China cracks down on building projects in anti-graft move finish
 
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Jul 8 2013
A man rides an escalator near Shanghai Tower (R, under construction), Jin Mao Tower (C) and the Shanghai World Financial Center (L) at the Pudong financial district in Shanghai July 4, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Carlos Barria
Tue  EDT
(Reuters) - China on Tuesday ordered a five-year suspension of the construction of new official buildings, state media reported, in the latest move by President Xi Jinping to crack down on extravagance and pervasive corruption.
The decision was "made in accordance with the country's frugality campaign", official news agency Xinhua said.
Some structures built in violation of regulations had tainted the image of the Communist Party and stirred vehement public disapproval, the agency said.
"The directive called on all party and government bodies to be frugal and ensure that government spending goes toward developing the economy and boosting people's wellbeing," it added.
The ban also covered "glitzy structures" built as training centers, hotels or government motels, it said.
Numerous scandals in recent years have centered on extravagant expenditure on new government buildings by officials, often in poverty-struck inland regions.
Xi, who took office in March, has made the fight on graft a key objective of his administration, and the party has already targeted everything from the use of government cars to liquor served at official banquets.
Corruption is so bad it could hurt the party's grip on power, Xi has warned although so far few high-level officials have been caught in his dragnet and the party has shown no sign of wanting to set up an independent graft-fighting body.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion, anecdotes, links and data. If you see a comment that you believe is irrelevant or inappropriate, you can flag it to our editors by using the report abuse links. Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters. For more information on our comment policy, see
I feel like I¡¯ve heard of this happening in some other country, although on a much larger scale. Hmmm??
Jul 23, 20139:42am EDT--
Anyone who¡¯s read ¡°Animal Farm¡± by George Orwell should not be surprised at all by this.
Jul 23, 201312:28pm EDT--
China¡¯s overnight repo rate is creeping up again, and rose above 4% for the first time since the first week of July. The PBOC attempted to the crack down on shadow banking until it realized that the unintended consequence of its plan was a burgeoning financial panic. As the new rulers of China begin cracking down on corruption, a real estate bubble and industrial overcapacity, perhaps they should ask what will replace the economic growth caused by these inefficiencies. Like it or not, these dysfunctional practices support economic growth. What sustainable economic practices will replace the unsustainable ones as they are eliminated by the government? Full post with charts, links and images: http://dareconomics.wordpress.com/2013/07/23/around-the-globe-07-23-2013/ ?
Jul 23, 20131:38pm EDT--
A connected approach to governance, risk and compliance
is the world's largest international multimedia news agency, providing
, headline news,
, news alerts,
available on Reuters.com,
, and interactive television platforms. Thomson Reuters journalists are subject to an
