High ranking Chinese official to attend North Korea festivities finish
 
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jul 18 2013
Wed, Jul 17 2013
Wed, Jul 17 2013
Wed, Jul 17 2013
Tue, Jul 16 2013
Chinese Vice President Li Yuanchao (R) meets with Spain's Foreign Minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo (not pictured) at Zhongnanhai government compound in Beijing June 25, 2013 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Wang Zhao/Pool
Wed  EDT
(Reuters) - China's vice-president, an unusually high ranking official to visit North Korea, will lead a delegation to attend festivities there marking the 60th anniversary of the end of the Korean War.
Li Yuanchao is China's vice president and a member of the 25-member Politburo, though he is not part of the Politburo Standing Committee, the most elite and powerful body in China's state structures.
His visit, from July 25 to 28, was announced by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
"This is because of all the new problems that have impacted the relationship between the two countries," said Cai Jian, an expert on North Korea at Fudan University in Shanghai.
Li previously headed the party's influential Organisation Department and was once seen as a contender for the Standing Committee.
The North threatened South Korea and the United States with a nuclear war for weeks in response to toughened U.N. sanctions imposed after the test, but has since been more conciliatory.
Kim sent an envoy to Beijing in May, but Chinese officials gave him a lukewarm reception, a source with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters, saying Beijing wanted an end to the North's nuclear and missile tests.
Mass games and other festivities marking the end of the 1950-53 Korean war are a major occasion in North Korea, drawing tourists, diplomats and even foreign journalists, who are normally banned.
"China has consistently advocated for economic reforms in North Korea," he said.
The last time a similarly high ranking Chinese official visited Pyongyang was in October 2010. Zhou Yongkang, then China's domestic security chief, led a delegation to Pyongyang to attend North Korean leader Kim Jong-un's public debut.
(Reporting By Megha Rajagopalan; Editing by Ron Popeski)
We welcome comments that advance the story through relevant opinion, anecdotes, links and data. If you see a comment that you believe is irrelevant or inappropriate, you can flag it to our editors by using the report abuse links. Views expressed in the comments do not represent those of Reuters. For more information on our comment policy, see
A connected approach to governance, risk and compliance
is the world's largest international multimedia news agency, providing
, headline news,
, news alerts,
available on Reuters.com,
, and interactive television platforms. Thomson Reuters journalists are subject to an
