Sri Lanka teams up with Chinese firm for $1.4 billion port city
2013-07-24 09:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Jul 10 2013
Fri, Jul 5 2013
A general view of the Colombo South Harbor at Colombo Port July 24, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Dinuka Liyanawatte
Wed  EDT
) to build a city on a 230 hectare site that will be reclaimed from the sea, the head of the state-run Ports Authority said on Wednesday.
The site is next to the island nation's main Colombo port and Colombo's historic Galle Face Green seafront. It is also close to where Shangri-La Hotels Lanka Ltd, a subsidiary of Hong Kong-listed Shangri-La Asia Ltd (
), is building a 500-room hotel.
"The Chinese firm will invest in reclaiming the land and infrastructure of the port city," Priyath Wickrama, chairman of Sri Lanka Ports Authority, told reporters. "It will be given around 50 hectare of reclaimed land on a 99-year lease for its investment."
The 39-month long construction project will start in September, Wickrama said, adding the city would include eco-parks, residential areas, offices and shopping malls.
Since the end of a nearly three-decade war in May 2009, the Indian Ocean island nation has been spending heavily on infrastructure, including ports to attract foreign investments to its $59 billion economy.
(Reporting by Shihar Aneez and Ranga Sirilal; Editing by David Holmes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Development¡± is fine as long as people realise that the kind of tourist that will visit Sri Lanka in the future will not be be coming to see an unique Island paradise but just another industrial country .Well Done!!!!
Jul 24, 20139:52pm EDT--
