FACTBOX: AIG sells unit for $2.2 bill to new fund, small company
2009-10-13 05:08:00.0
FACTBOX: AIG sells unit for $2.2 bill to new fund, small company | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
FACTBOX: AIG sells unit for $2.2 bill to new fund, small company
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue  EDT
) said on Tuesday it had agreed to sell it's Taiwan life insurance company, Nan Shan Life, for $2.15 billion to Primus Financial and China Strategic Holdings.
) is an investment holding firm, publicly traded in Hong Kong, which also makes and trades battery products. * Fan Guo Ping is the largest single shareholder and owns 6.27 percent of the company while Chen Guang Lin has 0.19 percent. About 93.5 percent of the company is owned by public shareholders.
* The company said in August it would issue $1 billion in convertible bonds for the purchase of Nan Shan. After the bond places, buyers will own 95.5 percent of the company. Fan's interest will be diluted to 0.4 percent and the existing public shareholders will have only 2.7 percent.
* Robert Morse, a former top executive of Citigroup (
) in Asia, and two former colleagues announced the launch of a new financial services firm in April.
* The 23-year Citi veteran is chairman and CEO of the new firm, Primus Financial Holdings.
) Asia investment banking head Huan Guocang, who was hired by Morse and later became a top China dealmaker for Citigroup, is co-chairman of Primus Financial.
* Wing-Fai Ng, a former managing director at Taiwan's Fubon Financial (
), is co-CEO.
* The firm's focus includes most of Asia with the exception of Australia and insurance investing as well.
(Compiled by Alison Leung and Michael Flaherty; Edited by Valerie Lee)
