UPDATE 1-UK determined on CCS, may bring forward power levy
2009-10-13 00:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain, determined to speed up development of carbon capture and storage (CCS), may bring forward its plan to introduce an electricity levy to fund such demonstration projects, Energy Secretary said on Monday.
"We are determined to go as far and as fast as we possibly can with CCS," said Ed Miliband, who heads the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC).
"That's why we are planning to bring forward legislation for a levy to fund projects and that is going to provide a clear financial mechanism to make the projects happen," he told reporters at a CCS conference in London.
In July, DECC proposed a levy on electricity to fund the CCS projects, which should be in place by 2011. The government plans to sponsor up to four CCS projects, seen as crucial to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. [ID:nLH861517]
ScottishPower, a unit of Spain's Iberdrola (
), said the DECC had reassured it of the status of the government competition, aimed at having the first commercial scale CCS system up in running in Britain by 2014.
) said last week it would defer an investment decision to build a coal plant in Kingsnorth for up to three years, casting doubts the competition deadline of 2014 could be met [ID:nL7082010].
"With the USA, Canada and China catching up fast, it's vital that we continue in the race...and make it a reality," said Nick Horler, chief executive of ScottishPower
ScottishPower's consortium, including Shell UK Limited (
), is competing against groups led by E.ON as well as another, led by RWE npower (
E.ON UK has said it was still vying for funding in the competition, though it said it needed to talk to the DECC.
"We are determined to move quickly on the competition," said Miliband. "We are currently at the stage of the invitation to negotiate with the companies concerned and we will obviously be judging all the bids that we get in."
While ScottishPower plans to retro-fit CCS to its existing coal generator in Longannet in Fife, Scotland, E.ON and RWE plan to build a new facility for adding CCS at Kingsnorth and Tilbury respectively, both in the Thames Estuary near London.
(Reporting by Daniel Fineren, Writing by Nao Nakanishi)
