Johnson Controls sees higher sales, earnings
2009-10-13 09:56:00.0
Johnson Controls sees higher sales, earnings | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Johnson Controls sees higher sales, earnings
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Fri, Sep 11 2009
Tue  EDT
) said on Tuesday it expected higher sales next year as global auto production recovers, U.S. stimulus efforts pay off and emerging markets improve.
The maker of car interiors, batteries and building efficiency systems said it was gaining market share in many of its businesses and was benefiting from recent cost cuts, while higher auto production levels would support volumes.
The company said it expected to report earnings of 40 to 42 cents per share for the fourth quarter that ended September 30, on sales of about $7.9 billion, with all of its geographic automotive businesses posting a profit. The result would be above the 39 cents analysts were expecting, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
For the new fiscal year now under way, it said sales would rise 9 percent to about $31 billion, above the $30.2 billion analysts were expecting, and it would earn $1.35 to $1.45 per share, while analysts had forecast $1.44.
"We're very confident about that number," Chief Executive Stephen Roell said at an analyst meeting in New York.
Johnson Controls' shares were down 68 cents, or 2.5 percent, at $26.45 in early New York Stock Exchange trading. The shares have traded in a range from $27.90 to $8.35 over the past 52 weeks.
The Milwaukee-based company said it expected auto production to recover in North America and China, and was launching new products in Europe.
"We're well-positioned to leverage volumes as production recovers," Roell said.
The world's largest maker of auto interiors estimated North American auto production of 9.8 million in 2010, up from about 8.6 million in 2009. European production would be flat, at 15.8 million vehicles, while China's output of passenger vehicles was expected to jump to 8.3 million vehicles, from 7 million.
"We're seeing a very strong recovery in China," Roell said.
Higher auto production would boost sales in its power solutions segment 17 percent next year, or 6 percent excluding the impact of higher lead prices. And it predicted a 3 percent sales increase in its building efficiency business, helped by demand in emerging markets.
The company, which is retrofitting New York's landmark Empire State Building to reduce energy use, forecast U.S. commercial construction would begin to recover in the second half of 2010.
Johnson Controls said longer-term profit margins would be stronger than previously expected in its auto interiors and battery units, but kept forecasts unchanged for its buildings segment.
The company said it expected government stimulus-funded projects to begin to have a meaningful effect on revenue this year, and weakness in North America would be offset by less economically sensitive institutional markets and several emerging markets.
New construction, which has been hit by rising unemployment and tight credit, accounts for about a quarter of company revenue, Roell said. But he stressed the company's primary focus was on institutional buildings -- such as health care, government and school facilities -- and these sectors were expected to hold up well.
The company estimated 2010 capital expenditures of $625 million to $675 million to boost capacity in emerging markets, launch new auto businesses and fund improvements in the battery business. It said it had minimal debt coming due this fiscal year and about $1 billion maturing in fiscal 2011.
(Reporting by Nick Zieminski and Christopher Kaufman; Editing by Dave Zimmerman and Maureen Bavdek)
