AUTOSHOW-Tokyo Motor no-show? Japan snubbed as market shrinks
2009-10-13 02:27:00.0
(Reuters) - The list of participants at the Tokyo Motor Show says it all: the Japanese car market is sinking into irrelevance.
At least that's the mood ahead of the biennial event opening next week as one carmaker after another cancelled their attendance, leaving just two boutique brands from overseas -- Lotus and Alpina.
It's a sea change from two years ago, when top guns from Volkswagen (
), Daimler (
) all flew in to jazz up their booths despite their cars' limited presence in the world's third-largest auto market.
The rare, razor-thin turnout at the Tokyo Motor Show -- traditionally considered one of the industry's five big international shows -- underscores the waning fortunes of Japan's once-buoyant market.
Demographically, Japan is suffering the double blow of a shrinking population and a rapid exodus from the countryside to cities, where owning a car can be a hassle due to expensive parking lots and congested roads. Auto executives also blame a fading interest in cars among young Japanese.
In Tokyo, home to a tenth of Japan's population and counting, car ownership is under 0.5 per household, or less than half the national average.
For the financial year to March, JAMA, the industry's lobby group, is forecasting a 32-year low in sales of new cars and trucks of about 4.3 million units, down 8 percent from last year.
The government has helped stem some of the sales slide with reduced taxes since April on less-polluting cars, especially hybrids, and a separate scheme to reward new purchases to replace cars older than 13 years.
But unlike in the United States or Europe, the response has been far from dramatic, with sales finally breaking a 13-month decline in September with a modest 0.2 percent rise. Questions also hang over whether the tax incentives will remain in place for three years as planned with a new government in place.
"The government's stimulus should help this year, but beyond that we expect the downward trend to resume," said JPMorgan auto analyst Kohei Takahashi.
"There's no question that the importance of the Japanese market is diminishing."
SIDELINED BY CHINA?
The Japanese market's woes have invited the inevitable comparison with China, where booming demand meant that no global brand dared miss the Shanghai auto show in April. China this year unseated the United States as the world's biggest auto market.
At the Tokyo Motor Show, opening to media on Oct. 21, automakers will showcase 19 world premiere cars, down from 37 in 2007. Floor space will be less than half of the previous show.
Still, Japanese executives insist their market -- and their local auto show -- still play an important role.
"Japanese car and motorcycle makers lead the industry in environmental and other technology," said JAMA Chief Satoshi Aoki, also chairman of Honda Motor Co (
"The Tokyo Motor Show plays a crucial role as the forum from which such technology and messages originate," he said.
To step up to that plate, Honda will premiere three cars including a futuristic, six-seater hybrid minivan that takes lightweight technology to an extreme with basket-like, floating seats, an all-glass roof and carbon-weight wheels.
In an even more sci-fi-esque concept, Nissan Motor Co (
) will display the Land Glider, a two-seater all-electric city commuter that tilts when turning corners, like a motorcycle.
) is covering wide ground with showcase items including the second version of its electric car concept, the FT-EV II, as well as the first physical model of a planned rear-wheel-drive sports car that will borrow affiliate Subaru's (
Chief engineer Tetsuya Tada said the compact sports car, to go on sale by the end of 2011, would be "affordable" at much less than 3 million yen ($33,600).
At the Lexus stand, Toyota will have a two-seater sports car that is widely rumoured to be a close-to-production version of the LF-A sports car concept, which Toyota President Akio Toyoda has personally raced on the famed Nuerburgring track in Germany.
The sports car theme gels with the new chief's stated mission of turning Toyota into a maker of "fun" cars to breathe some life back into Japan's lustreless car market.
"I have a feeling it's us carmakers -- not the customers -- that have distanced ourselves from cars," Toyoda said this month.
