Canada oil sands help U.S. energy security
2009-10-12 18:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Canadian oil sands are vital to North America's energy security and are being developed in an environmentally responsible way, Canadian Natural Resources Minister Lisa Raitt said in an interview.
"Canada's oil sands are an incredibly important part of energy security for the United States," Raitt told Reuters at a carbon capture and storage (CCS) conference in London.
"If you don't purchase from Canada, who are you going to purchase from? It's going to be more reliance on OPEC nations," she said.
With an estimated reserve of 173 billion barrels, Canadian oil sands are the largest source of crude oil outside the Middle East. But development of Alberta's huge reserves requires open pit mines and carbon-spewing processing plants, placing producers at a disadvantage under any fuel standard that rewards low carbon sources.
Last week, the Canadian and Alberta governments promised C$865 million ($823 million) to help oil major Royal Dutch Shell Plc (
"The government will be involved in the promotion of the oil sands ... it is a great asset, it is imperative to energy security in North America and it is being developed in a responsible manner and will continue to do so," Raitt said.
After backing away from the Kyoto agreement signed by a former Liberal government, arguing the sharp cuts required would do too much damage to Canada's economy, the Conservative government has pledged to cut Canada's carbon emissions by 20 percent from 2006 levels by 2020.
"We are leading the way on carbon capture and storage technology and funding of real demonstration projects to remove greenhouse gases from the use of coal and the use of oil and gas, recognizing as well the importance of energy efficiency and renewables," Raitt said.
In August, PetroChina (
Despite the importance of its oil sands for energy security, the Canadian government said last month it would not introduce further barriers to investing in the country.
"We are a trading nation," Raitt said when asked whether the government would take a tougher stance on future bids for its energy assets.
"We are very cognizant of the fact that if we want to trade and invest in other countries, we have to allow that trade and investment to happen in ours. However, it has got to be done within the corporate rules of the Canadian government."
AECL could be split into reactor building and research units, a decision the government expects to make when the report comes comes back this fall.
"To be able to be a vendor of nuclear reactors in the world and be able to build nuclear reactors in the world you have to have a very high degree of focus on that line of business," Raitt said.
