Crisis spurs Asia to hasten cooperation, a little
2009-10-12 19:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Advocates of closer Asian economic integration should keep the champagne on ice, but there are signs that the global financial crisis is finally pushing governments in the region to cooperate more actively.
But, after years of talk, governments are on course to pool part of their vast holdings of currency reserves in an initiative that could sow the seeds for Asia eventually to project more collective power in a world where the writ of the Group of Seven rich industrial states no longer goes unchallenged.
"I sense a change in attitude, with Asia seeing an opportunity," said Wendy Dobson, an economics professor at the University of Toronto and author of a book, "Gravity Shift," on how economic influence is moving from West to East.
Asia has failed miserably so far to turn its rapid growth into political clout. But since the Group of 20 anointed itself last month as the pre-eminent forum for global economic coordination, eclipsing the G7, Asia has a chance to make its voice heard. Japan, China, South Korea, India, Indonesia and Australia are all members of the G20.
Peter Drysdale, a professor at Australian National University in Canberra, has been scathing about East Asia's 'mickey-mouse' financial cooperation.
"What has changed," Drysdale said in an email, "is participation from the leadership group in East Asia in the G20 process, and that could deliver the promise of more effective and relevant regional cooperation."
An early test looms next month when regional finance ministers are due to finalize plans for a $120 billion fund, drawn from members' currency reserves, to be tapped by participants in the event of a fresh crisis.
The fund has its roots in the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI), a web of bilateral currency swaps slung together in 2000 by the central banks of ASEAN Plus Three -- the 10 members of the Association of South East Asian Nations plus China, Japan and South Korea.
The CMI had one overriding purpose: no Asian countries would ever again have to go cap in hand to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as several did after the region's 1997/98 meltdown.
Rather, they would be able to turn to their neighbors for cash to stave off any runs on their currencies.
By 2007, governments had agreed to transform the network of bilateral deals into a much more practicable common pot of money.
By "multilateralizing" the CMI, in the jargon, a member country in financial straits could be able to draw more quickly on a deeper pool of funds.
But it took the global crisis to inject a sense of urgency into the project. Ministers agreed in May to have the new CMIM fund running by the end of 2009 and are due in Busan, South Korea, in late November to settle a clutch of outstanding issues.
These include the distribution of voting power in the fund, the triggers for the release of emergency funding and the location of an independent surveillance unit to analyze regional economies.
Singapore has been tasked with designing this new office, officials say, and is eyeing a big enough budget to pay for high-caliber staff.
"No doubt the financial crises has given ASEAN+3 the impetus to speed things up," said Jay Menon, an economist in the Asian Development Bank's Office of Regional Economic Integration.
"There's much room for optimism, and the next meeting in Busan could be the turning point," Menon said.
To be sure, the political climate is turning more conducive. The prime ministers of China, Japan and South Korea agreed in Beijing on Saturday to push the long-term goal of an "East Asian community."
But, as a practical matter, the fund will be irrelevant unless it is substantially increased; $120 billion is a tiny sum next to the potential needs of a clutch of countries in crisis.
As a result, analysts say, capitals will continue to rely on self-insurance in the form of hordes of reserves -- incidentally thwarting the G20's task of rebalancing the global economy.
"The first line of defense for the foreseeable future will always by each country's foreign exchange reserves," said Tom Byrne, Moody's Investors Services' regional credit officer.
"There's a reluctance to take it seriously as long as it's connected to the IMF," said Dobson of the University of Toronto.
To its backers, the unit could eventually blossom into a mini-Asian Monetary Fund. Still, giving it real power would be a huge leap for Asian governments. Unlike the members of the European Union, they have scant tradition of subjecting themselves to regional peer pressure and supranational authority.
"There are a lot of institutional obstacles to overcome," Moody's Byrne said. "The political preconditions are not in place for a coordinated approach to economic and financial challenges."
