MOVES-UPDATE 3-Allstate, Calamos, RBC Wealth Management
2009-10-12 17:15:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Monday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The insurer named Mark LaNeve, 50, as chief marketing officer. LaNeve was most recently vice president of sales, service and marketing at General Motors Corp.
The asset manager has hired Terry O'Malley, previously head of UK distribution at asset managers including Credit Suisse, Invesco (
) and Fidelity, to develop Calamos' presence in the institutional direct and consultant marketplaces in the UK and continental Europe.
The securities firm has hired Rhonda Smith and Lynn Syler, both formerly at Bank of America Corp (
), as senior vice president - financial consultants at its Gig Harbor, Washington office.
The financial services and infrastructure services industries company hired a team led by Scott Roth and Patti Unti from Capmark Investments to form Ventras Capital Advisors LLC, a company that will specialize in residential and commercial real estate funds management and distressed asset management and disposition.
The British-based fund manager named Mark Ingram, formerly co-head of UK retail sales at Credit Suisse Asset Management (
), as regional sales manager, part of a wider reorganization of Jupiter's UK wholesale sales team.
The asset management unit of Intesa Sanpaolo Group said Francis Candylaftis has resigned as CEO and general manager to pursue new professional opportunities. Eurizon's board named Mauro Micillo to replace Candylaftis effective Oct. 16.
The bank named James Bardrick and Manuel Falco as co-heads of banking for Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA), the bank said in a memo on Monday, to replace veteran dealmaker Tom King. [ID:nLC386023]
The Asia-based global investment bank said its chief China economist Mingchun Sun was appointed head of China equity research, a newly created role to spearhead growth of its China equity research franchise.
The Swiss bank said it appointed Allen Lo as country head for Hong Kong and chief executive of UBS AG, Hong Kong branch. He was deputy head of the wealth management business in Asia Pacific from September 2006.
The human resource services company said it appointed Andrew Tunningley as global strategy leader for investment. John Rushen has been recruited to succeed Tunningley as head of the UK investment team. He joins Hewitt from Ermitage, one of Europe's leading alternative asset management organizations.
The Swiss private bank said it appointed Richard Wohanka as the new chief executive of the bank's asset management and alternative investments division. He was formerly CEO of Fortis Investment Management.
The accounting firm said it appointed Alex Plavsic as the new head of its UK Forensic practice. Previously, he was head of fraud investigations. (Compiled by Amit Kumar in Bangalore and Christian Plumb in New York)
