China iron ore imports 50 mln T over demand -CISA
2009-10-12 05:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China's iron ore imports have exceeded actual demand by about 50 million tonnes so far this year and the oversupply leaves no room for further price rises, a senior official of the China Iron and Steel Association (CISA) said on Monday.
China failed to secure a deeper cut to iron ore term prices this year, as its bargaining position was weakened during the annual negotiations due to the country's massive steel production and iron ore imports by mills and merchants.
"We believe the Chinese iron ore price is largely influenced by speculation on the market," CISA's Vice Chairman Luo Bingsheng told reporters at the sideline of an industry conference in Beijing.
China imported 405 million tonnes of iron ore in the first eight months of this year, up 32 percent from a year earlier, to feed its rapidly growing steel output.
The country's annual capacity is expected to top 700 million tonnes by the end of this year, with production of around 600 million tonnes of crude steel in 2009, hefty growth of 20 percent from the all-time high of 500 million tonnes in 2008.
The benchmark price of Indian origin ore with 63/63.5 percent iron in China has stabilised at about $90 per tonne, below the year's peak of $115 hit in early August, but still above the contract price of about $75 cost and freight.
Additionally, Luo called for a revision of ongoing annual price talks, which he said would benefit both steel mills and miners, but gave no details.
"The traditional negotiation system no longer matches the current market situation. We think it is necessary to make some changes and adjustments, but they should be decided by both the buy side and the sell side," Luo told reporters.
), despite the top miners' "take or leave it" approach to the 33 percent price cut first reached by Rio Tinto (
The annual conference involving CISA and the steel industry, led by top producer Baosteel (
), is traditionally seen as a warmup for annual term talks. China will be hoping finally to extract some advantage from its position as the world's top steel consumer by squeezing a better deal out of reluctant iron ore miners. [ID:nSHA346936]
Shan also said talks over 2009/10 prices were continuing with Brazil's Vale (
) and Australia's BHP Billiton (
) six months into the contract year, but added that China was not in talks with Rio Tinto. (Editing by Ken Wills and Lincoln Feast)
