UPDATE 1-Deutsche CEO says Europe banks should consolidate
2009-10-12 14:32:00.0
(Reuters) -Deutsche Bank (
) Chief Executive Josef Ackermann warned that Europe, unlike China and the United States, was in danger of missing an opportunity to consolidate its banks in the wake of the credit crisis.
"While the U.S. and China use the crisis to create large and competitive institutions, Europe threatens to be left behind," Ackermann told a conference in Frankfurt.
The United States had used the crisis to create large, competitive, international banks through mergers, he said. At the same time, he said, banks in China had grown to become among the largest internationally.
The high profitability of some banks was the consequence of a unique set of circumstances, Ackermann said, driven by the disappearance of some investment banking competitors and the support of a raft of monetary and fiscal measures.
"How banks will fare when things normalise, when some of these measures have run out, remains an open question," he said.
The cooperation between central banks to provide foreign exchange swap facility -- a measure that has helped Euro zone banks maintain U.S. dollar liquidity -- should be made permanent, he said.
This is because the situation in the financial and real economy remains fragile, and a wave of insolvencies, higher unemployment and loan defaults lies ahead, he said.
Generally speaking, banks will need more capital to cope with the economic fallout, but many technical questions about what kind of capital would qualify as being adequate still needs to be resolved, he said.
Particularly when it comes to accounting, the different responses to the financial crisis had caused the International Financial Reporting Standards and the U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles to drift further apart rather than converge, he said.
The leverage ratio -- which caps banks' ability to grow through expanding debt -- as currently conceived has "serious weaknesses," he said.
Stefan Krause, Deutsche Bank's chief financial officer, later clarified that the leverage ratio may be "too simplistic and possibly misleading" for investors since it does not take account of the quality of the core capital.
This could mean that in theory two banks holding very different assets may end up with a similar leverage ratio. This could be a misleading picture for investors, Krause said. (Reporting by Edward Taylor; editing by John Wallace)
