TEXT-Nice Systems gets another Beijing Metro deal
2009-10-12 07:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Oct 8 2009
Tue, Sep 8 2009
Mon  EDT
(The following was issued by Israel's Nice Systems (
(The following was issued by Israel's Nice Systems (
Oct 12 - NICE Systems Ltd (NASDAQ: NICE), a leading global provider of advanced solutions that enable organizations to extract insight from interactions to drive performance, today announced that it has been selected by Beijing Metro in China to provide NICE's IP video solution, with support for content analytics at certain project locales, to enhance safety and security at the 24 stations of its Line 15 route.
NICE's business partner for the project is Beijing JingShiDa Machinery and equipment Research Institute.
This is a milestone project both for Beijing Metro and NICE, in that it is the Metro's largest video security project ever.
The subway line is planned to run 40 kilometers, with 24 stations, across northern Beijing from Xiyuan in Haidan District in the west, which is the location for the famous Summer Palace, which has the largest royal park in China, is designated Key Cultural Royal Protection Site, and is a main tourist attraction, through to Hedong in the Shunyi District in the east.
The NICE IP video security solution will be deployed to protect commuters at each of the line's 24 stations, which will be connected to a security system that consists of over 2,600 channels, thus constituting Beijing metro's biggest video security project ever.
The scalable IP-based video solution will provide Beijing Metro Line 15 with seamless surveillance, to help protect the railway including its tracks and stations and passengers.
NICE will provide support for advanced capabilities, such as identifying unattended luggage, detecting unauthorized entry into secured areas, and counting the number of people across multiple entries/exits.
By providing real-time alerts, security personnel will be able to verify the security of the physical infrastructure and to prevent accidents resulting in enhanced passenger safety and better asset protection.
"Following the success and proven reliability in the six projects we already have running with Beijing Metro, we are very happy to have been selected once again for this important milestone project," said Doron Ben-Sira, President APAC.
"Being selected for this project reflects NICE's expanding footprint in Asia's security market, and our expertise in providing advanced solutions for enhancing the safety and security of mass transit systems worldwide."
