UPDATE 3-Fortescue says no need for China funds to grow
2009-10-12 03:48:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Oct 12 2009
Sun, Oct 11 2009
Thu, Oct 8 2009
Tue, Sep 29 2009
Tue, Sep 29 2009
Mon  EDT
* Fortescue now to self-fund iron-ore expansion * Move seen slowing pace of expansion in Australian iron belt * Gap between Fortescue, Rio and BHP production seen widening * Fortescue beats production guidance in Sept qtr (Adds more details from media briefing, quotes, byline)
), which failed in a bid to obtain $6 billion in Chinese loans, said it can now self-fund expansion costs due to improving business conditions.
The decision is likely to dramatically slow Fortescue's pace of expansion, leaving it tens of millions of tonnes short of production targets as it continues to court customers exclusively in China, analysts said.
It will also widen the gap between Fortescue and its two bigger Australian rivals, Rio Tinto (
), which are showing no signs of pulling back from their own massive expansions.
Iron ore prices are tipped to go up by 10-15 percent this year, reversing last year's declines of between 33 percent and 44 percent, emboldening miners to dig deeper and faster, according to forecasts by Australia & New Zealand Bank, Macquarie Bank, Royal Bank of Scotland and others.
Fortescue, which sells exclusively to Chinese steel mills, reported a near-20 percent jump in ore shipped in the September quarter and said it had now held enough internal cash-flow to fund its expansion in stages, citing strong demand for its ore.
Fortescue Chief Executive Andrew Forrest said production costs were around $26 per tonne, providing healthy profit margins for the company to use to exploit more deposits and lay more roads and rail lines deeper into the ore-rich Pilbara iron belt.
Less than one month ago, Fortescue was still counting on customers in China to provide $5.5-$6 billion in debt-backed loans by Sept 30 in order to take its output rapidly to 95 million tonnes a year.
'CASH-FLOW STRENGTH'
But Forrest told a media briefing that since then Fortescue's markets had continued to "tighten," meaning it no longer required the Chinese funds.
"Fortescue's making over a 100 percent margin on their ore, producing it for $26 a tonne and selling it for $57," said DJ Carmichael & Co analyst James Wilson.
"If they had secured to $6 billion, they probably would have pushed to expand everything it has all at once and become a very significant producer in a short period of time," Wilson said. "Now they have to do it incrementally."
China is expected to increase an already heavy dependence on imported ore as its steel industry -- the world's biggest -- modernises and turns away from lower grade domestic ores.
Mark Pervan, senior commodities analyst at Australia & New Zealand Bank, forecasts term imported iron ore prices will rise 15 percent next year.
"From the strength of our cash flows, of our cash balances, we will be largely able to finance the step-up to 95 million tonnes which was the subject of the Chinese financing," Forrest said.
He said business conditions had changed for the better since Fortescue in August announced it was seeking the funding, which explained why Fortescue was "comfortable to let the September 30 deadline lapse."
Fortescue had included a 3 percent discount on 20 million wet tonnes of ore delivered between July 1 and December 31 if the funding was arranged, though Forrest would not be drawn on whether the ore would now be re-priced.
Part of the funds will be used to extend a rail line linking the two mines, a distance of 50 kilometres (30 miles), with completion expected within 13 months.
Fortescue was no longer in talks with the Chinese for funds but wouldn't rule out tapping external lenders, possibly to eventually help develop another deposit called Solomon, said Forrest.
By 2011, BHP Billiton hopes to lift its annual Australian iron ore production 50 million tonnes to 205 million.
Within three years, Rio Tinto wants to be producing 220 million tonnes from 200 million this year. ($1=$1.106 Australian dollar) (Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
