UPDATE 2-Australia delays Yanzhou bid approval for Felix
2009-10-12 05:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Australia has asked Chinese firm Yanzhou Coal (
) to resubmit its approval request for a $2.9-billion takeover of Felix Resources FLX.AX, but the delay failed to shake market confidence that the deal would go ahead.
Felix said on Monday the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) had asked Yanzhou Coal to resubmit its application for approval for a second time, without giving details.
"Yanzhou Coal has been communicating, and continues to communicate with, the relevant regulatory authorities of the PRC (Chinese) Government and the Australian Government about the transaction," Yanzhou said in a statement.
"We continue to work with the government and respect its processes. We are happy to resubmit," said Ian Smith, Yanzhou Coal's spokesman in Australia.
By opting to resubmit its application rather than extend the review by 90 days, Yanzhou is likely to get a decision sooner, two sources familiar with the convoluted review process said.
Uncertainty over the approval process has kept Felix's shares below the offer price of A$18.00 a share, but the stock held steady on Monday, suggesting investors were not worried about the latest delay. It was down just 3 cents at A$16.72 by 0049 GMT.
The FIRB, an advisory body to Australia's Treasurer, who makes the final decision, normally acts on applications within 30 days. If not, the deadline is automatically extended by 90 days.
But if it is close to making a decision after the 30-day deadline, applicants can prefer to resubmit and start afresh on a 30-day clock for approval rather than let the process continue and transition to a 90-day clock, the sources said.
The delays have come as the FIRB has been flooded with applications, including Chinese state-owned Sinochem's bid for farm chemicals group Nufarm Ltd (
) and Baosteel's plan to buy 15 percent of iron ore explorer Aquila Resources (
Last month, FIRB general manager Patrick Colmer said the board wanted to limit foreign investments in start-up projects to less than 50 percent and in major mining firms to 15 percent.
Coal miner Felix falls in between, being neither a start-up nor a major mining firm.
Earlier this year, FIRB allowed China's Minmetals to buy all the assets of OZ Minerals (
) except one mine, which was near a military weapons-testing site.
Last month, however, it blocked China Nonferrous Metal Mining (Group) Co Ltd from buying more than 50 percent of rare-earths prospector Lynas Corp (
), amid concerns about China's control of the market for rare-earths minerals. (Additional reporting by Denny Thomas; Editing by Mark Bendeich)
