Iraqi oil impasse seen deterring smaller firms
2009-10-11 07:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Iraq's failure to pass delayed energy legislation is unlikely to deter oil majors from doing business in a country already saddled with risk, but it may halt investment in smaller fields, a top U.S. official said.
"The oil and gas law certainly matters, but it is not critical to the big energy companies," Patricia Haslach, the official who oversees U.S. efforts to help Iraq resurrect its economy, said in a recent interview.
"It's critical if (Iraq) wants to develop small fields because it's the smaller companies that would possibly come into a province and pick up a field that yields 35,000-40,000 barrels per day. They're the ones that would require much more of the protection, much more of the traditional business climate."
Iraq needs all the foreign cash it can get to turn around its oil sector, which boasts the world's third-largest reserves but has not been able to shake the effects of decades of war, sanctions and decay in the years since the 2003 invasion.
The ouster of Saddam Hussein, who nationalised the oil industry and threw out foreign firms, was supposed to bring oil majors streaming into Iraq and transform it into a top supplier.
Most firms have stayed away from Iraq in the violent and chaotic years since 2003, however, as the local oil industry has suffered repeated insurgent attacks and officials have struggled to simply bring output back to pre-invasion levels. Now, as violence drops sharply, the ministry has invited some of the world's leading energy firms to compete in two bidding rounds to clinch deals for its most promising fields.
China's CNPC, which is already drilling in southeastern Iraq's Ahdab oilfield, is the only foreign firm operating a field in Iraq outside the semiautonomous Kurdistan region.
) are brokering a gas deal in southern Iraq, but it is not yet finalised.
) and CNPC clinched to develop super giant Rumaila field, the only contract clinched in the first bidding round. [ID:nLB132320]
Yet the historic opening of Iraq's oil sector is overshadowed by a feud between Baghdad and officials in the Kurdish capital Arbil, who have signed their own foreign deals and are pursuing an independent energy strategy with zeal.
The row is part of a larger dispute over oil and disputed territories that has pitted Arabs against minority Kurds and is seen as the chief threat to the country's fragile calm.
In parliament, where minority Kurds occupy more than 50 of 275 seats, the feud has bogged down passage of four laws seen as important in modernising and streamlining Iraq's oil sector.
The legislation includes a law reestablishing a national oil company, another reorganising the Oil Ministry, a third divvying up revenues and a final one setting guidelines for investment.
The final law would establish a federal council that, aided by energy experts, would vet deals and oversee oil policy.
In the absence of new legislation, the ministry is using Saddam-era laws to broker its deals, making for debate between the ministry and critics in parliament on basic questions such as whether new oil deals need to get lawmakers' approval or not.
After years of quarrelling, parliament is not expected to vote on the laws until after national elections in January.
Ultimately the delay adds the risk of investing and may deter business from the smaller, more risk averse firms that are likely to pursue Iraq's more modest fields, such as Naudoman or Badrah.
U.S. officials believe the legislation is important not only for the oil sector but as a signal of Iraq's readiness for investment in other sectors like housing and agriculture. (Editing by Simon Jessop)
