Woods gets grudge match, Perry set for battle of the ages
2009-10-11 12:59:00.0
Woods gets grudge match, Perry set for battle of the ages | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Woods gets grudge match, Perry set for battle of the ages
Sun, Oct 11 2009
Sat, Oct 10 2009
Sat, Oct 10 2009
Sun, Oct 11 2009
U.S. team member Tiger Woods watches his tee shot on the 13th hole during his foursome match at the Presidents Cup golf tournament at Harding Park Golf Course in San Francisco, California October 10, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Robert Galbraith
Sun  EDT
Woods enters the final day with a spotless 4-0 record this week and will be looking for another point, as well as a measure of revenge, when he takes on Yang, who has twice shocked the world number one in high-profile events.
"I guess it's the way it just worked out," said Couples.
"Really we put Kenny Perry up against Ryo because he's the oldest and he's the youngest.
"Other than that, that's just the way that really worked."
The 49-year-old Perry faces off against Ishikawa, the 18-year-old Japanese sensation, in a fascinating duel between youth and experience.
Perry, who has three children older than his opponent, is just one year removed from being eligible to play on the seniors tour while Ishikawa will have to wait three years to legally order a beer in California.
Ishikawa, however, has looked nothing like a Japanese schoolboy, winning four events on the Japanese Tour this season and impressing everyone by winning two of four matches in his Presidents Cup debut.
"He (Ishikawa) is by far much more developed in his game than I ever was at 18-years-old," said Woods. "I was longer than he was, but I certainly did not have the ability to hit shots like he does.
"It's quite remarkable what he's done and the poise in how he goes about it.
"To win, what, four times this year, on any tour, is quite remarkable and his age it's unheard of. I don't think it's ever been done.
"The way he's able to control his golf ball, the way he's able to putt and chip is far better than any 18-year-old that I've ever seen."
