Work restarts on China's biggest nuclear power plant: Xinhua
2013-01-05 07:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Work on China's largest planned nuclear facility has restarted, state media said on Saturday, a sign that the thaw in the country's nuclear industry is gaining pace after it was frozen in response to Japan's Fukushima atomic crisis in 2011.
Building of the Shidao Bay nuclear plant in coastal Shandong province, eastern China, resumed on December 21, Xinhua news agency reported.
More recently it has softened its stance on nuclear energy. In October last year, China announced revised plans for the sector and said it would start approving new reactors, though at a slower pace than pre-Fukushima.
Before the Japanese disaster, many in the industry had expected China to set a 2020 capacity target of around 80-90 gigawatts (GW), but that target was scaled back to 58 GW.
The Shidao Bay plant is expected to start supplying electricity to the grid by the end of 2017, and ultimately to have the capacity to supply 6,600 megawatts, Xinhua said.
Initial investment in the project, led by power producer Huaneng Power International Inc., is planned to be 3 billion yuan ($481.52 million), Xinhua said.
(Reporting by Adam Jourdan; Editing by Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Fukushima is on a major fault line, and the Japanese forgot that tsunami is a Japanese word. They put the back-up generators for pumping water to cool the fuel rods in the basement of the plant. The tsunami flooded the basement; generators don¡¯t work under water; and the Japanese earned their nuclear disaster. The Chinese plant is not on a major fault line; the back-up generators will not be in the basement to avoid flooding from any cause; so the Chinese plant will be safer than the Japanese plant. Shidao Bay is 360 miles west southwest of Seoul, ROK, so it is sheltered from typhoons by the Korean Peninsula and Kyushu, Japan, the same island that holds Nagasaki. It is appropriate that Nagasaki will help protect this new Chinese nuclear power plant.
Jan 05, 201312:54pm EST--
