MARKET SIGNALS-Japan's Asian consumer plays getting expensive
2009-10-09 01:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Buying shares of Japanese companies targeting Asian consumers for growth has been a popular play on domestic demand in emerging markets such as China, but some valuations look stretched.
The attraction of buying into Japan's equity market, rather than directly investing in emerging Asian markets, is its depth and high concentration of industry leaders.
The financial crisis has accelerated a trend among Japanese firms looking to grow their businesses in neighbouring Asian countries, which were last in and first out of the global recession.
However, expensive stock prices may outweigh the prospect of greater returns in the near term and force investors to look for other ways to gain exposure to growth in developing economies.
* For a graphic on earnings expectations and valuations, click on:
In the last four months, analysts on a 90-day basis have raised their 12-month forward earnings estimates for Japan's consumer discretionary sector by the most of any sector, Thomson Reuters StarMine data shows.
Automakers, auto parts manufacturers and household durable goods producers have contributed the most to that rise in expectations.
However, the consumer discretionary sector is the most expensive on the basis of price-to-expected earnings 12 months forward. It is trading at a multiple of 34 times, above the broader market's 22 times.
Analysts' forecasts as a whole almost always lag markets, and stock prices of Japanese automakers may not yet reflect the yen's broad strength against the currencies of competitors and uncertainty about demand heading into the key year-end shopping season.
So higher analysts' earnings forecasts today do not always translate into higher stock prices tomorrow.
* For a graphic on auto exports in Japan, click on:
In the last 30 days, aggregate earnings estimates for the consumer discretionary sector have risen 4.1 percent. If the autos industry were removed, earnings would only have improved 1.8 percent, showing how analysts are still trying to adjust their forecasts for carmakers to reflect the recovery.
) about yen strength, what has so far looked to be a V-shaped recovery in non-Japan Asia has been a boon for Japanese auto industry stocks.
The year-to-date total return on the MSCI index for Japanese autos is 29 percent compared with 4.2 percent for the MSCI Japan index, according to Datastream.
Japan exported 29,144 cars to Asia in August, down 23 pct from year ago, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association says. However, that was smallest decline among the major export destinations, including Europe (down 59 percent) and the United States (down 26 percent).
Still, stock prices have already priced in quite a bit of good news and the boost from the U.S. cash-for-clunkers car trade in programme is over.
Using StarMine's proprietary model of measuring a company's actual value, as opposed to market value, the ratio of price-to-intrinsic value of the auto industry is 1.63 compared with 1.26 for the consumer discretionary sector and 1.03 for the Topix.
Furthermore, The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ's exporter forward hedge index, which measures currency hedging activity among exporters, fell in September for a third consecutive month despite a recovery trend in overall hedging volumes and the dollar's decline below 90 yen.
* For a graphic on Japan retailers, click on:
In savings-rich Japan, where the unemployment rate remains near a record high, the retail industry may not necessarily be the first place an investor would look for growth potential.
However, Fast Retailing (
) posted record annual profits for the 2008-2009 fiscal year and said it expects 10.5 percent rise over the next year, based on a strategy of moving its casual clothing line aggressively into China and South Korea. [ID:nT189181]
The company appears to have tapped into growing demand among consumers in developing Asian economies, who are young, cost-conscious but willing to pay a bit more for higher quality goods. [ID:nHKG53637]
Meanwhile, Japanese consumers' tastes have been clearly affected by economic decline, hurting department stores but benefiting discount stores and specialty retailers with cheaper goods. Analysts see no change in that trend over the next year.
) are the very few retailers expected to post double-digit revenue growth in the next fiscal year, Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S estimates show.
While the stock may not be a value play, it may have more growth potential. The difference of the mean target price for 6-12 months forward among analysts over the average monthly share price in September was at the highest since March 2009, when a global equity rally began in Asia. (Editing by Kim Coghill)
