India hits out at attempt to cast Kyoto aside
2009-10-08 09:58:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Oct 8 2009
Wed, Oct 7 2009
Wed, Oct 7 2009
Wed, Oct 7 2009
Tue, Oct 6 2009
By David Fogarty, Climate Change Correspondent, Asia
By David Fogarty, Climate Change Correspondent, Asia
Thu  EDT
Shyam Saran, India's special envoy for climate change, said developed nations were trying to craft a pact that contained none of Kyoto's steps to enforce hard emissions reduction targets for rich countries.
"We are not happy with the pace of the negotiation and in fact we are concerned that instead of moving forward on the issues that are very critical, we seem to be moving in the reverse," Saran told Reuters on the sidelines of climate talks in Bangkok.
"Instead of moving toward a much higher degree of implementation and commitment, what are we trying to do? We are trying to reduce everything to the lowest common denominator," he added in a swipe at efforts to try to accommodate the United States in a new climate pact. Washington never ratified Kyoto.
Trying to find a formula that brings in big developing nations such as India, the world's fourth-largest carbon emitter, and top emitter China, is crucial.
A key issue is how to broaden Kyoto from 2013 after its first phase ends. Kyoto binds 37 industrialized countries, except the United States, to emissions targets between 2008-12, while developing nations are exempted from setting economy-wide targets under U.N. agreements.
India and many other developing nations have expressed frustration over efforts by the European Union, the United States and other rich nations to replace Kyoto, with one idea being to take parts of the present pact and place them in a new deal.
The United States wants an agreement based on legally binding domestic action but not a pact that would contain legally enforceable steps to ensure emissions reduction targets are met, an idea that worries poorer nations.
"What has happened is that at this particular meeting we have a proposal that essentially we should put aside the Kyoto Protocol," Saran said.
"This is something that causes great concern to all of us because at this late stage, if you're going to come up with such a major change in the nature of the negotiations, then how do you take this process forward?"
"You cannot blur the distinction between developed and developing countries," Saran said.
