Lenovo entering 'PC plus' era, CEO says
2013-01-09 22:40:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Lenovo Group Ltd, on track to become the world's No.1 personal computer maker, is leveraging on what it calls the "PC plus" era as the company ramps up its plant capacity in major markets including the United States.
PC demand growth has waned over the past year as more consumers flock to ultraportable and increasingly powerful tablets and smartphones for basic computing. Hewlett Packard (HP), Dell and other stalwarts of the PC industry are now fighting to sustain growth as tablet computers eat into their PC-related businesses.
But PCs aren't disappearing anytime soon.
"We don't live in a post-PC world," Lenovo Chief Executive Yuanqing Yang said in an interview in Las Vegas on Wednesday. "We are entering the PC plus era."
"In our industry many players think PCs have become a commodity product," he said. "We have never thought this way."
Lenovo, he said, has redefined the category with products like Yoga, a laptop running Microsoft Corp's Windows 8 that can be converted to a tablet PC by flipping the screen all the way backwards, and Twist, another laptop that has a screen connected through a hinge.
Lenovo vaulted into the PC market by buying IBM's personal computer division in 2005. It has become a force through aggressive pricing, overseas acquisitions and taking advantage of a fast-growing home market.
Lenovo is lagging HP in PC shipments in the third quarter by less than half a percentage point, according to IDC, a consultancy. IDC placed HP at the No.1 spot with a 15.9 percent market share, marginally ahead of Lenovo's 15.7 percent share.
But Gartner, a rival to IDC, said Lenovo held the lead, with a 15.7 percent market share in the third quarter of 2012 compared to HP's 15.5 percent.
A year earlier, HP held a 17 percent market share while Lenovo held 13.1 percent, Gartner said. In the third quarter of 2010, Lenovo ranked fourth with 10.4 percent, trailing HP with 17.5 percent, Acer with 13.1 percent, and Dell with 12.2 percent.
"Now we are nurturing new areas including smartphones and tablets," Yang said. "We have focused on this change for many years. We have prepared for this trend."
One of the secrets of Lenovo's success, apart from its strategy, is its diverse workforce, Yang said. Its nine-person executive team represents six countries, he said.
The company wants a manufacturing footprint to match, with plans to increase the number of plants in most of its major markets. It is building a plant in the U.S.
"We want to be a global-local company," Yang said.
Last year, Lenovo bought Brazilian electronics maker CCE, and U.S. cloud computing firm Stoneware.
Lenovo, which is making a concerted global push into tablets and ultrabooks, does not expect to launch a smartphone in the U.S. until it has more U.S. brand recognition, said Gerry Smith, head of North American business for Lenovo.
Lenovo launched a number of smartphone models, including the S890 with a 5-inch screen, at the Consumer Electronics show, for distribution in various markets.
In its biggest market by revenue, China, it has 15 percent of smartphone sales, according to Gartner.
(Reporting by Poornima Gupta and Bill Rigby; Editing by Ryan Woo)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If Lenovo comes up with a phone that encrypts text messaging and makes a more business oriented phone, it should really take off with corporations. It will need to be able to be set by company IT personnel to make it a business only phone, capable of being retaining a history for anaylses by IT and company security.
Jan 10, 20133:17am EST--
I bet he won¡¯t be shutting his Chinese factories when he opens shop in America.
Jan 10, 20134:35am EST--
My Lenovo laptop says ¡°Made FOR Lenovo, Made in China¡±.
My Lenovo laptop says ¡°Made FOR Lenovo, Made in China¡±.
Note the word ¡°for¡±.
And the CE is right, like all fads the handheld computer fad will go away especially when new low cost supercomputers are released, and the new computers will make handheld devices seem as slow as something from the 80¡äs. With 30GS speed on my fiber optic land line for $24.95 a month,why would I even consider something less? And the speeds are only increasing. All the net speed in the world will do you no good if the computer device you are using is not able to properly use it.
The next big thing will be net speed, and it will be up to 100GS, but not for wireless users.
Jan 10, 201310:39am EST--
