UPDATE 4-Fast Retailing sees record profit on Uniqlo boom
2009-10-08 06:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Fast Retailing (
While most of Japan's retail industry is reeling from a slump in consumer spending that shows little sign of abating amid rising job losses, Uniqlo has attracted customers with hit products such as underwear using heat-trapping fabric and a camisole with built-in bras.
), Japan's largest retailer, posted a sharp drop in its first-half earnings last week, while second-ranked Aeon Co Ltd (
Globally, budget fashion retailers like Spain's Inditex's (
) Zara and Sweden's Hennes & Mauritz (
) are weathering the downturn better than mid-priced rivals, but Uniqlo's monthly same-store sales growth have been much bigger than these chains.
The company said Uniqlo stores overseas have been posting strong sales growth, both in Asia and Europe, where it opened a large-scale store in Paris this month.
"The reason for our strong performance is that we have won recognition globally as a new Japan-born brand, different from H&M, Zara and Gap," company CEO Tadashi Yanai told a news briefing.
"Fabrics like heat-tech will remain a very niche strength to compete with those Western players who focus only on fast fashion and don't really care about the quality of the fabric as much," said Jeanie Chen, retail analyst at CLSA, referring to Fast Retailing's fabric that helps keeps users warm.
Uniqlo has expanded its offerings beyond basic garments to reach more fashion conscious shoppers, and started selling its "+J" autumn and winter collection this month in collaboration with designer Jil Sander, including men's coats priced at 14,900 yen.
The company, which also operates shoe stores and other chains, has said it will aim to lift sales to 5 trillion yen by the financial year to August 2020, more than seven times its forecast for this year.
It said the significant part of its growth would come from China, where it plans to open 32 stores this financial year bringing the tally to 75. The company is also scheduled to open a flagship store in Shanghai in spring 2010.
Yanai said while Uniqlo has established itself as a global fashion brand in Asia, where it plans aggressive store opening, it was difficult to grow on its own in other major markets.
"In Europe and the United States, we cannot achieve large growth without acquisitions," he said.
Fast Retailing forecast a record operating profit of 120 billion yen ($1.36 billion) for the year to August 2010, in line with the average estimate of 119.4 billion yen in a poll of 18 analysts by Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
That would follow a 24 percent rise in operating profit to 108.6 billion yen for the past financial year, in line with its own forecast of 108 billion yen. Same-store sales at Uniqlo stores in Japan rose 11.3 percent during the period.
For the last three months of the previous financial year, the company's operating profit fell 2.3 percent to 11.4 billion yen, due to markdowns to attract customer traffic. The company does not disclose the fourth quarter figures and they were calculated by Reuters by subtracting nine-month results.
Shares in Fast Retailing, which runs about 780 Uniqlo stores in Japan and 90 overseas, rose 2 percent in the year to Wednesday, underperforming an 11 percent gain in the benchmark Nikkei average
. ($1=88.36 Yen) (Additional reporting by Colin Parrott; Editing by Michael Watson, Lincoln Feast and Valerie Lee)
