UPDATE 1-EU Commission plans extended Asia shoe tax-sources
2009-10-07 15:32:00.0
(Reuters) - The European Commission has proposed extending anti-dumping duties on EU imports of Chinese and Vietnamese shoes for 15 months, despite huge opposition from member states, global brands and consumers, EU sources said.
If approved, the new duties would take effect from Jan. 3, 2010, much to the annoyance of large global footwear producers, major European retailers and consumers across the 27-nation bloc struggling to deal with the worst economic downturn in decades.
"The proposal put forward by the Commission, which will be now sent to the interested parties by the end of the week, is to extend the current duties by at least 15 months," one source citing from the proposal told Reuters on Wednesday.
Brussels temporarily reimposed the tariffs last October pending a review, despite opposition from the majority of member states and the threat of legal action by Beijing at the World Trade Organisation.
In a bid to avert another so-called "shoe war" with member states and further damaging already tense economic relations with China, the Commission -- which oversees EU trade policy -- has proposed a 15-month extension instead of the normal five-year term for what are known as "definitive duties".
INDUSTRY, CONSUMERS OPPOSED
"Prices have increased by on average at least 10 percent since the imposition of the duties in 2006," the European Footwear Alliance, representing manufacturers such as Nike (
), Adidas ADSG.DE and Timberland, said in a statement.
), hit by dwindling consumer spending in Europe, described the decision as "farcical".
"Time and again the Commission talks a good game on free trade but caves in to the usual vested interests at the last minute," said Alisdair Gray of the British Retail Consortium.
Austria, Belgium, Britain, the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and Sweden still want the duties scrapped immediately, sending a positive messaage before the lucrative Christmas retail period, an EU diplomat said.
But major shoe-producing members Italy, Spain, France and Poland want to keep the duties. (Reporting by Darren Ennis; Editing by Dale Hudson and Louise Ireland)
