UPDATE 2-Turkmenistan plans renewal of gas flows to Russia
2009-10-07 10:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Turkmenistan hopes to resume pumping gas to Russia this month, an official said on Wednesday, after a six-month disruption that analysts estimate is costing Central Asia's top gas producer $1 billion a month.
The Kremlin also said a deal to restore supplies had been reached with Turkmenistan, which has reacted to the dispute with its Soviet-era master by offering gas to be drawn from the world's fourth-largest reserves to buyers in Europe and China.
"The resumption of supplies was a result of the talks between the Russian and Turkmen presidents in September," said Natalya Timakova, spokeswoman for President Dmitry Medvedev.
"Gazprom is now implementing this political decision," she said, referring to the state-run gas export monopoly that runs Russia's extensive gas pipeline network.
Medvedev met Turkmen President Kurbanguly Berdymukhamedov on Sept. 13 in the Caspian city of Turkmenbashi. Gas trade is a sensitive issue in Russia's relations with ex-Soviet neighbours, and supply rows have often escalated into diplomatic disputes.
"We hope to renew supplies by the end of October," said Torye Yagshymuradov, the head of Turkmengeologia, the government body that controls the use of natural resources in Turkmenistan.
Yagshymuradov, speaking at a conference in the Kazakh city of Almaty, said the two sides had not yet reached a final agreement on the price of the gas.
Pipeline blasts happen frequently on the territory of the former Soviet Union due to the age of the equipment, but it rarely takes more than a week to restore flows.
Before the explosion Gazprom used to import about 50 billion cubic metres of Turkmen gas a year, but due to the economic downturn it is unlikely to return to such volumes.
A market source told Reuters that Gazprom was likely to buy up to 30 billion cubic metres of Turkmen gas next year. (Writing by Dmitry Sergeyev and Vladimir Soldatkin, editing by William Hardy)
