Appeal of cash-rich private banks remains
2009-10-07 13:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Private banks are here to stay, with their growth expected to outstrip the broader global economy in coming years and the cash they provide to universal banks becoming more important in the post-crisis world.
In the year following the collapse of U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers, private banks have been hit by the triple whammy of a market meltdown, the Madoff fraud and the tax attack on industry giant UBS (
Even though some private banks have been humbled by the crisis, rising wealth in emerging markets such as Brazil, Russia, India and China could mean double-digit revenue growth in some regions, top bankers told the Reuters Wealth Management Summit.
"I am bullish on this industry," said Gerard Aquilina, vice chairman of Britain's Barclays Wealth (
), which aspires to become one of the world's top five players.
Wealth management, until 10 years ago a nice add-on for many universal banks with the exception of the two Swiss giants UBS and Credit Suisse (
), has grown in importance among global banks and many are scrambling to acquire private banking assets in the current consolidation wave.
New, more demanding requirements for liquidity and banks' regulatory capital are highlighting the importance of having a steady source of cash stabilize revenues.
), formerly best known for its investment bank, has taken on most of Citi's (
) wealth assets to become one of the world's largest private banks and says one in every two billionaires on the Forbes list is a client.
Revenues from private banking now represent half of Morgan Stanley's top line and the bank still plans to expand.
"We still continue to see this industry as a growth industry," said Alexander Classen, Head of Private Wealth Management in EMEA for Morgan Stanley. "We expect it to expand at a faster pace than gross domestic product growth."
The rich are seen boosting their wealth to $48.5 trillion by 2013 from $32.8 trillion, or about 8 percent per year, Capgemini and Merrill Lynch predicted in their 2009 World Wealth Report.
Felipe Godard, Head of European International Markets at rival JP Morgan Private Bank (
), made similar predictions.
But the world's rich are still cautious on the outlook for the economic recovery and private bankers will have to work twice as hard to extract the gains they predict from what seems to have become a low-margin business.
"The sentiment we get from clients is not necessarily that we are going back to sunny days," Godard said.
The richest, who tend to worry more about preserving their capital than making aggressive returns, are still holding more cash and bonds than equities and avoiding riskier but more lucrative products such as commodities and hedge funds.
Scorpio Partnership, a specialist consultancy firm, predicts gross margins in private banking to ease to an average of 104 basis points from 107 at the end of 2007.
The cautious ultra-rich may also be lagging other less risk-averse investors, many of whom booked big gains when worldwide stock markets rebounded throughout this year.
"Normally we are more aggressive than the customers," said Enrique Marazuela, chief investment officer at BBVA Patrimonios (
), which deals mainly with Latin America.
Private bankers say the crisis has, above all, taught them to be closer to, and more transparent with, clients. Larger banks have learnt from small boutiques the benefits of spending more time with a more select number of wealthy customers.
"It's been a crisis of confidence, not just about losing money but about losing faith," said Samir Raslan a top executive at Citi Private Bank (
"More than any specific product, what was important was to be in front of the client and be there at each stage."
