Japan PM orders stronger surveillance near disputed isles
2013-01-08 06:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe ordered his defense minister on Tuesday to strengthen surveillance around islands at the heart of a territorial feud with China, Kyodo news agency reported.
Deputy Foreign Minister Akitaka Saiki summoned the Chinese ambassador earlier in the day to protest against an "incursion" by four Chinese maritime surveillance ships near the islands, officials said.
"I want you to respond firmly," Kyodo quoted Abe as telling Defence Minister Itsunori Onodera.
The ships entered the area around noon on Monday and left in the early hours of Tuesday, the officials said.
China's State Oceanic Administration confirmed four Chinese marine surveillance ships were patrolling waters near the islands.
"Japan has continued to ignore our warnings that their vessels and aircraft have infringed our sovereignty," the Communist Party chief of China's marine surveillance corps, Sun Shuxian, said in an interview posted on the Oceanic Administration's website.
"This behavior may result in the further escalation of the situation at sea and has prompted China to pay great attention and vigilance," Sun was quoted as saying.
Sino-Japanese ties chilled after the Japanese government bought the disputed islands, known as the Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, from a private Japanese owner last September.
Japan's Defence Ministry has scrambled F-15 fighter jets several times in recent weeks to intercept Chinese marine surveillance planes approaching the islands.
The hawkish Abe, whose conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) returned to power in a landslide election victory last month, has vowed a tough stance in the territorial feud.
(Reporting by Kiyoshi Takenaka, Hitoshi Ishida and Linda Sieg; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Yea, keep a close eye on the islands, somebody might steal a rock.
Jan 08, 20137:41am EST--
I am not sure about rocks, but they might steal oil or fish.
Jan 08, 20138:24am EST--
What Japan need is to strengthen its defense force and upgrade its military capability. That should not be a preparation for war, but rather in accordance with the fact that any nation in a dispute over resource rich territory with another should be prepared for any eventuality, unless she wants give up at the limit.
Jan 08, 20138:35am EST--
