China's insurance regulator to reject $9.4 billion HSBC deal: reports
2013-01-09 13:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China's insurance regulator is expected to reject HSBC's sale of its $9.4 billion stake in Ping An Insurance (
) to Thai conglomerate CP Group, media reports said on Wednesday.
) and an embarrassment to the various parties involved in a corporate deal that was set to be Asia's second-largest last year.
The China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) is likely to veto the deal due to a lack of funding, the South China Morning Post and The Wall Street Journal both said on Wednesday.
Reuters on Tuesday said that the deal was in jeopardy after state-backed China Development Bank had expressed concerns over its financing. According to the story, CDB's reluctance emerged after media reports late in December that said CP Group's payment for the deal came from outside sources.
A $1.9 billion payment by CP subsidiaries was made on December 7 as a first installment for the deal, with the shares then transferred to CP Group, according to HSBC. Payment for the remaining amount was due after regulatory approval, which had a deadline of February 1.
CDB originally agreed to back the remaining purchase, though HSBC did not disclose the size of the loan. CDB withdrawing from the process would be a major setback for the sale, but would not necessarily kill the agreement if another funding source could be found before that deadline.
A CIRC rejection, however, would stop the second installment and effectively end the deal.
A spokesman for Ping An said the sale was moving ahead with normal approval procedures, while HSBC declined to comment.
Doubts over the deal's closing surfaced after the respected Chinese magazine Caixin Century Weekly reported late last month that CP Group received funding for the first payment from outside sources, naming Chinese businessman Xiao Jianhua as being among the backers.
(Additional reporting by Lawrence White Xie Heng and Bi Xiaowen; Editing by Michael Flaherty and Greg Mahlich)
