FOREX-Dollar on defensive, Aussie hovers near 14-month high
2009-10-07 02:16:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar was on the defensive on Wednesday while higher-yielding currencies such as the Australian dollar held near their 2009 highs, buoyed by investors' search for bigger returns.
following gains on Wall Street and gold prices XAU= held close to a record high set the previous day. Base metals also made solid gains, all of which supported growth-linked currencies.
"With the view that the low interest rate policy in the U.S. will likely be around for a while, an abundant supply of dollars is flowing into higher-yielding currencies such as the Australian dollar and emerging market currencies," said Kazuyuki Kato, treasury department manager at Mizuho Trust & Banking.
Near-zero rates have increased the dollar's appeal in carry trades, where investors borrow in a cheaper currency to buy higher-yielding assets.
The dollar index =USD, edged up 0.1 percent to 76.384, having lost ground steadily after touching a three-week high of 77.475 last week.
It hit a 13-month low of 75.827 last month and could retest that level, although some market players said a further fall towards its March 2008 lows at the 70 level would require a surge in the euro versus the dollar, and that may not be likely in the near term, dealers said.
Although some of these countries later denied such a move, traders said the dollar's broad slide is likely to persist as the world commits to resolving global economic imbalances.
Resolving imbalances implies a new global growth framework in which countries with large current account surpluses, like China, focus on boosting domestic demand, while deficit nations like the U.S. undertake policies to increase savings.
"The economic framework is changing with the dollar's status as a world reserve currency being slowly but surely challenged by talk about SDR (special drawing rights) or the Chinese renminbi," said a senior trader for a Japanese bank.
, but stayed in sight of near two-week highs touched on Tuesday.
Traders said the yen's rise this week was partly due to a share sale by Japanese brokerage Nomura, which is expected to raise about 433 billion yen ($4.9 billion), part of which is likely to be bought by overseas investors.
Traders said foreign demand for Nomura's new shares may provide support to the yen towards the payment date on Oct. 13.
, towards its eight-month low of 88.23 yen struck last week.
hovered near 14-month highs against the dollar in the wake of the Reserve Bank of Australia's decision to hike the cash rate by 25 basis points to 3.25 percent on Tuesday. [ID:nSP499690]
"The RBA is spearheading the global exit strategy and it is no coincidence that the stronger cyclical commodity countries Norway, Canada, and even New Zealand are likely to lead the way well ahead of their more structurally impaired counterparts -- U.S. and the UK," said Su-Lin Ong, senior economist at RBC Capital.
but remained in reach of $0.8920 hit on Tuesday, its highest since August 2008. Traders said the currency's next target would be at $0.8960 and then at $0.9000.
The kiwi is not far from a 14-month high of $0.7379 hit on Tuesday. (Additional reporting by Anirban Nag in Sydney and Satomi Noguchi in Tokyo; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
