China's twins celebrate double fun of siblings
2009-10-07 05:48:00.0
China's twins celebrate double fun of siblings | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China's twins celebrate double fun of siblings
Tue, Oct 6 2009
Wed  EDT
Dressed in matching outfits, trios and matching couples ranging from babies to grandmas danced, sang, did calligraphy and joined in a huge domino rally.
In some countries parents may fear the simultaneous arrival of multiple children, but in China they are lucky exceptions to strict family planning rules that limit many couples to one son or daughter unless both parents are themselves only children.
Introduced in the late 1970s, the one child policy forbids most urban residents from having a second child, although rules are more relaxed for ethnic minorities and rural residents whose first child is a girl.
Having twins means children grow up with a companion and gives parents the prospect of a more comfortable old age, as in a country with weak social security nets, children are often the main source of support for their aging mother and father.
One Nanjing paper said a local hospital had seen 100 pairs of twins and 3 sets of triplets in 2006 as compared with just 45 pairs of twins in 1995, a phenomenon doctors there put down to fertility drugs.
Song Binying, a 37-year-old mother of twin daughters from southwestern Sichuan province, said she knew a couple who had used the practice, and could sympathize with them.
"Perhaps they just think that twins are very cute, and they really like them. But I think no matter whether they were conceived naturally, or if their parents had injections or something, they will bring their families the same happiness."
Organizers said around 500-600 sets of twins and other multiples attended the annual Twins' Cultural Festival, the sixth of its kind to be held in Beijing.
"If you have twins it's not against the (one child) policy and you still get the benefits, plus the child will have a companion. It's great for a child's development. People should know what it's like to have siblings," he said.
