UPDATE 2-IMF's Kato says yen levels reflect fundamentals
2009-10-07 07:42:00.0
(Reuters) - The recent run-up in the value of the yen has not taken it out of line with medium-term fundamentals but its impact on Japan's fragile recovery needs to be watched, a senior IMF official said on Wednesday.
The yen gained broadly on Wednesday, hitting a new 8-1/2 month high against the dollar, as market players tested how far Japanese authorities would allow the currency to strengthen.
"According to IMF estimates, the yen's current levels broadly reflect medium-term economic fundamentals," Kato told reporters after the conclusion of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank's semiannual meetings here.
"On the other hand, disorderly currency moves have an undesirable effect on Japan's economy."
Kato, a former senior Japanese finance ministry official whose term at the IMF expires at the end of this month, declined to comment on whether recent yen moves warranted intervention by Japanese monetary authorities.
But he said it was necessary to monitor the impact recent yen rises could have on Japan's corporate sentiment and the economy, which is just beginning to recover.
Japan has not intervened in the currency markets since 2004 and many market players doubt the new government, led by the Democratic Party which won elections in August, will depart from the old administration's stance. [ID:nT249408]
Kato said central banks should not rush to end their easy monetary policies, adding that Australia, which raised interest rates on Tuesday, was only able to do so because the damage from the global recession on its economy had been minimal.
"It's a shared view among nations that until a return toward a recovery is assured, stimulus measures shouldn't be withdrawn too hastily," he said.
That goes for Japan too, according to Kato.
The timing of phasing out the Bank of Japan's corporate debt buying programme depends largely on the degree of improvement in credit markets, but very low interest rates should be intact for some time, he said.
While the BOJ is seen keeping rates near zero at least until 2011, it is considering phasing out its emergency steps aimed at supporting corporate finance when they expire in December.
A decision on the fate of these steps could come as early as next week, when BOJ policymakers meet for a rate review.
Central banks around the world have begun debating how and when to phase out the emergency steps they took to contain the damage wrought by the worst global financial crisis in decades, but most are not expected to do so until well into next year.
BOJ Governor Masaaki Shirakawa on Saturday signaled that an exit to the bank's unconventional steps may be near, telling reporters that corporate finance was in less need of policy support since credit market conditions had improved significantly.
Asked whether China should allow its currency to move more flexibly to trim global economic imbalances, Kato said the country should focus on turning its economy into one led by domestic demand.
"If as a result China's currency appreciates in a way that reflects fundamentals, it would contribute to global rebalancing by boosting Chinese consumers' purchasing power."
All countries with big current account surpluses, not just China but also Japan and Germany, should take steps to boost domestic demand to help trim imbalances, Kato said.
China, while insisting it intends eventually to free up the yuan, has kept the currency essentially flat against the dollar since the global crisis began worsening in July 2008 and it has shown no sign it is in a hurry to heed pressure from the rich Group of Seven nations to let its currency rise. (Editing by Tim Ahmann)
