WITNESS: Learning to sail with an Olympic champion
2009-10-06 20:09:00.0
(Reuters) -"Duck," chirped British Olympic champion Paul Goodison again but he was not fondly reminiscing about his favorite meal during his run to the Laser gold medal at the Games regatta in China last year.
It was a pertinent reminder for me to keep my head down while I tried another tack in our two-man Bahia boat in Weymouth and Portland Bay, the venue for the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic sailing events and credited by the Royal Yachting Association as the best sailing waters in Northern Europe.
Such was my concentration in trying to remember all of Goodison's instructions that I forgot the first rule of self preservation -- and as the boom, which stabilizes the bottom of the main sail, swung sharply around I was caught another ringing blow just above the ear.
"So, how much sailing have you done?," Goodison asked on a sunny late September afternoon on England's south coast, with the white chalk cliffs of Britain's world heritage Jurassic Coastline providing a beautiful backdrop.
"This is my first time," I replied as we pushed off from the dock at the impressive National Sailing Academy, the first of the 2012 London Games venues to be completed.
As a Reuters journalist I have reported on the last two Olympic regattas, in Athens in 2004 and Qingdao in China last year, but a boating holiday on the Norfolk Broads, numerous ferry crossings and some unsuccessful attempts at surfing were about the sole sum of my experiences at sea.
Goodison, 31, is the best Laser dinghy sailor in the world, as his Olympic, world and European titles and nomination for this year's International Sailing Federation (ISAF) World Sailor of the Year Award testify to, but he was going to need patience in abundance while I got to grips with the mechanics of the boat.
In calm conditions but with just enough breeze for forward momentum, Goodison ran through some basic theory, including the relationship between a boat's course and the wind direction, and then threw me in at the deep end. Not literally, but it was my turn to take control of the boat and suddenly I was a bag of nerves.
The tiller, the lever that steers the rudder, is extremely sensitive to the touch and an inch of hand movement either side is enough to alter the boat's course.
In my head I ran through what I had just learned: Push the tiller, stand and rotate the tiller while keeping your balance, remember to duck your head, sit back down on the other side of the boat while keeping the tiller parallel behind you.
"That, actually, was a jibe (turning the stern through the wind)," said Goodison and urged me to have another go.
Undeterred, I tried the maneuver again... and again... and again... and each time the boat ground to a halt.
"We'll try heading downwind," said Goodison, and as I unfurled the spinnaker, the sails filled and we were propelled by the breeze and began slicing through the sea.
Figuring out the intricacies of the wind is an art and I was dumbfounded by Goodison's ability to predict, to the second, when the breeze would lift.
When the wind gusts you see patches of darker water and as Goodison pointed to an area some 30 to 40 meters away he began counting down from 10 to one. Right on cue, the sails filled again and we increased speed.
Out in the bay, it was a veritable who's who of British Olympians.
Beijing gold medalists Iain Percy and Andrew Simpson glided by in their Star boat while further out Pippa Wilson, who has moved to the women's 470 boat since winning gold in China in the three-person Yngling, was training with new crew partner Saskia Clark.
The majority of Britain's elite sailing squad live in and around Weymouth and Portland, and when not competing in regattas around the world they can be found honing their skills in the bay.
After an hour's sailing we headed back to dry land and it was time to get Goodison's verdict on my efforts.
"You were thrown in at the deep end...I'm probably not the best teacher out there but by the end you'd made a couple of tacks, you did not look stupid which is always the important thing," he said. "Hopefully you can take that forward to next time you sail."
