Climate pundit seeks faster CO2 shipping cuts
2009-10-06 00:48:00.0
(Reuters) - The United Nation's shipping agency must move faster to introduce mandatory efficiency measures for vessels, veteran environmental campaigner Jonathon Porritt said on Tuesday.
Failure do to so could result in a solution being imposed on the shipping industry by the European Union and others, he said.
Shipping and aviation are the only industry sectors not regulated under the Kyoto Protocol, which sets targets for greenhouse gas emissions by rich countries from 2008-12.
The seaborne sector accounts for nearly three percent of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and pressure has grown for cuts ahead of December's climate change summit in Copenhagen.
"There is a sense amongst all of us that the IMO has ... been dragging its feet on all of this," Porritt said.
"Progress made has really been very slow indeed," he told Reuters in an interview.
The initiatives were circulated for trial use and will be discussed at the IMO's next committee session in March 2010.
The Forum for the Future charity, which Porritt co-founded, has joined British entrepreneur Richard Branson and others in a new group called the Carbon War Room seeking a more active stance from the IMO and the shipping industry to combating CO2.
"If the IMO is not able to raise its game, then the industry is going to find itself increasingly regulated to do what it is currently in a position to do voluntarily," Porritt said.
"The first thing would be to agree an absolute timetable for introducing these indexes," said Porritt, who stepped down as chairman of the UK government appointed Sustainable Development Commission this year.
An IMO spokeswoman said it had opted not to make binding decisions on climate change before December's summit.
"Rather, IMO looks to the Copenhagen Conference to provide, through a new framework treaty instrument, political insight and direction," she said.
"The organization stands ready to enact the necessary technical and operational measures needed to give effect to its members' relevant decisions."
Environmental groups argue the measures reached in July did not go far enough given opposition from China, India and Saudi Arabia.
Peter Hinchliffe, marine director with the International Chamber of Shipping, which represents 75 percent of the global industry, said it wanted to see a mandatory design index in the "fastest possible timescale," adding shippers were in a constant search for increased efficiency to cut CO2.
"We already called for mandatory application but it was thrown out by the member states," he told Reuters. "Many of them are preserving their position for Copenhagen."
