CORRECTED - (OFFICIAL)-MOVES-UPDATE 3-Bank of America, UBS, Jefferies, RBC
2009-10-06 15:37:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Tuesday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
Law firm Chadbourne & Parke said it hired Richard Ross, a vice president and assistant general counsel at Goldman Sachs Group (
) in New York, as counsel in the corporate practice.
The largest U.S. bank announced three hirings in its global credit flow trading group. The bank hired Jasen Conners and Charlie Shah as investment grade traders, while Lawrence Wolfson will join as a high yield trader.
The company said it appointed Terry Duddy as a non-executive director with effect from Dec. 3, replacing John Clare. Duddy has been chief executive of Home Retail Group since 2006.
The British life insurer said it would bring its domestic businesses under a single chief executive, naming Mark Hodges, its current head of UK life insurance, to lead the core unit. [ID:nL6703455]
The securities and investment banking group said it appointed Peter Hale as a senior vice president and head of Asian convertible bond trading. He joins from JPMorgan, where he worked for six years and was most recently a managing director and head of Asia Pacific convertible bonds.
The international arm of RBC Wealth Management, headquartered in London and part of the Royal Bank of Canada, said it appointed Matthew Yong and Frank Mu as president and CEO, respectively, of its Asia operations.
Stuart Peskin joined the company as managing director for client service. Most recently, Peskin was based in Tokyo with State Street Global Advisors as their Asia-Pacific director of product engineering and development.
The regional financial services firm hired Vivian Altman as a public finance investment banker in fixed income capital markets. Most recently, Altman served as president and chief executive of the Edison Economic Development Council/Edison Redevelopment Agency in New Jersey.
The online investing firm hired Jared Macke as online marketing manager. Prior to joining Scottrade, Macke was director of interactive services at Brighton Agency Inc.
The broker dealer launched its equity-research group, with initial coverage of 14 technology supply chain and networking companies.
Brian White, managing director within equity research, will be covering the technology supply chain, networking and IT hardware sectors. Prior to joining the firm, White covered the electronics supply chain and China technology sectors for Collins Stewart.
The law firm named Frank Ryan as the chair of the firm's litigation department. Ryan succeeds Samuel Goldblatt, who will focus on his practice as a trial lawyer. (Compiled by Amit Kumar in Bangalore and Juan Lagorio and Elinor Comlay in New York)
