UPDATE 3-Aeon H1 op profit falls 40 pct, keeps outlook
2009-10-06 06:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's second-largest retailer, Aeon Co Ltd (
), reported a 39.5 percent fall in first-half operating profit on Tuesday, hurt by prolonged weak consumer spending, but it reiterated its full-year outlook above the market forecast.
Supermarkets and department stores remain in a slump even as the country's economy crawls out of recession, with record deflation and rising job losses dampening hopes for a speedy recovery.
"The customers' drive for thrift is expected to accelerate amid the lack of improvement in employment conditions and other factors," he said.
) have been hit by sharp falls in sales for months as thrifty consumers cut back spending on clothes and other non-daily items and defect to cheaper specialty stores like Fast Retailing's (
Aeon has been trying to lure back shoppers by expanding offerings of cheap store brand items and sprucing up shops, but its attempts to revamp its larger supermarkets that sell clothes and houseware items in addition to groceries have failed to reverse the trend.
"Many had expected Aeon to cut its outlook. It's very hard for Aeon to meet its full-year forecast," said Shun Tanaka, a retail analyst at SMBC Friend Research Center.
He added that the company's supermarkets, which had enjoyed relatively solid sales, have been suffering lately due to price falls.
The retail conglomerate runs about 1,800 supermarkets and grocery outlets, including Jusco stores, as well as thousands of specialty shops, including U.S. apparel chain Talbots TLB.N.
Okada said the company is shifting its focus to the Asian market outside Japan, where little growth is expected due largely to the country's ageing population.
"Especially China and ASEAN, which hold strong promise of growth," he said. The company has about 80 supermarkets and other stores in Southeast Asia and China.
For the six months ended in August, the company said its operating profit came in at 35.5 billion yen ($397 million), down from 58.7 billion yen a year earlier.
The firm kept its full-year forecast at a range of 130-140 billion yen in operating profit, up 4.5-12.6 percent from a year earlier and above a mean estimate of 119.8 billion yen in a poll of 12 analysts by Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Shares of Aeon have fallen 5 percent so far this year, underperforming a 9 percent gain in the benchmark Nikkei average
Prior to the announcement, Aeon shares ended down 2 percent at 830 yen, underperforming a 0.2 percent gain the broader market. (Reporting by Taiga Uranaka; Editing by Joseph Radford)
