HIGHLIGHTS 3-Interview quotes from BOJ member Mizuno
2009-10-06 07:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Oct 6 2009
Tue, Oct 6 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Tue  EDT
(For more stories on the Japanese economy, click [ID:nECONJP])
Following are key quotes from Reuters' interview with Mizuno:
"We will deal appropriately with temporary steps including CP and corporate bond buying taken to cope with acute conditions ahead of their expiry at the end of the year, while monitoring corporate finance and financial markets.
"In this regard, it is important to examine whether these temporary steps may hinder autonomous market functioning."
"The September tankan showed improvements in funding at big firms were spreading, but the number of small firms facing funding difficulties was only slowly declining. In addition, the narrowing yield spreads on commercial paper and corporate bonds between primary and secondary markets partly reflect feeble funding demand."
"Looking at how the temporary steps have been and are being used now, there is less demand for the CP and corporate bond buying operations, and the (BOJ) holdings of this debt have decreased.
"On the other hand, there is strong demand for special operations aimed at backing corporate finance, with the balance remaining almost the same as its peak at around 7 trillion yen ($79 billion).
"It is important to bear in mind the following points when considering what to do with these temporary measures: The first is how the functioning of each instrument's market has improved... The second is how to assess the impact each step has had on overall corporate finance... Thirdly, it is important to exchange views with the market on how the BOJ should deal with corporate finance and temporary steps.
"The BOJ needs to examine carefully individual market conditions, overall corporate finance, macroeconomic and price conditions, as well as how the temporary measures fit in with other policies in a broader sense, and convey that appropriately to market participants."
"Given that temporary steps regarding corporate finance support are technical, it is important to gain understanding from participants not only in money markets and bond markets but also from other market players when discussing an exit (from these policies).
"That way, we could avoid any misunderstanding that the BOJ is rushing towards an exit strategy.
"The world will need to accept low economic growth in the process of moving to a new equilibrium after the problem of leverage at U.S. households is resolved, from the past equilibrium that was backed by excess U.S. consumption.
"As Japan's experience from the burst of its own bubble shows, there will be a long and rocky road ahead in the process of recovery from the financial crisis.
"Even though structural adjustments will lead to progress in rectifying global imbalances stemming from excess consumption in the United States and excess savings in Asia, the U.S. economy can't be expected to return to how it was before the financial crisis.
"China and India are expected to achieve a high growth rate, but it is unclear whether these emerging economies can absorb global demand, and so the world must accept low economic growth for the time being.
"The world economy could falter if major economies implement too early their exit strategies from fiscal stimuli, monetary easing and measures for stabilising their financial systems, or if they mis-time changes to global regulations on bank capital ratios."
"Our main scenario is that the growth rate will rise gradually, both at home and overseas, as economies move towards self-sustaining growth led by the private sector after being supported by inventory restocking and various public support measures.
"But we still can't be optimistic about whether the Japanese economic recovery will be sustained after the effects of stimuli have run their course.
"The recovery in exports will be led by shipments to emerging economies, including China.
"It is hard to see a scenario in which external demand raises the current low capacity utilisation at Japanese manufacturers to levels seen in the first half of last year, because the pace of recovery in the West is expected to be slow.
"If that's the case, attention should be paid to how soon Japan's manufacturers can make adjustments for excess capacity and workers. We should also watch to see if these adjustments have favourable effects on households (long term) and whether personal consumption can hold up in the meantime."
"Upside risks for Japan's economic outlook will arise if China and other emerging economies achieve higher economic growth than expected and if the effects from stimulus last longer.
"International institutions have slightly revised up the world economy's outlook due largely to a faster-than-expected recovery in emerging economies.
"But it will take a considerable period of time before the economy gets on a full recovery path led by the private sector, given that financial systems in the West remain unstable... prices face more downside risks than upside... and U.S. households have not completed their balance sheet adjustments."
"The BOJ said in its April outlook that ... Japan's economy is expected to recover gradually, thanks in part to the impact of fiscal and monetary policies as well as measures for the financial system, and as overseas economies and the global financial markets recover.
"In the next outlook report in October, we will extend the period of our forecast to March 2012."
