European bankers see new commodities wealth
2009-10-06 13:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian demand for copper, steel and other metals will create new pockets of wealth in Latin America, according to European bankers who see the region as a key growth engine in the years ahead.
Enrique Marazuela, chief investment officer at Spain's BBVA Patrimonios (
), said that while developed markets would struggle along even as Asia recovers, "Latin America will be in a good situation" because of its mineral and metal resources.
"We think commodities will help Latin America in the coming years," he told the Reuters Wealth Management Summit in Geneva, where other bankers catering to the ultra-affluent also said they expected fresh business from the region.
Antonio Costa, area manager at Santander Private Banking International (
), said his Geneva-based institution was heavily involved in Mexico, Brazil and Chile where he said rich people were increasingly keen on expert investing advice.
And Alexander Classen, head of Morgan Stanley Private Wealth Management for Europe, the Middle East and Africa, singled out Brazil as "a very big potential market" for his firm along with other emerging economies where wealth is still being generated.
Referring to the large number of international banks now eyeing up Latin America, BBVA's Marazuela said there was room for a range of players to do business. "We are focusing on different parts of the pie," he said.
Marazuela stressed developing country consumers would be one of the global economy's main drivers in the coming years as they spend money they amassed in the boom time -- a contrast to the United States, European Union and Japan where governments are struggling to shore up domestic demand.
"They are focused on the first car, the fridge, the first washing machine," he said, referring to the middle classes of China and other Asian countries. "All of those things require a lot of raw materials, a lot of metals," he said."
Latin American exports of copper, iron and other industrial commodities should create new wealth creation opportunities for European banks in the region, whose political instability has historically spurred many people to bank abroad, according to the BBVA executive.
Morgan Stanley's Classen said there was "not that much" appetite in buying industrial metals and minerals at the present time, despite expectations that the global economy would eventually pick up with renewed need for such goods.
Instead of recommending that its clients buy traded commodities or indices, Marazuela said that his bank was urging clients to invest in big mining and refining companies who stand to benefit from the renewed demand.
"It is simpler to deal with listed companies," he said.
