MONEY MARKETS-Curves steepen after Australia hikes rates
2009-10-06 07:25:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. and European money market curves steepened slightly on Tuesday as traders priced in higher interest rates in the second half of next year after Australia became the first major economic power to raise rates.
While not totally unexpected, the Reserve Bank of Australia's 25 bps rate rise was still something of a surprise, and set off talk in financial markets on if, when, and how much other major central banks will follow.
The shifts in rate expectations were concentrated in the second half of next year because the overwhelming consensus is still that U.S., euro zone and UK economies remain too fragile to warrant the rapid withdrawal of accommodative policy.
This was reinforced on Monday by New York Federal Reserve President William Dudley who said rates will stay low for a prolonged period because labour markets are weak, the banking system has not fully recovered and inflation is not a threat yet.
"The lesson for G7 markets is that the key signal from the RBA ... is that once the tightening cycle begins, it can progress a lot faster than what G7 money markets are pricing in at the moment," said Lena Komileva, director and head of G7 market strategy at Tullett Prebon in London.
"It is cause for the market to reconsider the repricing for the second half of 2010," she said.
Euro zone Overnight Index Swaps on Tuesday showed investors pricing in at least a quarter point rate hike from the European Central Bank to 1.25 percent within a year. At the end of last week, no increase at all was priced in over the next year.
But some analysts view the RBA's case as somewhat unique because of the relatively healthy state of the Australian economy, which was less battered by the banking meltdown and is now benefiting from the cyclical boom in China and commodities.
Any increase in U.S., euro zone or UK rate expectations, therefore, provides a good trading opportunity because these economies and banking sectors are much more fragile.
"The steeper the money market curve is, the more attractive it is to receive (swaps) or go long the forwards over the next year or two," said Ciaran O'Hagan, senior rates strategist at Societe Generale in Paris.
"The curve is already pricing in quite a steep recovery ... (but) credit conditions remain very difficult in terms of extension of credit by banks and demand for credit. Short rates in dollars and euros will remain low, that's for sure," he said.
Interbank lending rates mostly rose on Tuesday, albeit marginally, according to the British Bankers' Association's latest daily fixing of London interbank offered rates, the global benchmark pricing for the cost of interbank money.
Benchmark three-month euro Libor was fixed at 0.69875 percent EUR3MFSR=, dollar Libor at 0.28406 percent USD3MFSR= and sterling at 0.55125 percent GBP3MFSR=.
Longer-dated sterling and dollar Libor rose too, with one-year sterling rates up nearly a basis point at 1.09938 percent GBP1YFSR= and dollars at 1.21250 percent USD1YFSR=. Euro one-year Libor was virtually unchanged at 1.22250 percent EUR1YFSR=.
Data from the ECB showed the amount of cash deposited by banks at the central bank rose further above 150 billion euros, continuing the increase seen since the ECB's 75 billion euro tender of one-year funds last week.
The ECB will announce its latest interest rate decision on Thursday, when it is fully expected to leave rates unchanged at a record low 1.0 percent, with few hints yet it is preparing to end some of its ultra-loose policy measures. [ECB/INT]
The Bank of England also meets on Thursday and is fully expected to leave rates at a record low 0.5 percent, while a majority of economists believe it has allocated all it intends to in quantitative easing. [BOE/INT]
