MONEY MARKETS-Rate jitters anew after Australian hike
2009-10-06 00:31:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. and European money market curves steepened a bit on Tuesday as concerns over central banks tightening ultra-loose monetary policies elevated after Australia became the first major economy to raise rates.
The Reserve Bank of Australia's quarter-percentage-point hike did not catch traders completely off guard, and the move set off talk in financial markets on if, when and how much other major central banks will follow. For more see [ID:nSYD520296].
"You are seeing more concerns over tightening in global rates," said Jessica Hoversen, fixed income market analyst at MF Global Research in Chicago.
The RBA move led traders to shift in their rate expectations in the second half of next year even though the consensus is that U.S., euro zone and British economies remain too fragile for a rapid withdrawal of accommodative policy.
The Bank of England and European Central Bank, which will hold policy meetings on Thursday, are widely expected to hold their record low policy rates unchanged.
Benchmark three-month interbank rate on dollars USD3MFSR= stood at 0.28406 percent for a third straight session, suggesting short-term rates may have hit a bottom since their crisis peaks a year ago.
Equivalent London interbank offered rate on euros EUR3MFSR= and sterling GBP3MFSR= rose slightly to 0.69875 percent and 0.55125 percent, respectively. For more on Tuesday's Libor fixings double-click on [ID:nL6286234].
Longer-dated sterling and dollar Libor rose too, with one-year sterling rates up nearly a basis point at 1.09938 percent GBP1YFSR= and dollars at 1.21250 percent USD1YFSR=. Euro one-year Libor was virtually unchanged at 1.22250 percent EUR1YFSR=.
ISOLATED CASE?
Some analysts view Australia's rate move as unique. Its economy was less battered by last year's banking crisis and is now benefiting from the boom in China and commodities.
U.S. gold futures GCZ9, for example, hit a record high of $1,045 an ounce on Tuesday. [ID:nN01351554]
Any increase in U.S., euro zone or UK rate expectations, therefore, provides a good trading opportunity because these economies and banking sectors are much more fragile.
"The steeper the money market curve is, the more attractive it is to receive (swaps) or go long the forwards over the next year or two," said Ciaran O'Hagan, senior rates strategist at Societe Generale in Paris.
In the dollar swaps market, two-year swap spread held steady on the day at 35.00 basis points, suggesting traders are betting U.S. rates if they do rise will do so slowly.
"The Fed is not going to do anything until the unemployment rate peaks," MF Global's Hoversen said.
Last Friday, the U.S. Labor Department reported the jobless rate USUNR=ECI reached a 26-year high at 9.8 percent in September. This signaled persistent weakness in the jobs market and its drag on consumer spending, which makes up 70 percent of the U.S. economy. [ID:nN02314318] (Editing by James Dalgleish)
