INTERVIEW-China says rich need to honour climate commitments
2009-10-06 09:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China hit out at rich nations on Tuesday, saying failure to honour past climate commitments was undermining U.N.-led efforts to try to seal a broader pact in December to fight global warming.
Speaking on the sidelines of climate talks in the Thai capital, Yu Qingtai, China's special envoy for climate change, said some nations needed to do some "deep soul-searching".
"What is happening right now in these negotiations is not very encouraging to say the least," Yu said, repeating a fear he expressed on Monday that some nations were trying to "terminate" the Kyoto Protocol, the U.N.'s top weapon to curb climate change.
"Are we serious about the commitments that we undertake? Are we serious about the agreements that we reach? Do we have the political will to act on the basis on what we say?"
Yu said Annex 1, or rich, nations seemed to be shifting their positions to meet the stance of the United States. Washington wants any steps to cut emissions to be effective under domestic law but has been ambiguous on whether any new climate pact from 2013 should be internationally binding.
The United States never ratified Kyoto, which binds 37 industrialised nations to emissions targets during its first commitment period from 2008 to 2012.
"What we see now is the move, the other Annex 1 countries, moving to what the U.S. is prepared to put on the table, to make it comparable. So what is happening right now is not very encouraging."
Developing nations, including China, say rich countries are historically responsible for most of mankind's greenhouse gas pollution in the atmosphere since the Industrial Revolution and that they have the right to expand their economies to help fight poverty.
"Everybody agreed in Bali that there should be a twin-track system and one of the tracks should be a discussion of the second commitment period. But now people are trying to take away the wheels on this track," Yu said.
Yu said the U.S. commitments should be comparable to the European Union, Canada and other rich nations.
"We are prepared to negotiate with everybody what comparability should mean. In our view it should be comparable in terms of magnitude, in terms of legal nature, it should be a set of commitments rather than national actions, which is meant for developing countries." (Editing by Nick Macfie)
