FTSE closes up 2.3 pct; commods, banks lead surge
2009-10-06 00:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index closed 2.3 percent higher on Tuesday, as heavyweight commodity and bank issues rallied on renewed hopes over the gathering pace of the global economic recovery, ahead of the third-quarter U.S. earnings season.
At the close, the FTSE 100
was up 113.65 points at 5137.98, after closing 0.7 percent higher on Monday.
"The FTSE has had a bumper session today after yesterday's strong performance in the US ... surging higher yet again as optimism returns ahead of the start of earnings season," said Jimmy Yates, Head of Equities at CMC Markets.
Dollar weakness, following a report Gulf Arab states were in talks to replace the U.S. unit with a basket of currencies in oil trading, underpinned higher metals prices, which boosted the mining sector.
), Antofagasta (
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Rio Tinto (
), Kazakhmys (
Energy stocks rose as crude prices CLc1 rose above $71 a barrel, supported by the U.S. Energy Information Administration, which raised its outlook for world oil demand at the end of this year as the economy improves in China and other Asian countries. [ID:nSYD517468]
), BP (
), Tullow Oil (
Banks finished strongly, buoyed by a BofA Merrill Lynch strategy upgrade of the sector to 'overweight', with HSBC (
), Standard Chartered (
), Barclays (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
A Citigroup upgrade to 'buy' from 'hold' helped Rolls-Royce (
), up 4.4 percent, with the broker hiking its target price for the engineer to 550 pence from 465 pence, saying it saw upside risk to estimates.
) was among a handful of FTSE 100 fallers, off 1.7 percent, pressured by a UBS downgrade to 'neutral' from 'buy' on valuation grounds.
), however, rose 1.4 percent, boosted by support for its experimental kidney cancer drug Votrient. [ID:nN05383169]
) fell 1.3 and 0.6 percent, respectively, as traders banked profits following recent gains amid M&A speculation.
Britain's economic recovery stalled in the three months to September, The National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) said.
The NIESR reported GDP was flat in the third quarter following a modest expansion of 0.1 percent in the three months to August, an outturn it described as disappointing. [ID:nLAG003826]
British industrial output in August fell unexpectedly, and at its sharpest monthly pace since January, official data showed, dampening expectations for a strong rebound in growth in the third quarter of this year. [ID:nL6227520]
), the largest U.S. aluminium maker, unofficially kick off the earnings season. Third-quarter corporate earnings figures will give a clearer picture of the state of the economic recovery.
Yates said he sees the FTSE reaching between 5,400 and 5,650 on the back of strong third-quarter results, and he added: "Markets have pushed ahead beyond most people's expectations so far, so who's to say it won't do it again." (Editing by Simon Jessop)
