FOREX-Dollar under pressure, Aussie up on RBA hike
2009-10-06 04:35:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell on Tuesday, hurt by a media report, later denied, that Gulf Arab states were in talks to abandon the dollar in oil trade, while the Australian dollar rose after its central bank raised interest rates.
of $0.8876 after the Reserve Bank of Australia raised interest rates by 25 basis points to 3.25 percent, becoming the first Group of 20 central bank to hike as the global financial crisis eases. [ID:nSYD520296]
The New Zealand dollar also hit a 14-month high, rising to $0.7357
"The big story is Australia as other countries will now seek to raise rates, in contrast to the United States where the Fed is expected to raise rates last," said Lee Hardman, currency analyst at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ.
For a graphic comparing central bank rates, click here:
In the short term, the dollar would remain under pressure as risk sentiment was still improving and capital flows were turning toward higher growth and emerging assets, he said.
There were also options worth almost $1 billion in dollar/yen with strike prices in a range of 88 to 91 yen, which may limit the dollar's upside.
The dollar index, which tracks the performance of the greenback versus a basket of six other major currencies, was down 0.3 percent at 76.353 .DXY, inching back in the direction of a 13-month low of 75.827 hit in late September.
"In the United States, there is an ample supply of money, while Australia has started to tighten policy and the economy is doing well," said Yuichi Hojo, director of FX distribution for UBS in Tokyo.
"There might be a pullback in the next day or two, but viewed from the longer-term, it seems to be in an uptrend," Hojo said, referring to the Australian dollar.
But others said more monetary tightening had already been factored into the market, and the Aussie's upside would likely be limited at around $0.90.
The U.S. dollar's decline accelerated after Britain's Independent newspaper said Gulf Arab states were in secret talks with Russia, China, Japan and France to replace the dollar with a basket of currencies in the trading of oil. [ID:nSYD421795]
It said the proposal was for trade in crude oil to move over nine years to a basket of currencies including the Japanese yen and Chinese yuan, the euro, gold and a new, unified currency planned for nations in the Gulf Co-operation Council, including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Qatar.
Saudi Arabia's central bank chief said the story was "absolutely incorrect" [ID:nFCC000043] while authorities from Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Algeria said they were not aware of the report or did not see any need for a new currency for oil trade.
Russia had not discussed changing the dollar's role in the global trade of oil, deputy Russian finance minister Dmitry Pankin said. [ID:nFCC000045]
"A story of this nature smells of conspiracy theory and therefore has to be regarded with some suspicion," Commerzbank analysts said in a note. "It does however match the current zeitgeist very well: It is currently very much en vogue to demand and predict a new 'world financial order'."
(Additional reporting by Masayuki Kitano in Tokyo, editing by Nigel Stephenson)
