JPMorgan Asia private bank light on equities
2009-10-06 04:23:00.0
(Reuters) - JPMorgan's (
) private banking arm in Asia is positioning for a deceleration in the global economy in the second half of 2010 by staying underweight on equities, a senior executive said on Tuesday.
The bank is favoring alternative return drivers that are less dependent on growth, such as hedge funds, commodities, currencies and credit, and beefing up its cash holdings instead.
"This has to do partly with how we see the world in the next six to twelve months and partly to do with the risk sensitivity of our clients," Ivan Leung, chief investment strategist with JPMorgan Private Bank in Asia, told the Reuters Wealth Management Summit.
Leung said the bank was 4 percent underweight on equities, 8 percent overweight on hedge fund strategies and 5 percent overweight on cash when compared with a balanced portfolio which has a 40 percent allocation to equities, 40 percent to fixed income and 20 percent to alternative assets.
"The rising tide has lifted all boats but once the policy measures begin to fade out, we may see that the U.S. consumer is still impaired and this has been a jobless growth," said Leung.
"I'm not betting against the U.S. consumer but I don't want to bet my clients money on them either," he said.
'FULLY VALUED'
Many of the private bank's clients who are first generation Asian entrepreneurs were reluctant to pile into equities earlier this year while their businesses were still floundering while others pulled money out of hedge funds after managers put up gates preventing redemptions last year.
"The risk tolerance is rising now, but I will concede that the Asian equity markets are looking fully valued now. So this is the time to be even more careful," said Leung.
A vast majority of the private bank's clients in Asia fit a moderate risk profile, he said.
Many wealthy investors suffered heavily when financial markets tumbled in 2008. According to Capgemini and Merrill Lynch's global wealth report, the number of high net-worth individuals fell 15 percent last year, while their total worth declined by a fifth.
Hong Kong's high net-worth population fell the most, dropping 61 percent from the end of 2007 to around 37,000.
JPMorgan, however, managed to grow its private banking assets in 2008 primarily on inflows into its U.S. business as the bank weathered the storm better than its peers. Its private banking business manages $400 billion globally.
The wealth manager is still positive on growth in the Asian economies of China, India and Indonesia while it recently started investing in the middle-eastern equities which has lagged the rally in the emerging markets this year.
"We have been telling clients that the easy money has been made and now is the time to trust professionals with your money. The next year or two will mark a sweet spot for active management," Leung said.
