BUY OR SELL-Chinese car stocks: prime picks or out of gas?
2009-10-05 23:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese auto makers, hammered by the global financial crisis last year, have become investor favourites as car sales in the world's largest auto market look set to hit a record this year under Beijing's stimulus policy.
Manufacturers with merger potential or green concepts, such as Goldman Sachs-invested Geely Automobile (
), which U.S. billionaire Warren Buffett owns a stake in, notched strong performances last quarter.
Most Chinese car maker stocks have more than doubled to quadrupled this year, triggering concerns about how long and far can they race ahead amid concerns the broader stock market is steering for a correction in October.
China's cars sales in August rose more than 90 percent and are set for a record in 2009, in sharp contrast to a dismal U.S. market where auto sales tumbled 23 percent in September.
China has implemented a number of policies to stimulate the market, including tax incentives for small cars and rebates for buyers in rural areas. [ID:nSHA115648]
"As the auto industry is one of the pillar industries in China, we believe Beijing may continue to use stimulus measures to ensure sustainable growth of the industry if auto sales lose steam in 2010," said Rebecca Tang, an analyst at CIMB.
Companies with stable growth, such Honda Motor's (
), could trade between 15 and 17 times 2010 earnings, closer to Asia's sector median of 19 times, against 9 to 10 times now, said Peter So, head of research at CCB International.
He expects China's car sales to rise 18 percent in each of the next three years.
Struggling global giants, including General Motors [GM.UL] and Ford Motor (
), are pondering selling some assets, creating opportunities for Chinese car makers to lift their profiles and quality via the purchase of brands and technologies overseas.
"Acquisitions could help Chinese auto makers to save money to build brand recognition," So said.
But different corporate cultures and relative inexperience at management could actually slow down any Chinese firms that succeed in buying overseas assets, some market watchers said.
Homegrown Geely, which used to make some of the cheapest cars in China, has said its parent was considering bidding for Ford's Volvo brand.
"If Geely acquires Volvo's car division then investors should short this stock. The company is too small to handle Volvo," said Tsuyoshi Shiba, Chief Investment Officer with Triskele Capital.
Geely, China's No. 10 automaker, doubled its first half net profit to 596 million yuan ($87 million), while Volvo posted an operating loss of $886 million in the second quarter alone.
Scepticism also abounds over BYD, with actual short positions on the stock rising to nearly 10 percent of its daily turnover in the third quarter, from 2.9 percent the previous quarter, according to data sourced from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
BYD Chairman Wang Chuanfu, China's richest man this year after Buffett's investment sparked a seven-fold rally in his company's stock, has described developments at his 6-year-old battery-maker-turned-car-manufacturer as "beyond your dreams".
The company, which expects to sell around 400,000 cars this year, has said it wants to produce up to 9 million vehicles by 2025, putting in the top tier of global automakers. Next year it hopes to start exporting its electric cars to the United States.
"Its car sales are still small and the 50 times PE is too high and unreasonable," said Andrew To, sales director at Tai Fook Securities. There is a risk that the battery cars could encounter problems such as charging stations, he added.
"Just like Internet stocks during the doc.com bubble, it is very difficult to make an accurate valuation for BYD shares", said Charles Guo, an analyst at J.P.Morgan.
21x 53% -6% 25% (Additional reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Doug Young and Lincoln Feast)
