Dining Out: The top 5 restaurants in China
2009-10-06 02:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Tue  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - The Miele Guide to Asia's finest restaurants is written by food experts who know and love the region (www.mieleguide.com).
This list of top 5 restaurants in China, where the gourmet scene continues to develop and innovate at a rapid pace, and is not endorsed by Reuters.
1. Laris, Shanghai
Being the best in Shanghai, let alone China, is no mean feat, but if anyone can achieve it, it's David Laris. His eponymous restaurant is a stunning combination of gastronomy and aesthetics, full of well-heeled gourmands there to savor his sophisticated, contemporary fare that defies staid ethnic labels, while observing society at play in elegant surrounds. Address: 6F Three on the Bund, 3 Zhong Shan Dong Yi Road, Shanghai, China
2. Beijing Da Dong Roast Duck Restaurant, Beijing
Judging by the line of worshippers that gather outside its doors every evening, it is clear that Da Dong has cultivated itself as a near-mythical experience. This restaurant's masterly 'super lean' Peking ducks boast thin, crisp, caramel skin that dissolves in the mouth with just a hint of fragrant oil.
Address: Nanxingcang International Plaza, 22A Dongsishitiao, Dongcheng District
3. M on the Bund, Shanghai
Since it opened its doors 10 years ago, M on the Bund has been one of the best-loved restaurants in Shanghai, and that's nothing to sniff at in a city where new restaurants spring up -- and shut down -- every week. The cuisine on offer is comfortable and perfectly executed, with deft touches of the Mediterranean and the Maghreb.
4. Jean-Georges Shanghai, Shanghai
Celebrity chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten couldn't have picked a finer spot for his Shanghai outpost. This (his second) signature restaurant sits on the Bund with a coveted view that overlooks the lights of Pudong on the opposite bank of the Huang Pu. Here, his team serves his signature Asian-accented, light French fare with aplomb. Address: 4F Three on the Bund, 3 Zhong Shan Dong Yi Lu
5. Made In China, Beijing
Although being 'made In China' is not a universally loved epithet, here it signifies a bustling open kitchen, offering views of the chefs as they whip up traditional northern dishes done the old-fashioned way, and some of the best Beggar's Chicken in the city. Being Made in China is now a compliment.
Address: GF Grand Hyatt Beijing, 1 Dong Chang An Jie, Dongcheng District
