China, Taiwan brace for typhoon as flood toll exceeds 200
2013-07-12 02:04:00.0
China, Taiwan brace for typhoon as flood toll exceeds 200 | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, Taiwan brace for typhoon as flood toll exceeds 200
Thu, Jul 11 2013
Wed, Jul 10 2013
Tue, Jul 9 2013
Mon, Jul 1 2013
Thu, Jun 27 2013
Rescue workers pull a boat carrying villagers away from a flooded area in Guanghan, Sichuan province, July 11, 2013. Credit: Reuters/China Daily
Fri  EDT
Soulik is expected to hit northern Taiwan later in the day, before crossing the narrow Taiwan Strait and slamming into China's provinces of Fujian and Zhejiang on Saturday.
"Government departments must place saving people's lives as their top priority," Chinese state media quoted Premier Li Keqiang as saying, as officials scrambled to tackle the floods.
The Taipei city government has ordered companies and schools to send staff and pupils home early, although the financial markets will operate normally.
Taiwan's China Airlines and Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd both warned of significant cancellations and disruption of flights to and from Taiwan on their websites.
China has ordered fishing boats to return to port and suspended ferry links to Taiwan, official news agency Xinhua said.
At least 36 people have died in flooding in the southwestern province of Sichuan since the weekend, and 166 people are missing, the China News Service said.
State television has broadcast dramatic pictures of bridges and houses being washed away around Beichuan and Dujiangyan in Sichuan, a region that is still recovering from a massive earthquake in 2008 that killed nearly 70,000 people.
China's Ministry of Civil Affairs said flooding had also hit Xinjiang in the far west as well as Tibet and Beijing, the capital. In Inner Mongolia at least five people have died, it added.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard in BEIJING and Faith Hung in TAIPEI; Additional reporting by Elaine Lies in TOKYO; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
