Safina and Venus knocked out out of China Open
2009-10-05 11:15:00.0
(Reuters) - World number one Dinara Safina was upset 7-5 7-6 by local wild card Zhang Shuai in the second round of the China Open on Monday, leaving Serena Williams one victory away from reclaiming top spot in the rankings.
Serena's sister Venus, the world number three, also had a bad day, losing to Russian teenager Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova for the second week in a row, this time 3-6 6-1 6-4.
Safina, who lost her opening match at last week's Pan Pacific Open to a qualifier, made 20 unforced errors and 12 double faults before leaving the center court in tears. Her post-match news conference was canceled.
"I'm just having some bad losses right now," the Russian said in a statement released by organizers.
"So many matches that are very close, ones that I should win, having set points or match points every time. It's very disappointing. I would like to take a break now, and I'm very upset with myself."
Zhang, 20, had won the first WTA main draw match of her career in the first round on Sunday.
"I wasn't thinking about the result, I was just thinking about learning as much as I could from her," she said. "She was not on her best form, she was impatient and made lots of mistakes."
Pavlyuchenkova, the world number 39 dominated the final two sets of the match to claim her second win over seven-times grand slam winner Venus after last Monday's upset in Tokyo.
"She played really well, unfortunately sometimes I made errors too soon in the play," Williams, 29, said in a brief news conference.
"She started way aggressive today. She wanted to kill me, I guess," Pavlyuchenkova said. "I had nothing to lose. I just tried to move her around as much as I could, just hit as hard as I could in the court and just enjoy the match."
Sixth seeded French Open champion Svetlana Kuznetsova joined her compatriot in the third round with a 6-2 6-1 victory over Spain's Anabel Medina Garrigues.
The partisan center court crowd later had another victory to cheer when China's number one Li Na battled past Lucie Safarova of the Czech Republic 4-6 6-0 6-4 to reach the third round.
Earlier, Novak Djokovic had shrugged off the effects of jet lag to become the first seed to reach the men's second round with an unconvincing 6-3 7-5 victory over Victor Hanescu.
"That's the first round, you have to get used to the ups and downs," said the 22-year-old, who was playing his first match since his U.S. Open semi-final defeat by Roger Federer.
In other men's first round action, eighth seeded Croatian Marin Cilic beat Igor Andreev 6-4 6-4, while Spain's Tommy Robredo thrashed German Benjamin Becker 6-2 6-1.
(Additional reporting by Liu Zhen, editing by Justin Palmer and Ken Ferris)
