HIGHLIGHTS-Comments from officials at G7, IMF meetings
2009-10-05 13:56:00.0
(Reuters) - The following are comments on Monday from finance officials in Istanbul for the Group of Seven, IMF and World Bank meetings. > For top stories, please double click on [G7/G8]
On whether rebalancing the global economy implied a weaker dollar and a stronger euro: "It does not at all, at all imply a change in the bilateral position of the dollar and the euro, not at all."
"It is absolutely clear that a number of currencies have to progressively and orderly appreciate vis a vis both the dollar and the euro, but certainly not at all any change in the bilateral relationship."
"If there is any qualification, it would certainly be that the other currencies, in particular currencies of the emerging world, should appreciate, or would appreciate, taking into account this strategy in the medium and longer term."
Asked what action might be taken to stop the dollar falling when the United States was saying it wanted a strong dollar: "As regards the position of the various countries concerned and governments and central banks concerned, you can see what was our communique, the last communique of the G7."
"I will only add, with gravity, that I trust the U.S. authorities when they say that a strong dollar is in the interests of the U.S. ... It was said by Tim Geithner, by Ben Bernanke ... so this is important and I trust it is very important that they say that."
"Because donor countries are facing severe fiscal constraints at home, we must be fully confident that ... any new resources will be managed well and used effectively. To this end, we will be seeking critical institutional reforms in any consideration of additional resources."
LIU MINGKANG, HEAD OF CHINA BANKING REGULATORY COMMISSION
"It is far too early to mention that the Chinese currency could be an international reserve currency. I am always realistic, so let's face the reality.
"Our view is that it needs more work, quite frankly."
"We don't want to shortchange the (other) multilateral development banks at the expense of the World Bank, or vice versa, so we need to make sure we're coordinated."
NAOKI MINEZAKI, JAPAN'S SENIOR VICE FINANCE MINISTER:
"The (IBRD's) reform should aim at a voice structure which better reflects the views of developing and transition countries ... At the same time, the reform should ensure that members which provide financial support to the World Bank Group continue to have appropriate stakes in its management and operations ...
"I would like to stress that the voice reform should take into full consideration the cumulative contributions to IDA of current major donors, because that ... must be essential for the World Bank Group to continue securing contributions."
Senior Japanese finance ministry official, on Tokyo's stance on the World Bank's capital increase:
"First, we'd like to see the outcome of a review on whether the bank's existing capital is being put to full use ...
"If a capital increase is deemed necessary, and if Japan is appropriately represented in the voice reform, it's possible for us to cooperate in the capital increase."
"In many countries, including African countries, the possibility to react to the crisis was much bigger than a decade ago ... because in many countries the advice of the IMF had helped provide some fiscal and monetary room ... the hard work of the last years cannot be lost, which is why we must provide low income countries the means to keep their heads above water and take advantage of the recovery.
JULIE DICKSON, CANADIAN BANKING REGULATOR, ON SYSTEMICALLY IMPORTANT FIRMS
"How should systemically important institutions be defined and identified? I don't think they should be. I think that will increase moral hazard."
"The only place where I've ever seen where that makes sense is with central counterparties and clearing and setttlement systems ...
MARK SOBEL, U.S. TREASURY ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (speaking to the Institute of International Bankers)
"The U.S. and the EU have a special responsibility to intensify cooperation and reaffirm our commitment to preserving the global nature of markets, while ensuring robust and consistent regulation ... We cannot go our own ways, deviating significantly from international standards or practices, and exposing global markets to the risk of fragmentation..."
"The (current) system is inherently unstable ... You have developing countries lending trillions of dollars to the United States at zero interest rates. It's a form of foreign aid to the United States."
"The (IMF) flexible credit lines are a move in the right direction but they don't solve the problem."
"We welcome the expansion of the SDR (Special Drawing Right) ... and it's already being helpful in some very specific countries. The SDR allocation has institutional limitations. The largest recipient of the SDR is the United States. We are not the country that needs the reserves."
ECB'S LORENZO BINI SMAGHI ON CHINA, DOLLAR PEGS:
"The best way (forward) is that China starts adopting its own monetary policy and detaching itself from the Fed's policy."
ON CENTRAL BANKS' APPROACH TO MONEY, CREDIT GROWTH
"In Europe we found that looking at money and credit aggregates was very useful and at a certain point we found that even though inflation looked under control, other things were not going at the right speed, so we adjusted policy to take that into account."
"Globalisation has led to a scarcity of resources ... in some parts of the world the price of gasoline is not sustainable and has not adjusted, in the expectation nothing will change ... Until part of the advanced world realises it has to organise itself to grow less we will not get out of the woods."
"What was missing in a society where everyone agreed on the model of growth and short termism, was someone to raise their hand and say 'it's not sustainable' ... (We) need someone to look medium term and that can only be an institution that can look beyond electoral deadlines, and this can be a central bank.
"... strengthening the independence of central banks all over the world is important for monetary policy but also for supervision. If you look around the world maybe those countries where supervision was in (the hands of) central banks on average did better than those countries (where it wasn't)."
FRENCH ECONOMY MINISTER CHRISTINE LAGARDE ON CURRENCIES, INTERVIEW WITH CNBC
