U.S.-led group in talks to buy Ford's Volvo: source
2009-10-05 15:11:00.0
U.S.-led group in talks to buy Ford's Volvo: source | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
U.S.-led group in talks to buy Ford's Volvo: source
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
Mon, Oct 5 2009
The XC60 Volvo model is displayed during the first media day of the 79th Geneva Car Show at the Palexpo in Geneva March 3, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Denis Balibouse
Mon  EDT
) director Michael Dingman is in talks to acquire the automaker's money-losing Volvo brand, a source familiar with the matter said on Monday.
The group, called the Crown consortium, has been in talks with Ford over Volvo for some time, said the source, who asked not to be named because the discussions are private.
The discussions raise a potential rival bid for Volvo to that of China's Geely Automotive (
), which confirmed in September an interest in the Swedish brand.
Ford, the only large U.S. automaker not to restructure under a government-supported bankruptcy this year, in December said it was considering selling Volvo. The automaker has been divesting brands to focus on Ford, Mercury and Lincoln and conserving cash to support a turnaround.
"We will provide an update as soon as we have something to say," Ford spokesman Mark Truby said.
The Financial Times first reported the Crown consortium's interest in the Volvo brand and said the group was fronted by Dingman and former Ford and Chrysler executive Shamel Rushwin.
Dingman served on Ford's board from 1981 to 2002, when he reached its mandatory retirement age.
The FT said the consortium had fully secured financing from U.S. private equity groups and was seeking additional backing from Swedish investors to signal its intent to keep Volvo in the country, citing people close to the sale.
The FT reported another informed person as saying the U.S. consortium had offered significantly less than Hong Kong-listed Geely, but that both plans involved similar plans for more than $3 billion of additional investment in Volvo.
The unit was designated as held for sale during the first quarter, meaning that Ford expected to sell it within a year, but the process has moved at a deliberate pace.
Volvo is the last brand left at Ford from the automaker's former premier auto group. Ford previously sold off Aston Martin, Jaguar and Land Rover, but has continuing relationships with each brand and likely would retain ties to Volvo also.
As a result, Ford's interests run beyond transaction price to the long-term financial stability of Volvo.
(Reporting by Jon Carter, Quentin Webb and David Bailey; Editing by Jan Paschal, David Holmes, Gary Hill)
