China expands pollution monitoring to biggest cities
2012-12-30 12:43:00.0
(Reuters) - China plans to release hourly air pollution monitoring data in 74 of its biggest cities starting on New Year's Day, state media said on Sunday, in a sign of increasing responsiveness to quality-of-life concerns among prosperous urban people.
Microscopic pollutant particles in the air have killed about 8,600 people prematurely this year and cost $1 billion in economic losses in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Xi'an, according to a study by Beijing University and Greenpeace that measured the pollutant levels of PM2.5, or particles smaller than 2.5 micrometers in diameter.
The new monitoring will include not only PM2.5, but also sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone and carbon monoxide, the Xinhua news agency said, citing a Friday announcement by the Ministry of Environmental Protection.
Data will be collected from 496 monitoring stations, it said.
First Beijing, then other cities have become more public about their air quality data since the U.S. embassy in Beijing began publishing hourly data from a pollution monitor installed on embassy grounds in Beijing.
The embassy's monitor often diverged with official air quality readings, adding to public pressure for the city to come clean about the state of its air.
Sunday was a clear and sunny winter day in Beijing, with the levels of ozone and PM2.5 declared "moderate" or "good", according to embassy data. The Beijing Municipal Environmental Monitoring Center (www.bjmemc.com.cn) rated PM10 concentrations as "excellent".
Many Chinese cities have removed belching smokestacks and coal-burning factories from their centers in the past few years, but a rise in the number of cars during the same period has created new air quality problems.
(Reporting By Lucy Hornby; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
At the Durban Conference in late 2011, China presented a 22 point plan to address pollution in China. China will spend $1.7 trillion over 5 years, or $340 billion per year, to reduce pollution. Results should be seen by mid-2014 and continue through late 2016 when a second five year plan can be expected. President Xi Jinping has a degree in chemical engineering, so China elected a leader with the scientific training to address pollution unlike the lawyers, propagandists, and preachers who lead the US. China¡¯s leaders have always said that they would build the economy first and clean the environment when it could be done without harming the economic well-being of their citizens. My partners and I run companies in China for desalination, water filtration, and indoor urban agriculture. We also invest in Suntech Holdings and other clean energy firms. Our warehouse farms in cities use multiple technologies, and we take city air, pass it through electrostatic plates to remove SO2, NO2, and CO, and use standard filters to remove particulates. The CO2 increases food production with the equation CO2 + H2O + soil nutrients + green plants + light = food + O2. We grow more fruits, vegetables, and grains and reduce pollution in cities, eliminating transportation costs from rural areas.
Dec 30, 20125:43pm EST--
