Nations vow well-funded World Bank but no deal yet
2009-10-05 11:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Finance and development ministers from around the globe on Monday pledged to ensure the World Bank had enough money to fight poverty, climate change and other challenges facing developing countries.
The International Monetary Fund and World Bank's Development Committee called on the Bank to provide member nations with an assessment of its capital needs by spring 2010 so they could decide how best to meet that goal.
"We committed to ensure that the (World Bank) has sufficient resources to meet future development needs," the committee said in a communique at the end of a meeting here.
If approved, it would be the first general capital increase for the global lender in 20 years, World Bank President Robert Zoellick told a news conference.
Putting off a decision until next year gives divided rich donor nations time to decide whether or not to refill the crisis-depeleted coffers of the World Bank and other development banks, such as the African Development Bank.
France, Britain and Italy said they were not convinced a capital increase for the World Bank was necessary, although the United States, Nordic countries, the Netherlands and Australia voiced general support.
"We're into the world of politics here," he said.
At the semi-annual meeting, developing countries urged an early agreement on providing more money to the Bank.
Zoellick said World Bank lending to middle-income countries this year could reach $40 billion, up from $33 billion last year, the second year in a row of record lending.
"The world economy is still in a precarious state," he said, adding that developing economies had sent a strong message on the need to prepare for the possibility the fledgling global recovery goes off track next year.
Zoellick has warned that the institution, the globe's premier development lender, could face serious financing constraints by the middle of next year.
The Bank has proposed a capital increase of between $3 billion to $5 billion for the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, its lending arm for emerging and credit-worthy middle-income countries, ranging from China to Indonesia, Brazil, Mexico, Ukraine, Latvia and Nigeria.
"The least we can do at this stage is to agree to supporting a capital increase for IBRD," India's Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee told the gathering.
"We must be fully confident that additional capital for the MDBs' hard loan windows is needed and that any new resources will be managed well and used effectively," Geithner said.
French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said she did not believe the Bank needed fresh funds. "The (World Bank) has substantial resources at its disposal to assist its members, resources that are far from being depleted," she said.
Britain sounded a similar note, saying the institution should provide member countries with options for increasing lending using existing resources. (Additional reporting by David Lawder; Editing by Tim Ahmann)
