FTSE steady as miners' strength offsets weaker oils
2009-10-05 07:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index was little changed in mid-session trade on Monday, with stronger miners offsetting weak energy issues as investors awaited U.S. data for more clues on the outlook for the global economy.
At 1109 GMT, the FTSE 100
was up 3.02 points, or 0.1 percent higher, at 4991.72 after ending on Friday at a near three-week closing low below the 5,000 level, down 59.11 points at 4,988.70.
"The key for today's session will be this afternoon's ISM non manufacturing data and this will help dictate whether investors start to build on positions or if equities will sell off further," said Nicola Poskitt, a market analyst at City Index.
The September Institute for Supply Management non-manufacturing index, which measures activity within the service sector, is expected to show a reading of 49.9 from 48.4 in August when it is released at 1500 GMT.
The FTSE 100 lost 1.8 percent last week, with investor nerves setting in as weaker data, including worse-than-expected non-farm payrolls data, increased concerns that a 44 percent rise since a trough in March may be overdone.
Miners were the top gainers, supported by slightly firmer copper prices thanks to an easier dollar and by some positive broker comment.
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Rio Tinto (
The broker said that as the recovery process gets underway, mining assets could fall under China's radar as the country looks to broaden its overseas direct investment in mining by between $8 billion and $25 billion over the next five years.
Britain's service sector expanded at its fastest pace for two years in September and firms were more optimistic about the next 12 months than at any time since April 2007, purchasing managers' data showed. [ID:nLAG003818]
Although the news failed to impact the FTSE significantly, the announcement saw sterling pare losses against the euro EURGBP=R.
Banks were mixed by, with Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) (
) rallying 3.7 percent following Friday's sell-off, traders said.
RBS was set to meet investors this week to tie up the details of a 4 billion-pound share placement as its negotiations with the Treasury about joining the toxic loans insurance programme intensify, The Daily Telegraph newspaper said.
Britain's financial watchdog on Monday published its final set of rules that will force banks to hold minimum levels of liquidity to ride out market storms, but they will not take full effect until economic recovery is assured. [ID:nL5700758]
) added 1.1 to 0.2 percent each, while Barclays (
) fell 0.9 percent and 0.4 percent, respectively.
) to negotiate a 250 million pound deal to purchase its banking division, the Mail on Sunday paper said.
) gained 4 percent. The Sunday Telegraph said that after unsuccessfully searching the markets for takeover targets, RSA has abandoned plans to raise $1 billion in a rights issue.
The shares were also helped higher by a note from analysts at Cazenove, which reiterated their "outperform" rating on the stock, arguing RSA's valuation was undemanding.
The UK firm is looking to raise up to 1.6 billion euros from the flotation, according to two people close to the matter. [ID:nWLA4900].
Oil majors were the major drag on blue-chip sentiment as crude prices fell back below $70, with BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
Among individual stocks, Tesco (
) dipped 1 percent, ahead of its first-half results, which will be released on Tuesday, with Evolution Securities initiating its coverage with a "reduce" rating.
Sainsbury's (
