Rugby-Kirwan says 2016 inclusion would trigger Asian boom
2009-10-05 03:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan coach John Kirwan has made an impassioned plea for the inclusion of rugby sevens in the Olympics, saying it would be a catalyst for the growth of the game in Asia.
"Olympic inclusion would have a massive effect on the growth of the game across Asia," former New Zealand great Kirwan told Reuters on Monday.
"This is a real opportunity to engage new rugby markets, take the game to new communities and get more men, women, boys and girls playing the sport."
Rugby, which featured in four of the first seven Olympics until 1924, proposed its smaller version in its pitch to the IOC. "Rugby Sevens is the perfect tool to do that. It's fast, exciting, unpredictable ... and a favourite with sports fans," said Kirwan.
"It also gives the ability for so-called smaller rugby nations to compete at the top level against established nations and beat them -- we've seen plenty of evidence of that."
Japan will host the 2019 rugby World Cup but South Korea's victory at the inaugural Asian Sevens Series last month provided an example of the shorter game's potential for upsets.
New Zealand have been the dominant force in international sevens for the past decade, often not having to rely on drafting in their All Blacks.
The Japanese have traditionally flown the flag for rugby in Asia, hosting a successful junior world championship earlier this year before earning the right to stage the 2019 World Cup.
"In an Asian context you would see more central funding through governments and expansion of rugby onto the curriculum in schools (if Olympic access were granted)," he said.
"In China, Korea, Japan and Kazakhstan there would be more investment in development programmes from a young age -- more people playing the game and an unprecedented media and TV platform through playing on the world's greatest stage."
(Editing by Ian Ransom; To query or comment on this story email sportsfeedback@thomsonreuters.com)
