PRESS DIGEST - British business - Oct 5
2009-10-04 22:30:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun, Oct 4 2009
Sun, Oct 4 2009
Sun, Oct 4 2009
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Fri, Oct 2 2009
Sun  EDT
Ensus's new 300 million pound bioethanol refinery at Wilton, on Teesside, will consume so much wheat that home grown supplies of the crop will become exhausted to such an extent that to feed the nation as well could see Britain become a net importer of the crop for the first time in its history. BP (
) are building another plant, costing 200 million pounds, in Hull, and the two plants will consume an estimated 2.3 million tonnes of feed wheat between them every year, up to 19 percent of the total UK crop.
BAE SAYS IT WILL SETTLE CORRUPTION CASE, BUT NOT WITHOUT EVIDENCE AT ANY COST
) is prepared to settle the Serious Fraud Office's probe into allegations of bribery in Africa and Eastern Europe, but sources say the defence group will not do so "at any cost". According to sources, BAE will settle only if it is presented with irrefutable evidence supporting the SFO's claim that it paid bribes to secure lucrative contracts. A spokesman from the SFO said it too was prepared to agree a settlement. The spokesman said: "If BAE wants to continue talking, I am sure the SFO would welcome the approach. It's up to them to come back and make that approach." However, reports over the weekend suggest the two sides are far from agreeing on an amount.
TJ Hughes, the department store chain specialising in discounted branded goods, reported a 30 percent increase in underlying profits in the year to the end of January. The chain, which has 50 locations across England, Scotland and Wales, benefited from the trend towards more cost conscious consumerism that has seen supermarket chains such as Lidl and Aldi prosper. Earnings before interest, taxation, depreciation, and amortisation rose to 9.2 million pounds. Since June last year, under chief executive Sue Tennant, TJ Hughes has undergone aggressive expansion and a 51st store is set to open soon.
) has launched its Clubcard in Poland, Thailand and Slovakia, adding three million new cardholders to its customer loyalty scheme. The supermarkets giant now has 12.5 million Clubcard holders overseas. The company says more people in the UK have a Tesco Clubcard than own a Barclaycard. Carolyn Bradley, Tesco's marketing director, said: "It is more important than ever to say thank you to our customers for their loyalty."
) is set to meet investors this week to tie up the minutiae of a four billion pound share placing as negotiations with the Treasury about joining the toxic loans insurance programme intensify. The cash raised will be used to reduce the number of shares it will have to cede to the government to cover the 19.5 billion pound cost of joining the Asset Protection Scheme to insure its worst loans. Chief executive Stephen Hester is keen to see taxpayers' ownership is kept to a minimum. Reports that the bank was considering a convertible bond issue to generate cash have been dismissed by sources close to RBS.
The world's biggest investment banks, including Goldman Sachs (
), are expected to meet Lord Myners, the Treasury Secretary, to hold talks about signing up to proposals aimed at curbing excessive bonuses. This follows on from last week's agreement by domestic banks, including HSBC (
), to sign up to similar proposals. However, Lloyds Banking Group (
) assets in China, India and Malaysia after failing to agree on a price. It is understood Standard Chartered offered 125 million pounds for the assets, but RBS said this was not enough. RBS has already sold off businesses in Asia to Australia and New Zealand Banking Group as it looks to refocus on its core market in the UK and to raise cash.
SKY ATTACKS RIVALS' CALL FOR REGULATION
) over their submissions to Ofcom over the pay-TV review. The two companies reported that Sky's "near monopoly" was stifling competition. A spokesman for Sky said it was no surprise its rivals wanted to pay lower prices. Regulators do not generally intervene unless there is evidence of excessive profits or prices. Ofcom's threat of imposing limits on pricing is a worry to Sky, but the spokesman went on to say Ofcom's review produced "no compelling evidence that prices or profits in this sector are excessive".
Amid International Monetary Fund warnings that the UK faces a jobless recovery, the quarterly industry health check published today by the CBI and PricewaterhouseCooper, says the financial services sector could shed up to 60,000 jobs this year. A separate report by the Construction Products Association also paints a grim picture, predicting it will be 2021 before construction output returns to 2007 levels. The IMF contends that the UK's position is worse than the rest of the eurozone, due to its over-reliance on both sectors.
Along with a number of politicians and academics, the Building Societies Association is lobbying the government to remutualise Northern Rock (
Gambling group Gala Coral is close to finalising a debt-for-equity restructuring deal with lenders. The deal will see Gala's lenders write off 540 million pounds of debt, with the group's private equity owners expected to relinquish up to 50 percent of their stake. Gala, which is battling the effects of the smoking ban as well as the recession and increased taxes on gambling, is currently servicing a 2.6 billion pound debt-pile.
