Dispute over control clouds IMF expansion
2009-10-04 09:40:00.0
(Reuters) - Fierce disagreement over how much power rich nations should cede to developing countries clouded talks between global finance chiefs on expanding the role of the International Monetary Fund.
The IMF, which has lent more than $50 billion to countries around the world this year, says it needs more resources to oversee the recovery of the global economy and prevent future crises.
"We can only hope that over-represented advanced countries will realise that they may do great harm to the Fund if they attempt to block or delay quota and voice reform," Brazilian Finance Minister Guido Mantega said on Sunday.
But the demand for 7 percentage points is meeting resistance from the developed world, particularly European nations, which do not want to give up too much of their own power.
Finance Minister Anders Borg of Sweden, which is currently president of the European Union, warned that Europe could become less generous in its financial support of the Fund if it lost influence over it.
"Adequate participation in the decision-making process of the fund is a prerequisite for our taxpayers' continued support of large financial contributions," he said.
To ensure the global economy is stable enough for countries to stop accumulating huge foreign exchange reserves as a form of insurance, it is estimated that the IMF might need up to $1 trillion of fresh contributions, IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said on Friday.
But China, Brazil, Russia and India have said any increase in their contributions must be tied to changes in voting power.
China believes contributions should automatically adjust to reflect the size of individual countries' economies, Yi Gang, a Chinese central bank vice governor, said on Sunday.
In addition to the IMF's role as a lender of last resort, the Group of 20 major nations, which is managing the global recovery, wants the IMF to ensure balanced growth by reporting back to it on countries' policies and recommending changes.
China, which holds the world's largest foreign exchange reserves and has seen its financial markets buffeted by volatile capital movements, wants the activities of a reformed IMF to extend even further.
