China to open world's longest high-speed rail line
2012-12-22 11:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China will open the world's longest high-speed rail line next week when a link between Beijing and the southern metropolis of Guangzhou is inaugurated, officials said on Saturday, underscoring its commitment to a trouble-plagued transport scheme.
The 2,298-km (1,428-mile) line, parts of which are already in operation, will begin full service on Wednesday, halving travel time to less than 10 hours on trains which will run at 300 kph (186 mph).
The new route offers a chance for China's railways ministry, which has been dogged by scandals and missteps, to redeem itself.
"We have developed a full range of effective measures to manage safety," Zhou Li, head of the ministry's science and technology department, told reporters on a trial run from Beijing to the central city of Zhengzhou.
"We can control safety management," he added.
Last year's accident near the booming eastern coastal city of Wenzhou occurred when a high-speed train rammed into another stranded on the track after being hit by lightning.
The approvals include 25 rail investments, state media say.
Despite its expanding network, the Ministry of Railways struggles to make money. It suffered an after-tax loss of 8.8 billion yuan in the first half of 2012 in the face of rising operating costs and mounting debts.
However, the government says it remained committed to building high-speed railways between its major cities, with China eventually planning to run them into Russia and down to Southeast Asia.
"High-speed railways are needed for national development, for the people and for regional communication. Many countries have boosted their economies by developing high-speed rail," Zhou said.
China said in May it would open up the railway industry to private investment on an unprecedented scale, but private investors have been skeptical.
The need for funding is acute. China still needs billions more in rail investment to remove bottlenecks in cargo transport, ease overcrowding in passenger transport and develop commuter lines in its sprawling megacities.
(Reporting by Sabrina Mao and Ben Blanchard; Additional reporting by Nick Edwards; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
K By 2015, the bullet train system will span from Beijing to Singapour, connecting Laos, Thailand, and Malaysia on its way. That is the Asian integration in action! Unlike the ¡°US PIVOT Asia¡± which has shown its destructive force from the start. India probably would not sit quietly either, watching the East Asia succeed. Its jealousy will show its ugly face soon. Good luck, East Asia!
Dec 22, 20124:33pm EST--
unfortunately, by 2015 the bullet train system would have already fell behind. US will build more sophisticated and advanced transportation facilities at that time or even develop space-time tunnel technology directly.
Dec 22, 20125:51pm EST--
The Chinese bullet train system may not be profitable for each train, but the rail system is profitable for the country as a whole. The rail system offers alternative shipping routes to ensure that goods, raw materials, and other products can reach the markets. Passenger trains allow workers to reach jobs to earn paychecks that make them customers and tax payers. This allows companies to manufacture products and have customers to buy them for corporate profits that produce taxes for China, and the workers pay taxes. Few studies calculate the total amount of taxes that railroads generate beyond the initial revenues. Then, there is the issue of entrepreneurs deciding to start companies because they know that they can depend on numerous means of transport for receiving supplies, raw materials, and workers and for sending goods to markets. Also, entrepreneurs must know that customers have numerous options to reach stores that sell their products or the finished goods that their products are used to produce in another company. If someone plans to set up a company to serve a supply chain, he or she should be know that transportation options exist to support production and sales of the finished goods. Another issue is that China has state-owned enterprises, state-private partnerships, and private enterprises that are the vast majority of businesses in China. The state-owned enterprises generate profits for China, and the workers pay taxes to China. State-private partnerships generate a percentage of the partnerships¡¯s revenues for China, taxes on the earnings of private partners, and taxes on worker salaries that includes the salaries of the state¡¯s percentage of managers and directors. The private enterprises pay taxes on profits and on salaries and paychecks of managers and workers. Railroads are state-owned enterprises in China because start up costs would inhibit private development, but the railroads serve vital national functions in business, national defense, and convenience for Chinese citizens. In addition, China has more revenue streams than in the US and other western countries. In the issue of safety, Wikipedia reveals 1 train crash involving 2 trains in China for 2011 and 2012, while the US has had 27 crashes involving 32 trains. 4 US train wrecks involved 2 trains and 1 had 3 trains in the same wreck. A June 24, 2012, US train wreck was a head on collision. US railroads have GPS tracking of trains and switch settings to prevent collisions that send signals to endangered locomotives that switch on sirens and flashing lights to alert train engineers of imminent collisions. Railroad operations offices should also receive these alerts to allow for alternate communications with endangered trains. 27 times on 32 US trains, these safety features failed in 2011 and 2012. 1 time on 2 Chinese trains, the safety features failed in 2011 and 2012.
Dec 22, 20126:30pm EST--
