Comments from officials at G7, IMF meetings
2009-10-04 07:48:00.0
(Reuters) - The following are comments on Sunday from finance officials in Istanbul for the Group of Seven, IMF and World Bank meetings.
"This new international economic architecture has the G20 at the top of the pyramid, providing guidance and support to international financial institutions. Among these institutions, the IMF may become the most crucial one -- but this will only happen if the fund proves capable of reinventing itself."
"Over-represented developed countries are reluctant to accept these changes. To some extent, I can understand this. The task before us is not easy. We can only hope that over-represented advanced countries will realize that they may do great harm to the fund if they attempt to block or delay quota and voice reform."
LAGARDE ON CHINA'S PRESENTATION TO IMF STEERING COMMITTEE:
"What really hit me was the change of speech, and I suppose of economic policy of China. It was the first time I heard the Chinese both reiterate growth forecast of 8 percent in 2009 and 2010 and reiterate on several occasion that it was human and social development that (they want) to have at the heart of China's economic policy by speaking very specifically on a number of subjects -- social security, pensions, supporting consumption, infrastructure and development of internal economic policies that correspond to calls" to rectify imbalances.
"It was extremely articulated from their camp and determined, it was really concrete and precise."
"What I want is that the economic policies that have been mentioned by China, are carried out. That seems indispensable if we want to rebalance ... That's the priority."
"They haven't said it for a while, if you look at the American declarations, it was one of the first times that Geithner said we need a strong dollar. In Pittsburgh it was the first time."
"I wanted to mention the question of the need for better control and regulation of commodities, in particular, petrol and the financial instruments that are based on them. I do not want the exit from the financial crisis to restart the phenomenon of speculation on financial instruments based on commodities, notably on petrol ... I think it's a risk that could hurt the potential recovery."
"Premature withdrawal of supportive fiscal measures should be avoided as this could harm the recovery. However, rising borrowing costs and crowding out of private investment should be eschewed by adopting credible fiscal adjustment strategies that respond adequately to the upcoming costs of an aging population in advanced countries."
"In some emerging market countries, the threat of inflation, inter alia because of highly expansionary fiscal policies, requires increased attention. Rigid exchange rate arrangements could pose a threat to financial stability in these economies."
"With increasing signs of stabilization of the global economy, exchange rate volatility and risk aversion have decreased over recent months ... Going forward, risks of excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates should be avoided in view of their adverse implications for economic and financial stability. Increased exchange rate flexibility in some major trading countries would contribute to such an orderly process."
"Euro area HICP inflation has reversed its downward trend and should return back to positive territory in the coming months, in line with expectations, as the base effects stemming from past energy price developments have changed sign and the economy gradually recovers. At the same time, inflation expectations have remained well anchored in line with the ECB's objective of price stability."
"In Pittsburgh, G-20 Leaders advanced an ambitious agenda to create a seamless web of financial regulation and supervision ... The United States is committed to specific deadlines for implementation of more and higher quality capital, stronger liquidity, a simple leverage ratio to constrain excess risk-taking and building buffers that firms can draw down in periods of stress."
"The crisis underscored the importance of strengthening financial sector surveillance ... Greater transparency is critical to underpin the credibility and effectiveness of IMF surveillance. Since the crisis has taught us that no nation is immune, we call upon all IMF members to allow the publication of their annual Article IV reviews."
"In Pittsburgh ... G20 Leaders committed to a shift in IMF quota share to dynamic emerging market and developing countries of at least 5 percent from over-represented to under-represented countries. Attention must now shift to implementing this agreement, and we call on the IMF to facilitate this process by providing scenarios of how the quota shift could be implemented in the very near term."
"Nobody wanted the regulators to implement the regulation (before the crisis), everything was done by the industry, by political authorities. The regulators were abandoned.
"We need more independent regulators, more independent supervisors, so we are able to resist the pressure of the industry, resist the pressure of the politicians, but I don't see that. It's exactly the opposite. If you look at the discussion in Congress and so forth, you don't see a trend to make supervisors more independent, particularly with the central banks."
"A large part of this adjustment must come from within Asia through policies that will promote a reduction in both corporate and household savings rates, promoting a shift in production to non-tradable sectors and supported by greater exchange rate flexibility. Equally, major current account deficit countries need to articulate credible strategies for achieving fiscal consolidation over the medium term and embark on productivity-enhancing structural reforms."
TENDAI BITI, MINISTER OF FINANCE, ZIMBABWE:
"It will be a long while before the Zimbabwe dollar can be readopted. Unless we have exports of 30 percent of GDP and unless we have GDP of $9 billion, there is no way we can begin to think of reintroducing the Zimbabwe dollar.
