Apple's iPhone 5 starts strong in China but shares pressured
2012-12-17 16:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Apple Inc sold more than 2 million iPhone 5s in China in just three days after its launch there on Friday, its best ever smartphone launch in the country, but Apple shares fell on Monday after Citi downgraded the stock.
The highly anticipated release in China, Apple's second-biggest market, has not eased worries about stiffer competition in mobile devices that has driven a slide in the share price of the world's most valuable technology company.
Sales of Amazon.com Inc's cheaper Kindle Fire tablets have also surged this year and rival Microsoft Corp recently forayed into the market with its Surface.
Apple shares have fallen on seven of the last 10 trading days, with several analysts cutting their price targets on the company's stock.
The shares were down 1.3 percent at $502.76 in early trading on the Nasdaq. The stock has shed nearly 13 percent of its value since the beginning of this month to Friday's close.
Citi Research downgraded Apple's stock on Sunday to "neutral" from "buy", and lowered its price target to $575 from $675, citing diminishing hype around the iPhone 5 and improving competition in smartphones.
But Topeka Capital Markets remained upbeat, suggesting Chinese iPhone owners would upgrade from iPhone 4 models.
"The strong iPhone 5 sales this weekend support our view," Topeka Capital Markets analyst Brian White said in a research note on Monday.
"The iPhone 5 is all about the status upgrade. A new form factor shows the world that you have the latest and greatest iPhone, a sign of status in China."
Apple's latest iPhone, sporting a larger 4-inch screen and 4G capability, made its global debut with a launch in the United States and 30 other countries in September, selling more than 5 million in its first three days on the market.
Analysts, however, say the company's longer-term outlook in the China market may hinge on expanding its partners in that country to include China Mobile Ltd, the country's top telecoms carrier.
(Reporting by Sakthi Prasad and Sayantani Ghosh in BANGALORE and Melanie Lee in SHANGHAI; Editing by Edmund Klamann)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Apple Inc said it sold more than 2 million of its new iPhone 5 in China during the three days after its launch there on Friday, marking China¡¯s best-selling iPhone rollout ever.¡±
¡°Apple Inc said it sold more than 2 million of its new iPhone 5 in China during the three days after its launch there on Friday, marking China¡¯s best-selling iPhone rollout ever.¡±
This is a deliberate misinformation. The sale of 2 million are the results of cumulated order since September. One just need to look at the price at the resale market to know if the demand is strong or not. The price at the resale market is very close to or even below the official price and there is no shortage of supply, indicating very weak demand.
Dec 16, 201211:40pm EST--
Tim Cook is scared and posting bogus numbers trying to stop the stock from a slide. I call BS on what he says, just like Mark said; there is no supply problem indicating Apple is full of it!
Dec 17, 201212:13am EST--
Dec 17, 20126:18am EST--
