Focus on Czech leader after Irish back EU treaty
2009-10-04 05:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Czech President Vaclav Klaus faced growing pressure on Sunday to ratify the European Union's Lisbon reform treaty after Ireland's overwhelming approval of the charter revived plans to give the EU more global influence.
Just over two-thirds of Irish voters backed the treaty on Friday in a referendum put to them a second time, marking a decisive turnaround that was widely attributed to the EU's role in helping Ireland through the global economic crisis.
But the treaty, which would streamline decision-making of the 27-country bloc and create a long-term president and a powerful foreign policy chief, takes effect only if Poland and the Czech Republic follow other member states in ratifying it.
Polish President Lech Kaczynski is expected to sign soon. But Czech President Vaclav Klaus, who sees the treaty as a step towards a European superstate where national states will lose sovereignty, has not made his intentions clear.
"The Irish people have spoken. They have said a resounding 'Yes' to Europe," Jose Manuel Barroso, the president of the EU's executive European Commission, said as votes were counted in Ireland on Saturday.
"I hope that the necessary procedures for its entry into force can be completed as quickly as possible in Poland and the Czech Republic," he said in comments echoed by other EU leaders.
In a further sign of pressure on Prague, the EU's Swedish presidency and Barroso will meet Czech Prime Minister Jan Fischer in Brussels on Wednesday.
WAITING FOR BRITAIN?
He could wait until a British election due by June, hoping it would bring to power the opposition Conservatives who have said they would hold a referendum on the treaty if it is not yet in force, even though Britain has ratified it. Fischer says Klaus will sign the treaty by the end of the year. It has already been approved by the Czech parliament.
"The prime minister ... is convinced that ratification will be completed in a way that the Lisbon Treaty can take effect by the end of 2009," Fischer's office said in a statement.
In a reversal of Ireland's rejection of the treaty in June 2008, 67 percent of Irish voters backed the charter.
Irish debt yield spreads are expected to tighten by five-to-10 basis points on Monday and the euro currency could have a slight boost because prospects of the charter's introduction before the end of the year have now increased, economists said.
The charter's implementation, after more than a year on hold following Ireland's rejection in 2008, is expected to boost the prospects for further EU enlargement and clear the way to deeper integration among its member states.
"It is an important victory for Ireland and for all of Europe," Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt said.
