UPDATE 2-Irish voters back EU reform treaty - officials
2009-10-03 06:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Irish voters have approved the European Union's Lisbon reform treaty, Ireland's foreign minister and opposition groups said on Saturday, removing an obstacle to the EU's ambitions to increase its global influence.
Irish approval, a year after rejecting the charter, will put pressure on Poland and the Czech Republic to follow other EU leaders in backing a treaty intended to make it easier for the EU to reach decisions now that it has 27 member states.
"I am delighted for the country. It looks like a convincing win for the 'Yes' side on this occasion," Foreign Minister Micheal Martin told national radio.
"This is a very convincing win," Declan Ganley told reporters at the main Dublin counting centre. "Of course I am disappointed, I think we have made a mistake."
Monitors were still counting votes following Friday's referendum on a treaty that requires the approval of all member states to go into force, and official results were expected late on Saturday afternoon.
But state radio RTE said early tallies from counting centres showed constituencies such as Dublin Central and Dublin North East had voted 56 percent in favour while in Galway city early indications put the 'Yes' vote at 63 percent.
"It looks like a 'Yes' vote. I want to sympathise and commiserate with all our people who put in a great effort for the love of their country," said Richard Greene, a spokesman for the Coir group which opposed the treaty.
The atmosphere was calm after fraught campaigning that pitched Ireland's main political parties against anti-abortion groups, pacifists and British eurosceptics.
The vote followed warnings from celebrities, politicians and business leaders that a second "No" would ruin Ireland's reputation as it battles recession.
Many voters were thought more likely to back the treaty this time because of the economic crisis, during which EU aid has helped curb the impact on Ireland.
"Regarding the Polish and Czech presidents, it is a matter for them and it is a matter for their people. The ball is now firmly in their court," European Affairs Minister Dick Roche told Reuters at the main Dublin counting centre.
Irish approval would be a boon for the former "Celtic Tiger" economy, which was spared an Icelandic-style collapse because of its membership of the euro zone.
Many people in Ireland are struggling to come to terms with unemployment, higher taxes and the possibility of lower social welfare payments in the next austerity budget.
