Serena stutters as number one duel begins
2009-10-04 06:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Sat, Oct 3 2009
Serena Williams of the U.S. serves during her first round match against Kaia Kanepi of Estonia at the China Open tennis tournament in Beijing October 4, 2009. Credit: Reuters/David Gray
Sun  EDT
Safina, who must at least match Williams' progress over the next week in Beijing to retain the number one ranking, was equally unconvincing in her 6-4 6-4 victory over Italian Roberta Vinci earlier in the day.
Williams missed last week's Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo with knee and toe injuries and looked far from her best on Sunday. It Williams' first singles match since her rant at a lineswoman in her semi-final loss to Belgian Kim Clijsters at the U.S. Open last month.
The Australian Open and Wimbledon champion made nine unforced errors with five double faults in the 83-minute encounter against the big-hitting Kanepi, who broke the American three times.
The second seed, though, always looked to have the edge on the big points and claimed her place in the second round of the $6.6 million event with a fifth break of serve when world number 48 Kanepi went long.
Top seed Safina's victory over 59th-ranked Vinci was certainly an improvement on her first-round loss to Taiwanese qualifier Chang Kai-chen at the Pan Pacific Open last week but was by no means commanding.
Broken early in both sets, Safina immediately evened matters up with breaks of her own but was then forced to scrap it out with the dogged Italian to claim victory in a little under 90 minutes.
"I'm satisfied with the match but here is still room to improve my game," said the 23-year-old.
"I'm not thinking about (the ranking). I just think about the game. I think I am the 16th, 17th in the world to reach number one so it doesn't matter when you achieve it."
Earlier on center court, sixth seeded Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova damaged hopes of a first local champion with a 7-6 7-5 defeat of China's number two Zheng Jie.
The French Open champion, three times a finalist and winner of the 2006 title here, battled back after Zheng grabbed service breaks early in both sets to secure a place in the second round.
(Additional reporting by Liu Zhen, editing by Peter Rutherford)
