HIGHLIGHTS-Comments from officials at G7, IMF meetings
2009-10-03 14:35:00.0
(Reuters) - The following are comments on Saturday from finance officials in Istanbul for the Group of Seven, IMF and World Bank meetings. > For top stories, please double click on [G7/G8]
SENIOR U.S. OFFICIAL ON IMF, WORLD BANK CAPITAL
A senior U.S. administration official said the United States was looking at the financial resources of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund to assess how strong a case could be made to augment their capital -- on the condition of governance reforms at the two institutions. The official, who spoke on condition that he not be identified or directly quoted, said it would take a while for this process to produce an agreement.
GEITHNER ON DOLLAR, STIMULUS:
"It's very important for us that we continue to have a strong dollar. We are going to do everything necessary to make sure that we sustain confidence."
"We need a shift towards growth that is more balanced and sustainable, less prone to distortions and to crises. This shift is already underway. After years of taking on too much debt, Americans are starting to save again ... So if we want the world to grow at a higher rate, this shift must be offset by a broad structural shift to domestic demand-led and less export-intensive growth in the rest of the world ... We all have a strong interest in making this fundamental shift."
"No G innovations today," Geithner said when asked if ministers discussed a new role for the G7 or reducing its size. "We're trying to do what I think you would expect us to do ... bringing our countries together to make a difference in getting growth back, getting unemployment to come down, fixing our financial system, updating the basic arcitecture. We're going to do that by building consensus and coalitions everywhere we can .... If you have good ideas and command broad support among countries, you can get the world to move and act."
"We'll take action if currency moves become excessively one-sided ... I'd like to refrain from saying whether recent currency moves have been one-sided or not ...
"Stable currency moves are desirable. It's positive for all countries across the globe. What's most desirable is for currency rates to be determined in a way that reflects each country's economic strength ...
"I haven't heard about talks of a G4. But there were various discussions (about the status of the G7) including a proposal for turning the G7 into a more informal venue for talks.
"The conclusion, however, was that we would stick to how we've done things up till now."
Asked about the fact that yuan has not moved since the G7's last message in April, and what it would take for China to deliver on the G7 expectation, Trichet said:
Asked if the G7 discussed international coordination of central bank interest rate increases to avoid exchange rate tensions, Trichet said:
"We don't think the G7 choreography should be brought to an end. We do think that mainly as far as the exchange of views on exchange rates is concerned the best place to deal with these sensitive matters would be the G7 which takes no importance away from this new G20 formula."
"We said much of the crisis was caused by excessive, misperceived leverage and by perverse incentives, so we want a system with less leverage and more capital ... I do think it is premature to be concerned by an excess of rules at this stage." DRAGHI ON FSB REPORT ON REGULATORY HAVENS:
Asked if the FSB would be preparing a report on regulatory havens, as urged by British Finance Minister Alistair Darling:
"Absolutely, yes. I will tell you more about that tomorrow."
"Sooner or later Europe needs a single voice, at the G7 and at the United Nations (but) the timing can't be predicted.
"We have one currency, we need one economy. Naturally there is resistance, for historical reasons. You can't equate European countries to American states like Iowa and Wyoming."
"The statement speaks for itself on exchange rates ... what is crucial and one of the priorities for the G7 is to make progress on the framework for sustainable and balanced growth. That's been playing an extremely important role in rebalancing of growth around the globe and the comments on exchange rates need to be seen in that context."
GERMAN DEPUTY FINANCE MINISTER JOERG ASMUSSEN, ON G7:
Asked if there had been discussion of any proposal for a G4 (the United States, Japan, Europe and China), Asmussen said: "No".
On G7: "We have agreed to work on a more informal basis, that we step back to the way it was some years ago, and that we want to try to cut back the schedules for (number of) meetings."
"We have talked about being more cautious with (issuing) communiques in future: sometimes there will be one, sometimes not."
JOSEPH ACKERMAN, IIF CHAIRMAN AND DEUTSCHE BANK CEO:
"There is a very real risk that as central banks and governments strive to avoid premature shifts away from supportive monetary and fiscal policies, regulatory reforms come into force that could undermine global recovery and job creation."
"Regulatory measures need to be weighed in substantive dialogue with the industry to enable banks to play their vital role in the economy," he said in a news release.
CANADIAN FINANCE MINISTER JIM FLAHERTY ON CURRENCIES, G20:
"It's easier to discuss (foreign exchange) at the G20 because the Asian countries are represented. We do talk about it at the G7 as well."
"There are a lot of downside risks, particularly in the financial sector ... It is not my preferred scenario but a double dip is always possible."
"Because of the finance crisis, the German growth potential seems to have decreased to around one percent compared to around 1.5 pct before."
"It is a question that was a big absence in Pittsburgh ... We did, in the communique, reaffirm the need for the Chinese currency to appreciate. We continue to think that we need a strong dollar. As far as the question of volatility is concerned ... this commentary doesn't apply to one currency in particular but all currencies that see volatility."
"The G7 totally justifies itself. We considered that it was extremely important to continue to work together probably more on substance, more on economic and financial matters, that it was a forum that justified plainly the continuation of its activities. The question was to know whether we should systemically publish a communique after each meeting and that we will work that out over time. But the necessity of meeting to discuss technical monetary and financial questions seems real."
