UPDATE 1-G7 will issue Istanbul communique -French official
2009-10-02 10:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The Group of Seven rich countries will issue a communique after they meet in Istanbul this weekend, a French official told Reuters on Friday, countering suggestions the group might drop this tradition.
"There will be a G7 communique," the official said on condition of anonymity.
Finance ministers and central bank governors from the G7 -- the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada -- will meet in Istanbul on Saturday on the sidelines of meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Traditionally, after its meetings the G7 has issued statements on the global economy that are scrutinised by financial markets, notably for any hint they might consider official intervention to adjust currency rates.
But leaders of the broader Group of 20 -- which includes emerging market powerhouses India and China -- issued a 23-page communique after their summit in Pittsburgh last month and declared that the group was now the world's premier forum for economic co-operation, superseding the G7.
That raised questions about the G7's role and whether it was worth the older economic powers discussing currencies in the absence of a key player, China.
However, another G7 source said this week it was important to have a joint statement to avoid confusion and avert the risk of individual countries implying agreement on particular policies when there had been none.
Some European, particularly French officials have expressed concern in recent days that the euro's
strength against the dollar -- it is up about 16 percent since March -- could damage Europe's recovery by stifling its exports.
"It is out of the question that the euro pays the bill for an adjustment between the dollar and the (Chinese) yuan," French Economy Minister Christine Lagarde said on Thursday. [ID:nL2142064]
On Friday, she said she hoped the currency issue would be discussed in Istanbul.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner on Thursday repeated that a strong dollar was very important to the United States -- a statement European officials had been pressing him to make. [ID:nN01294346] (Reporting by G7 bureaux; Writing by Ruth Pitchford; Editing by Andrew Torchia) (andrew.torchia@thomsonreuters.com; +90 212 296 3617)
