UPDATE 2-Global chip sales rise 5 pct in Aug vs July - SIA
2009-10-02 00:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Global semiconductor sales rose 5 percent in August sequentially, helped by a continuing recovery in consumer spending, incentive programs for energy-efficient products and growing sales of notebooks, the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) said.
SIA said worldwide sales of semiconductors in August were $19.1 billion, compared with $18.2 billion in July, marking a sixth consecutive month of sequential growth.
Analysts said the August SIA figures met their expectations, and that they expect the semiconductor companies to have delivered a strong performance in September as well.
"We have already seen companies like Intel preannounce for the third quarter, which indicates that the month of September is also going to be good," Miller Tabak analyst Brendan Furlong said.
Think Equity analyst Vijay Rakesh expects September global chip sales figures to rise more than 6 percent, sequentially.
"You have holiday builds going on, builds ahead of Windows 7 and the builds ahead of the Golden Week in China," Rakesh said.
For the past six months, global chip sales have been growing in the 3 percent to 6 percent range, sequentially.
Chip sales in August were 16.1 percent lower than the same period a year ago, but the rate of decline was lower than the 18.2 percent clocked in July.
"Even the September year-over-year decline will be lesser that what you have seen in August," Rakesh added.
), Advanced Micro Devices (
), ASML (
), Texas Instruments TXN.N, National Semiconductor Corp (
Improving market conditions and stronger-than-expected demand have prompted several chipmakers, such as Intel, Altera Corp (
), Texas Instruments and ASML, to raise their third-quarter forecasts recently.
SIA President George Scalise said notwithstanding the slow recovery in demand, it is encouraging that the industry momentum has turned positive following the steepest decline in more than a decade.
Improving market conditions and stronger-than-expected demand have promted several chipmakers such as Intel, Altera Corp (
), Texas Instruments and ASML to raise their third-quarter forecasts in the past one month.
Year-to-date sales through August are down 21.3 percent to $133.8 billion compared with the same time last year, but the rate of decline has slowed from the first six months of 2009, during which chip sales declined by 25 percent, the SIA said.
The Philadelphia Semiconductor Index .SOXX, which tracks chip stocks, rose as much as 1 percent to touch a high of 312.80 Friday morning. It pared some gains and was flat at 308.74 at midday. (Editing by Unnikrishnan Nair)
