U.S. slaps duties on China wind towers, high-level talks begin
2012-12-19 02:53:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States pressed forward on Tuesday with plans to slap steep punitive duties on wind turbine towers imported from China at prices deemed unfairly low, even as officials welcomed a high-level Chinese delegation for trade and economic talks.
The action was the latest clash between the two countries over U.S. imports of green technology from China. It came as a Chinese delegation led by Vice Premier Wang Qishan was in Washington for the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade meeting, a high-level bilateral forum to address barriers to trade and investment.
The White House is also pushing for an increase in the nation's $16.4 trillion statutory debt cap as part of any deal. The U.S. Treasury expects to reach the debt ceiling by year-end and will likely run out of options to free up more borrowing capacity by sometime in February, risking a potential default.
China is the United States' largest creditor, giving it a deep interest in Washington's budget debate.
U.S. companies expect Wednesday's meeting to produce no sweeping new commitments, but hope for action on concerns ranging from Chinese barriers to U.S. farm products to policies pressuring U.S. companies seeking business in China to transfer valuable technology there.
"Failure to reach an agreement will create regulatory dead-zones that harm investors and businesses. Furthermore, the threat of retaliatory actions by regulators, on both sides of the Pacific, may create a regulatory protectionism that will harm both economies," the business group said in a letter to the heads of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the China Securities Regulatory Commission.
The United States has also slapped anti-dumping and countervailing duties on billions of dollars of solar panels from China, despite strong objections from Beijing.
In Geneva on Tuesday, China's Ambassador to the World Trade Organization Yi Xiaozhun, criticized what he called U.S. "abuse" of anti-dumping and countervailing laws and accused Washington of blocking some Chinese investment in the United States for "ideological reasons."
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying, speaking at a daily news briefing in Beijing, said trade protectionism such as the wind towers issue would hurt bilateral cooperation and the interests of the United States.
"We hope the two sides can fully make use of the current bilateral dialogue and cooperation mechanism to resolve the relevant trade disputes through dialogue," Hua said.
Anti-dumping duties announced on Tuesday were higher for two Chinese companies, Chengxi Shipyard Co. and Titan Wind Energy (Suzhou), than the preliminary rates they received this year in the range of 20 to 30 percent.
Three other Chinese exporters also faced higher duty rates of about 45 to 50 percent in the final decision, but the top rate of 70.63 percent for "all other" Chinese manufacturers and exporters was down slightly from the preliminary level.
The U.S. International Trade Commission has the final decision on duties. In February, the panel made a preliminary vote of 5-0 that there was a reasonable indication Chinese and Vietnamese imports have harmed U.S. wind tower producers.
"Over the last years, in a period of peak demand, the U.S. industry should have been profitable," said Alan Price, an attorney at Wiley Rein representing U.S. producers. "Instead, due to the surge in dumped and subsidized imports, the industry lost market share and saw its profits collapse."
(Additional reporting by Sui-Lee Wee in BEIJING; Editing by Dan Grebler and David Gregorio)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Angela Merkel, representing EU, declared during this difficult economic times in the world, protectionism hurts the world economy and is irresponsible. Is she going to say it in his face to Obama? Of is Angela bribed by the Medal of ¡°freedom¡±, not world¡¯s freedom, apparently, what Obama did to bribe and twist arm for unfair double standard for America, like the United States, ALWAYS hypocritical in its policy.
Dec 19, 201210:36pm EST--
Whenever the United States wants to be a protectionist,
Whenever the United States wants to be a protectionist,
it always first start getting accusatory, regardless of truth.
Dec 19, 201210:38pm EST--
