PREVIEW-China bent on flexing muscle in iron ore price talks
2009-10-02 05:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China will kick off its next round of iron ore price talks hoping finally to extract some advantage from its position as the world's top steel consumer by squeezing a better deal out of reluctant iron ore miners.
Despite producing nearly half of the world's steel and being the top iron ore importer, China this year resoundingly failed to convince the top three miners that it deserved cheaper prices than rival steel mills in Japan and South Korea.
But it is not clear it will be able to achieve a better result in the next round of talks: Spot prices for ore have rebounded, the global economy has bottomed out from the financial crisis and China continues to churn out record amounts of steel.
At an annual conference traditionally seen as a warmup for annual term talks, China's steel industry, led by top producer Baosteel (
) and industry body the China Iron and Steel Association (CISA), will be looking to set the scene for 2010/11 price talks.
It is not clear on what basis prices for the 2010/11 contract year will be negotiated, as China has not officially accepted a 33 percent price reduction from 2008/09 prices agreed by Rio with other Asian steel producers.
The marathon talks for this year are supposedly still continuing, though industry analysts and sources have said that major Chinese steel mills have tacitly agreed to the 33 percent cut as a benchmark.
For a graphic of iron ore settlements, click on:
One new tack that CISA's Secretary General Shan Shanghua has suggested is changing contract terms to coincide with the calendar year, rather than the traditional April to March period. [ID:nSHA337534]
"A price based on the calendar year means Chinese steel makers could settle ahead of other Asian rivals by several months," said a Chinese analyst, who asked to remain anonymous due to the sensitive nature of the topic.
Mark Pervan, senior commodities analyst at Australia & New Zealand Bank, said he expected term iron ore prices to rise 15 percent in the 2010/2011 fiscal year, based on the prices agreed by Rio Tinto and Japanese steel mills several months ago.
"But if spot markets stay around these levels and China gets its calendar year wish, we could see a smaller rise, of maybe 10 percent," he said.
The benchmark price of Indian origin ore with 63/63.5 percent iron in China has stabilised at around $90 per tonne, below the year's peak of $115 hit in early August, but still above the contract price of around $75 cost and freight.
"China's economic expansion will sustain both steel production and steel prices, hence forming a floor for iron ore prices and leaving room for further upside," said Hong Kong-based analyst Helen Lau of OSK Securities.
CISA has been setting out its position, saying it sees iron ore markets oversupplied next year as global steel output recovers slowly.
But China's own steel output has been growing at a rapid clip. The country's annual capacity is expected to top 700 million tonnes by the end of this year, with production of around 600 million tonnes of crude steel in 2009, hefty growth of 20 percent from the all-time high of 500 million tonnes in 2008.
) and the country's third-largest producer, Fortescue Metals Group (
), were invited to deliver speeches to the Qingdao conference, according to the agenda on the website of the meeting, www.ironoreconference.com.
But Fortescue missed a self-imposed deadline on Wednesday to agree $6 billion in debt financing from Chinese steel mills, casting doubt on a related deal to sell China 20 million wet tonnes of iron ore at a discount of 3 percent to rival miners. [ID:nSYD483094]
Relations between China and Australia, one of its biggest raw material suppliers, have been strained by the rejection of a number of attempts by Chinese state-owned firms to buy Australian miners.
The biggest failure was that of a $19.5-billion bid by Chinese metals conglomerate Chinalco to take an 18 percent stake in Rio, and relations have not been helped by the detention of four Rio employees in July on charges of stealing commercial secrets.
Stern Hu, the leader of Rio's iron ore sales team in China and an Australian citizen, is still in detention, although the Australian government insists his case has not derailed expanding ties with China. [ID:nSYD17110]
For a snapshot of iron ore news, click [ID:nIRONORE] (Editing by Michael Urquhart)
