U.S. solar industry to challenge tariff ruling
2009-10-01 17:26:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. solar energy industry hopes to persuade Customs officials to reverse a decision to impose a 2.5 percent tariff on solar panel imports after more than two decades of duty-free trade in the product, an industry official said on Thursday.
"We're taking it very seriously and we will be responding. ... The industry is in the process of preparing a challenge," said Rhone Resch, president of the Solar Energy Industries Association, whose members include both U.S. and foreign solar energy companies.
In the worst case scenario, U.S. importers of solar panels could face some $70 million in tariffs and penalties for product already imported this year.
As the New York Times reported on Wednesday, the U.S. Custom service ruled in January a panel made by Trina Solar (
That ruling was a surprise because "all solar panels contain bypass diodes and have forever. It's a safety issue not to have them," one industry official said.
Although the ruling only applies to the Trina panel, it has implications for other manufacturers, he said.
If that fails, the case could go to the U.S. Court of International Trade in New York.
The solar power sector is increasingly a global industry, with most panels today being sold into the European market and China expected to grow as a customer for clean energy.
While U.S.-based SunPower Corp SPWRA.O assembles panels at factories in China, the Philippines and Mexico, China's Suntech Power Holdings Co Ltd (
"It's unclear that the U.S. would want to enforce this policy long term ... If you move toward a protectionist stance, you also limit what your domestic companies can do abroad," said Christine Hersey, analyst at Wedbush Morgan.
), Energy Conversion Devices Inc ENER.O and Evergreen Solar Inc ESLR.O, since the companies produce some products in the United States.
But the tariffs should not have a large impact, since the benefits that foreign governments give to companies to set up manufacturing in their country -- such as lower corporate tax rates and low-cost financing -- "far outweigh the penalty of a 2.5 percent tariff," Blansett said.
(Additional reporting by Laura Isensee in Los Angeles, editing by Cynthia Osterman)
