GLOBAL ECONOMY-IMF raises growth forecast, recovery fragile
2009-10-01 09:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The International Monetary Fund raised its 2010 global growth forecast on Thursday, as factory activity picked up across Asia and Europe, and U.S. consumer spending accelerated in August to its fastest pace in nearly eight years.
Even as incoming data suggested the world economy is slowly healing, policymakers are still far from agreement on when to start winding down massive government stimulus spending.
Governments around the world have poured trillions into the economy and cut interest rates to historic lows to forestall an even deeper crisis, but some economists fear that turning off the taps too soon will shatter the fragile global recovery.
The IMF said the world economy will likely shrink 1.1 percent in 2009 before rebounding in 2010 to grow 3.1 percent, led by a turnaround in Asia. For details, see [ID:nSGN002195]
In July, the IMF said it expected the global economy to expand by 2.5 percent in 2010.
Mild improvement was visible in major economies. Euro zone manufacturing activity contracted less sharply than first thought in September, a survey showed, and Britain's manufacturing sector shrank modestly after employers cut jobs for a 17th straight month. [ID:nL1484335][ID:nL1492150]
Manufacturing activity in September surged across Asia due to growing demand, and a U.S. factory survey, due later, is expected to show that growth accelerated slightly in the same month.
In the United States, consumer spending rose 1.3 percent in August, the fourth consecutive increase and the biggest since October 2001, the government said. But a separate report showed initial claims for state unemployment benefits rose last week. [ID:nN01395512]
The jobless numbers took some of the shine off the consumer data, as spending is likely to be anemic as long as the job market remains soft.
"The labor markets remain the weak link in this recovery process," said Kevin Flanagan, fixed income strategist for Global Wealth Management at Morgan Stanley. "It will be a while before they provide any kind of support, especially to consumer spending,"
Euro zone finance ministers are split on the subject, with some ready to say 2011 would be the starting point for ending emergency stimulus. [ID:L1506693]
"Every country will have to define its exit strategy in its own due time. I don't think that we can have a precise, or a common, schedule," Portuguese Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos told reporters before a meeting of ministers in Gothenburg, Sweden. "We need a flexible approach on that."
Indeed, economies in Europe and beyond still look fragile despite signs of improvement. Germany's manufacturing sector came close to returning to growth in September after the economy pulled out of recession in the second quarter.
Factories in France, the euro zone's second largest economy, boosted activity in September to the fastest level in 19 months.
But recovery momentum has slowed in the euro zone as a whole, and exports have stalled due in part to a strong currency.
"While output and orders rose at increased rates, the pace of expansion was lackluster, held back by signs of momentum waning in some countries," said Chris Williamson at Markit.
"Job losses were widespread as firms struggled with the resulting squeeze on profit margins, highlighting the fragility of the recovery," he added.
Highlighting that outlook, the Bank of Japan's Tankan survey showed big manufacturers plan to cut capital spending by a record 25.6 percent in the fiscal year through March 31, more than indicated in a June survey. [ID:nT60733]
Capital spending has typically been a growth driver for Japan's economy, but is now one of its weakest links as firms cut expenditure to protect fragile profits. [ID:nT278766]
Other reports cast doubts on the strength of consumer demand around the world, a vital component of stronger global growth.
German retail sales fell by 1.5 percent on the month in August, bucking expectations of a small rise and suggesting consumers in Europe's largest economy remain wary. [ID:nL1464657]
Euro zone unemployment rose to 9.6 percent in August, surpassing July's 10-year high of 9.5 percent. [ID:nBRQ007544]
But the silver lining might be found in Asia, where factories in China, Japan, South Korea and India ramped up production last month as new orders from home and abroad rose.
) had a sharp rise in sales to China. [ID:nPEK178107] (For a graphic comparing Euro zone unemployment and consumer confidence, click here:
For a graphic showing UK PMI and factory production, click here:
) (Additional reporting by Wayne Cole in Sydney, Jason Subler in Beijing, Yoo Choonsik in Seoul and Hideyuki Sano in Tokyo and Christina Fincher in London; Writing by Lin Noueihed; editing by Elizabeth Piper and Jeffrey Benkoe)
