Chinese proud on nation's birthday, worry over future
2009-10-01 04:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Zhao Bingqing drew hard on a Black Devil cigarette in his tiny kitchen, eagerly waiting for the television to start showing a military parade through central Beijing to celebrate 60 years of Communist rule.
But pride in the spectacle of perfectly-drilled soldiers, excessive floats and top leaders of the world's third-largest economy were not enough to push aside more pressing worries.
"I'm concerned about housing," said Zhao, 54, a taxi driver taking time off work after an operation. "It's too expensive, and where we live is going to be demolished soon. I'd have moved earlier, but I have my daughter's schooling to think of."
His wife, Xu Guirong, chimed in with her complaint about prices in general, turning her back to the television broadcasting the event live from Tiananmen Square.
"We have a new subway line near us now, and it's great. I want prices to be as convenient as transport," she said.
But neighbor Pu Shufang, 87, invited by Zhao and Xu to watch the spectacle, was having none of it.
"I remember what old China was like!" she said, perched on the sofa in her neatly embroidered slippers.
She was referring to the pre-Communist era, which began with Chairman Mao Zedong proclaiming the People's Republic on October 1, 1949.
"All we had to eat then was porridge. There was nothing to buy. How could I not be happy with new China?"
Pu avoided answering questions about some of China's less proud moments, such as the chaos during the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, and periods like the 1989 suppression of pro-democracy protests, all now glossed over by the Party.
"I'm just a confused old woman," she laughed.
Still, all eyes were transfixed on the screen when the ceremony began. Daughter Yidan, 10, gave her mother a withering look of indifference when it was suggested she could join the army eventually.
"Some of her classmates are in the parade. But she's a year too young to take part herself," said Xu.
Down the street from Zhao's little house in a traditional alley in a western part of the city, Bian Dengxiang, 69, wanted to talk about his bad old days -- the Cultural Revolution.
"There were none of these parades over national day back then. We were lucky to get even two meals a day. All there was were sweet potato peelings," he chuckled, in the thick vernacular of his native central province of Henan.
"I much prefer the China of now, even with all its problems," Bian added, straining to watch a television set in a little store alongside other migrant workers.
