TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear programme
2009-10-01 05:28:00.0
TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear programme | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear programme
Tue, Sep 29 2009
Wed, Sep 30 2009
Wed, Sep 30 2009
Wed, Sep 30 2009
Tue, Sep 29 2009
Thu  EDT
Details of Iran's nuclear programme emerged in August 2002 when the exiled opposition National Council of Resistance of Iran reported the existence of a uranium enrichment facility at Natanz and a heavy water plant at Arak.
November 2, 2007 - Britain, France, Germany, the United States, Russia and China agree to push ahead with more sanctions after Iran refuses to suspend uranium enrichment.
March 3, 2008 - U.N. Security Council adopts a third sanctions resolution targeted at Iran's nuclear programme.
July 19 - Iranian officials rule out any freeze in uranium enrichment during talks in Geneva on the programme, attended for the first time by a senior U.S. diplomat.
August 2 - An informal deadline lapses for Iran to respond to an offer from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia for talks.
August 5 - Iran sends a letter to the powers but gives no concrete reply to a demand to freeze its nuclear activity, a step the United States says amounts to obfuscation. Washington and London say the powers may consider more U.N. sanctions.
February 5, 2009 - Russia says it plans to start up a nuclear reactor at the Bushehr plant by the end of 2009.
March 20 - After years of U.S. attempts to isolate Iran, new President Barack Obama calls for "engagement that is honest and grounded in mutual respect." Iran cautiously welcomes the overture, but said it wanted to see "practical steps."
April 9 - Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says Iran has mastered the nuclear fuel cycle and also tested more advanced machines for enriching uranium. He also inaugurates the nation's first atomic fuel fabrication plant near Isfahan.
June 5 - A quarterly IAEA report says Iran now has 7,231 centrifuge enrichment machines installed, a 25 percent increase in potential capacity since March.
August 28 - The IAEA reports Iran has slightly reduced the scale of its uranium enrichment. But it has also raised the number of installed centrifuge machines by some 1,000 to 8,308.
September 2 - Mohamed ElBaradei, outgoing director-general of the IAEA says Iran is not going to produce a nuclear weapon any time soon and the threat posed has been exaggerated.
September 12 - Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki says Iran will not back down in its nuclear row with the West, a day after the U.S. said it would accept Tehran's offer of wide-ranging talks with six world powers.
September 24 - China dampens expectations of further sanctions on Iran, telling major powers that more pressure would not persuade Tehran to halt its nuclear programme.
-- In contrast, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown tells the U.N. the world should consider "far tougher sanctions."
September 25 - The IAEA says Iran has told it about a second uranium enrichment plant under construction. Construction of the plant, near the city of Qom, had begun in 2006.
