UPDATE 2-Iraq bars China's Sinopec from second oil round
2009-10-01 11:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Iraq has barred China's Sinopec Corp. (
) from taking part in a second round of bidding for major oil deals over its purchase of a Swiss oil firm active in Iraq's Kurdistan region, a top official said on Thursday.
Iraq's Oil Ministry, which deems deals the largely autonomous Kurdish region signs with foreign oil firms illegal, had already threatened to blacklist Sinopec, China's biggest oil refiner, for acquiring Addax Petroleum Corp. AXC.TO.
The ministry has been awaiting an explanation from Sinopec about its dealings with Addax, which has been pumping oil from Kurdistan's Taq Taq field.
"The Oil Ministry has not gotten a positive answer from Sinopec and so it is considered unqualified to participate in the second bidding round," said Abdul-Mahdy al-Ameedi, deputy director of Iraq's contracts and licensing directorate.
In June, news broke that Sinopec had agreed to pay $7.24 billion for Addax, giving the Chinese firm fields with high potential in regions like west Africa and Iraqi Kurdistan.
The acquisition reflects China's eagerness to jump into the rich but risky energy sector in Iraq, which boasts the world's third largest proven oil reserves.
Addax was poised to profit in June when the Kurdish government feted the launch of the northern region's first oil exports. That included crude from Taq Taq, where Addax is working alongside Turkish firm Genel Enerji.
In July, field officials said Taq Taq was producing between 20,000 to 40,000 barrels per day.
Ashti Hawrami, the Kurdish energy minister, said he believes the field could someday produce up to 250,000 bpd.
Overshadowing Addax's operations are lingering questions about how Kurdistan will pay foreign firms for exports. The central government is steadfast in its refusal to give Kurds export revenues beyond the region's 17 percent budget share.
Baghdad's tussle with Kurdistan over the right to sign oil deals is just one facet of the entrenched Kurd-Arab dispute, now seen as the leading threat to Iraq's nascent stability.
Sinopec took part in the Oil Ministry's first oil bidding round, which culminated in an auction in Baghdad in June that produced just one deal, giving BP (
) and China's CNPC a contract to develop the giant Rumaila field.
Sinopec was part of a consortium, also including Royal Dutch Shell (
), that bid in the auction for northern Iraq's Kirkuk oilfield, a major producer for Iraq today. It also was part of a group that bid for 4-billion-barrel Zubair oilfield.
The ministry's decision pulls Sinopec from the list of dozens of companies qualified to compete in the second auction in December. Ten major oilfields will be on the bidding block.
Ameedi said the company will not be present at the ministry's bidding round workshop scheduled to take place later this month in Istanbul.
