Bangladesh says to sign deals with Conoco, Tullow
2009-10-01 09:31:00.0
Bangladesh says to sign deals with Conoco, Tullow | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Bangladesh says to sign deals with Conoco, Tullow
Wed, Sep 30 2009
Mon, Sep 28 2009
Fri, Sep 25 2009
Fri, Sep 18 2009
Thu  EDT
) and Ireland's Tullow Oil (
) by the middle of this month for exploration of gas in three offshore blocks, a senior energy official said.
"We will complete negotiations with them and sign deals to award those blocks by the second week of October," Tawfiq-e-Elahi Chowdhury, adviser to the minister responsible for power, energy and mineral resources, said on Thursday.
The companies will be awarded a production-sharing contract (PSC), with some provision to export their gas in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), the official said.
"We cannot waste even a day as our natural resources are depleting fast and we want a double-digit growth by the end of 2020 to become a middle income country," said Mohammad Muqtadir Ali, chairman of the state-run Bangladesh Oil, Gas and Mineral Corporation, or Petrobangla.
The foreign firms will invest $160.5 million in exploration in the three approved offshore blocks, Muqtadir told reporters at a news conference.
"Bangladesh has also lodged its objection (with those countries) and is trying to establish our rights. The issue will be settled through negotiations," said Mijarul Quayes, secretary of foreign affairs.
Bangladesh is facing gas shortages of 220 million cubic feet (mmcf) a day out of a total daily demand of 2,200 mmcf.
"We (now) have only 7.2 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of proven gas and 5.5 tcf probable gas," Muqtadir said.
To turn the probable gas into proven reserves the country will need huge investment and technical knowhow which it does not currently have, he said.
"If we cannot do that then the country will face tremendous crisis after 2015," Muqtair said.
The results of exploration by the foreign companies might come within four years for the shallow water block and five years for the deepwater blocks, officials said.
Petrobangla made the final selections after evaluating offers from companies that included ConcoPhillips, Tullow, Australia's Santos (
), Longwoods Resources Limited, Korean National Oil Corp, China's CNOOC (
) and Comtrack Services Limited of Cyprus, said the official.
Currently, British firm Cairn Energy's (
) Sangu gas field is the country's lone operating offshore gas field.
International oil companies have been awarded only 12 blocks, both onshore and offshore, since gas exploration began in the country in late 1960s.
"The model PSC of 2008 will not allow export even in the form of LNG unless Petrobangla or any third party refuse to buy natural gas," Tawfiq told reporters. (Reporting by Serajul Islam Quadir; Editing by Greg Mahlich)
