RPT-LME's tin users say market is disorderly
2009-10-01 04:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The tin market on the London Metal Exchange is "disorderly" and prices are distorted as latest data shows one entity controls more than 90 percent of stocks and cash contracts, industry sources said.
Members of the LME's Tin Committee told the exchange earlier this year it needed to take action. [ID:nL7149027]
"This is not a good situation and it certainly is not an orderly market," said a European tin buyer, which makes tinplate -- flat-rolled steel covered with a layer of tin.
Many industrial users of the market say the LME's lending guidance, which limits dominant position holders ability to profit, should be stricter still.
Tin stocks in LME warehouses stand at around 25,000 tonnes -- about 25 days global consumption. The tin market is expected to see a surplus of 5,000 tonnes this year. COMMODITYPOLL01
However, one source said the original long dominant position holder might have scaled back the size of his holding, but that others may have taken up that slack.
"The tin market is a complete nonsense at the moment, prices do not reflect what is going on in the real world," one senior tin market source said. "There is no shortage of tin ... the exchange needs to impose position limits."
"Trade customers are extremely unhappy. But there's nothing illegal going on so they can't actually do anything about it," a senior trader on the LME floor said. "It's all within the rules but there are loopholes being created."
The persistence of this backwardation despite ample supplies of physical tin could be one reason why, according to one source, the LME's Special Committee may be looking into the dominant holding.
The Special Committee meets quarterly and includes the LME's head of regulation and compliance Diarmuid O'Hegarty.
The LME would not say whether the committee has met recently, is meeting or is due to meet some time soon.
If the Special Committee suspects improper trading, which is affecting or is likely to affect the market, it can after consultation with the clearing house take action to rectify the situation and direct members to close or reduce positions.
Three-month LME tin MSN3, at above $14,000 a tonne, is up more than 40 percent since the start of the year.
Around 360,000 tonnes per year of tin is used globally, the bulk of which is produced by China followed by Indonesia.
The London Metal Exchange would not comment on any aspect of this story. (Reporting by Pratima Desai; editing by Camila Reed)
