Nadal back, women cash in at revamped China Open
2009-10-01 02:40:00.0
Nadal back, women cash in at revamped China Open | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Nadal back, women cash in at revamped China Open
Wed, Sep 30 2009
Fri, Sep 25 2009
Fri, Sep 25 2009
Tue, Sep 15 2009
Tue, Sep 15 2009
Rafael Nadal of Spain hits a return to Juan Martin Del Potro of Argentina during their men's singles semi-finals match at the U.S. Open tennis championship in New York, September 13, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Eduardo Munoz
Thu  EDT
However, he will have to vie for attention with most of the world's best 47 women in one of the WTA's four new mandatory "crown jewel" tournaments.
"The China Open has got the distinction of having a women's event that has got $4.5 million in prize money and a men's event that is less than half of that," WTA President David Shoemaker told Reuters recently.
"In the long history of tennis there have been too many events where the opposite was true, so we're pretty proud of that."
Nadal, who has not played since a U.S. Open semi-final defeat to eventual champion Juan Martin Del Potro last month, won the China Open in 2005 and will have fond memories of the new venue, the Olympic tennis center where he clinched gold last year.
World number four Novak Djokovic and number six Andy Roddick will be among those out to stop the Spaniard claiming his sixth title of the year, while Beijing will be one of the last stops on the tour for retiring 2004 China Open champion Marat Safin.
Serena and her sister Venus won Olympic doubles gold on their last trip to Beijing and Russia's Elena Dementieva, who won the women's singles title, will be another welcoming a return to the venue.
Belgian comeback queen Kim Clijsters has decided to remain at home after last month's emotional U.S. Open triumph but her compatriot Yanina Wickmayer will play on a wild card.
Wickmayer gets her reward for her surprise run to the semi-finals at Flushing Meadows but the other teenage sensation at the U.S. Open, American Melanie Oudin, will have to get through qualifying.
Local hopes of success will be entirely focused on the women's draw where the in-form Li Na and former China Open semi-finalists Zheng Jie and Peng Shuai will all be looking to give the home crowds something cheer about.
Matches in the main draw of the women's event start on Saturday while the ATP event gets going on Monday.
