FTSE gains 0.3 percent, supported by energy stocks
2009-10-01 04:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index rose early on Thursday, with gains from energy stocks countering weakness from banks, miners and interdealer broker ICAP (
At 0811 GMT, the FTSE 100
was up 14.24 points, or 0.3 percent, at 5,148.14, having closed down 0.5 percent on Wednesday -- the last session of a strong quarter, with the index seeing its best quarterly performance since its 1984 launch.
A powerful rally over the course of the summer saw blue chips rise 20.8 percent in the three months to September, although the index is still 5 percent below its level just over a year ago before the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
"My sentiment is that we came through September in fairly decent shape and I think we're going to press on and it won't be too bad; I think it'll be quite a good fourth quarter," said Stephen Pope, chief global market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald.
Energy stocks added the most points to the index, rebounding after slipping on Wednesday, with crude prices CLc1 hovering over $70.
), BP (
It was a mixed picture among the miners, against a background of firmer metals prices, positive data from China -- the biggest consumer of commodities -- and upbeat broker comment.
) was among the top blue-chip risers, up 6.3 percent, buoyed by a Morgan Stanley upgrade to "overweight" from "equal-weight", and helped too as Deutsche Bank hiked its target price on the stock.
), Antofagasta (
), Kazakhmys (
) and Xstrata XTA.L added 0.3 to 1.9 percent, though Lonmin (
China's manufacturing sector continued to gather strength in September as a pick-up in new orders boosted both output and jobs, a survey showed on Thursday. [ID:nPEK178107]
), which the broker upgraded to "neutral", and Liberty International LII.L, which it also lifted to "neutral", were among the biggest blue-chip risers, taking on 2 percent and 1.4 percent, respectively.
), however, was among the heaviest FTSE 100 fallers, shedding 2.9 percent, after Goldman cut its rating on the stock to "sell" -- to reflect the impact of incorporating UK rival Brixton.
Life insurers extended Wednesday's rally, with the sector boosted by M&A speculation, and as Panmure Gordon raised target prices, with Legal & General (
) up 4.9 percent, while Aviva (
Among other financials, banks fell with heavyweight HSBC (
) off 0.8 percent, Royal Bank of Scotland (
), down 0.5 percent.
), the world's biggest interdealer broker, proved a drag on sentiment, dropping 2.6 percent, after it said first-half profit was set to fall, blaming high investment costs and lower levels of activity in its most lucrative business lines. [ID:nL1451980]
) was also on the back foot. British prosecutors are hopeful of an imminent conclusion to the long-running investigation into allegations of bribery and corruption by BAE Systems, Europe's biggest defence contractor.
