UPDATE 2-Trading Emissions posts loss, upbeat for Copenhagen
2009-10-01 05:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's Trading Emissions (
) on Thursday swung to a full-year pretax loss due to falling carbon prices, but said it was optimistic for the outcome of a key climate change summit in December.
The company, which specialises in renewable energy projects and emissions instruments, believes countries will offer more commitment to climate change efforts at the United Nations summit in Copenhagen, but that there will be very little detail on measures.
"It's inevitable that Copenhagen will disappoint, because everyone's decided it will," Trading Emission's investment adviser Simon Shaw told Reuters. "Because the American domestic legislation isn't there already, China and others can't sign on the dotted line."
The Copenhagen summit will discuss a replacement for the Kyoto Protocol, under which companies can invest in clean energy projects in developing countries and in return receive Certified Emissions Reduction Credits (CERs) from the United Nations (UN) that they can sell for profit.
This expires in 2012, however, causing uncertainty for companies such as Trading Emissions and Camco CAMIN.L.
Shaw said that whatever replaces Kyoto's Clean Development Mechanism will likely be less dominated by China, India and Brazil and could offer opportunities for projects in areas such as forestry.
"We'd expect to see Africa, South-East Asia, Latin America become larger components," Shaw said, highlighting Indonesia as a potential area for projects to combat deforestation.
For the year to June 30, Trading Emissions posted a pretax loss of 232 million pounds, compared with profit of 194 million pounds ($309 million) the previous year.
The drop in carbon prices, which have fallen to around 13 euros per tonne from 20 euros, meant its net asset value per share fell to 150 pence from 227 pence.
"We're expecting it to get back to its normal range of 15-25 euros then and we'd hope for the higher end of that range by 2012," he said.
"The pretax loss is above our expectation of 192 million pounds, but this simply reflects the use of a point carbon price used for year-end purposes," he wrote in a note.
Trading Emissions also announced a final dividend of 3 pence per share, adding to the 1.5 pence interim payout.
Its cash position stood at 150.25 million pounds as at Oct. 1, compared with 158.13 million at June 30.
Trading Emission's portfolio of risk-adjusted carbon credits stood at 53.2 million CERs as at Oct 1, of which 42.1 million is for delivery before 2012. (Editing by Rhys Jones and Jon Loades-Carter) ($1=.6273 Pound)
