TREASURIES-Prices rise with safety bid as stocks fall
2009-08-31 16:17:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Treasury debt prices rose on Monday, capping off the strongest month since March with help from safe-haven buying amid worldwide losses in equity markets.
U.S. stocks fell after a 6.7 percent drop in Shanghai's equities index sent shares tumbling around the globe. Investors worried the prospects for a recovery in the world economy would dim if China's economy were to stumble.
Gains in Treasuries were limited however after a three-week rally and with a key employment report set for Friday, which will highlight a load of data in coming days.
"The weak overseas (equities) market was a bit of a tailwind for Treasuries," said William Larkin, fixed income portfolio manager at Cabot Money Management in Salem, Massachusetts, adding "this is sort of listless trading because we are straddling some pretty heavy economic data coming down the pipeline."
The benchmark 10-year Treasury note US10YT=RR traded 12/32 higher in price for a yield of 3.40 percent, down from 3.45 percent late Friday.
The benchmark yield in August had its biggest monthly fall since March, shedding about eight basis points. August also was the second straight month of higher prices, which has not happened since November and December of 2008.
"It's month end and there was a bit of a bid in the market, and equities were weak which is another reason to be long Treasuries," said Bulent Baygun, head of U.S. interest rate strategy at BNP Paribas in New York.
Trade volume, normally thin this time of year, were further constrained with London out for the summer bank holiday.
Business activity in the U.S. Midwest, as measured by the Institute for Supply Management-Chicago's business barometer, picked up at a faster pace than expected, and was on the cusp of expansion.
It also showed a spike in prices paid, which could spur inflation worries once a recovery gets under way.
Longer dated bonds, which are most sensitive to inflation, underperformed. The 30-year Treasury bond US30YT=RR rose 12/32 to yield 4.18 percent from 4.20 percent late Friday.
A survey in the heavily industrialized Milwaukee region was also much stronger in August, while business activity in New York City expanded in August for the first time in three months, thanks to increased purchases and a slowdown in layoffs.
This week's economic indicators will culminate in Friday's employment report for August.
Economists expected it to show a further slowing in the labor market's rate of deterioration, forecasting a drop of 225,000 in payrolls, based on the median in a Reuters poll, versus July's fall of 247,000.
The market is also awaiting an announcement Thursday of next week's bond auctions.
Other releases include the Institute for Supply Management's manufacturing report Tuesday and Wednesday's release of the minutes of the Aug. 11-12 Federal Reserve policy meeting.
Even if the data disappoint, bonds could face headwinds unless the reports are weak enough to convince investors that the economy will slip into a double-dip downturn.
"We're at relatively expensive levels," said Frank Hsu, director of global fixed income at Fimat in New York.
Two-year Treasury debt prices US2YT=RR gained 3/32 in price to yield 0.98 percent from 1.02 percent late Friday, while five-year notes US5YT=RR rose 8/32 to yield 2.40 percent from 2.45 percent. (Additional reporting by Burton Frierson; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
