Seoul shares rise helped by banks; LCD issues down
2009-08-31 22:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Seoul shares traded firmer on Tuesday as automakers and banks including Shinhan Financial Group (
) outperformed, but falls in LG Display (
) on Sharp Corp's (
As of 0145 GMT, the Korea Composite Stock Price Index
(KOSPI) was up 0.78 percent at 1,604.26 points.
"Shares are down, but faring better-than-expected given the kind of losses Chinese markets saw yesterday," said Lawrence Kim, a market analyst at Woori Investment & Securities.
Liquid crystal display (LCD) related issues including LG Display declined after news Japan's Sharp Corp will set up a venture with China Electronics Corp to make LCD TV panels from 8th-generation glass substrates in Nanjing to meet growing demand in China. [ID:nT324063]
"LG Display had in recent sessions reaped pretty fat gains following its own China venture news, and now that its rivals are making similar moves, some investors are opting to lock in profits," said John So, an analyst at Shinhan Investment Corporation.
He added that company fundamentals, however, remained "solid as China demand will be more than enough to absorb the supply."
) underperformed, trading flat.
Meanwhile, shares in Korea Beral (
F-M International Ltd, a subsidiary of U.S.-based Federal-Mogul Corp (
), told South Korean regulators in a disclosure on Monday that it had raised its stake in Korea Beral to 29.20 percent as of Aug. 25 from 28.69 percent.
Banks also rose, with shares in Shinhan Financial Group gaining 1.46 percent after HSBC upgraded its rating on the company to "overweight" from "underweight" and also more than doubled its target price on the group's shares to 52,500 won from the previous 25,400 won.
"With several macro data points painting a better-than-expected picture for the Korean economy, market interest rates bottomed out in the beginning of August and have started to rise," HSBC said in a report on Tuesday.
HSBC also boosted its 2009 net profit forecast for Shinhan by 66 percent, and increased its 2010 net profit estimates by 43 percent.
Automakers advanced, adding further support to markets, with Hyundai Motor (
But sharp falls in crude prices CLc1 led South Korea's key energy issues lower, sending SK Energy (
), the holding firm of GS Caltex, South Korea's No.2 crude refiner, down 0.61 percent.
(Reporting by Jungyoun Park; Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
