TREASURIES-Bonds up slightly on weak stocks
2009-08-31 00:03:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. government bonds edged higher in thin trade on Monday, helped by global equity losses though price moves were held in check as investors awaited a huge slate of data this week.
A 6.7 percent fall in Shanghai's equities index sent stocks tumbling around the globe as investors worried the prospects for a recovery in the world economy would dim if China's economy were to stumble. See [.N] and [.HK].
This increased demand overnight for safe-haven Treasuries, but the market struggled to stay in positive territory after a three-week rally and with a key employment report on Friday, which will highlight a load of data in coming days.
"After seeing some pretty decent buying overnight and last week, it is starting to peter out," said Kim Rupert, managing director of global fixed income analysis at Action Economics LLC in San Francisco.
"The market is still trying to gauge where the economy is. Are we in a recovery? Will it be sustained? There are a lot of questions for the market."
It was last up 5/32 in price, yielding 3.43 percent versus Friday's close of 3.45 percent.
Earlier price gains, however, pushed yields down to 3.40 percent, their lowest since Aug. 21.
Volumes, normally thin this time of year, were further constrained with London out for the summer bank holiday.
The Institute for Supply Management-Chicago's business barometer also showed a spike in prices paid, which could spur inflation worries once a recovery gets under way.
Longer dated bonds, which are most sensitive to inflation, underperformed. The 30-year Treasury bond US30YT=RR fell 13/32, yielding 4.23 percent versus 4.20 percent at Friday's close.
A survey in the heavily industrialized Milwaukee region was also much stronger in August, while business activity in New York City expanded in August for the first time in three months, thanks to increased purchases and a slowdown in layoffs.
This week's economic indicators will culminate in Friday's employment report for August.
Economists expected it to show a further slowing in the labor market's rate of deterioration, forecasting a drop of 225,000 in payrolls, based on the median in a Reuters poll, versus July's fall of 247,000.
The market is also awaiting an announcement on Thursday of next week's bond auctions.
Other releases include the Institute for Supply Management's manufacturing report on Tuesday and Wednesday's release of the minutes of the Aug. 11-12 Federal Reserve policy meeting.
Even if the data disappoint, bonds could face headwinds unless the reports are weak enough to convince investors that the economy will slip into a double-dip downturn.
"We're at relatively expensive levels," said Frank Hsu, director of global fixed income at Fimat in New York. (Reporting by Burton Frierson; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
