Brazil stocks tumble on Petrobras plan; real down
2009-08-31 16:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil stocks posted their biggest tumble in two weeks on Monday, led by Petrobras (
, which tracks the 64 most liquid stocks in the Brazilian market, closed 2.1 percent lower on Monday at 56,488.98, its lowest level since Aug. 19.
The government unveiled four bills to overhaul the oil legislation in which it would assign fields directly to Petrobras without holding bids and veto operational decisions of Petrobras' joint ventures with private companies.
"The perception is there are vast amounts of money involved, a lot of politicians making plans to make use of a huge chunk of wealth from an overly powerful and key industry in the country, so this is risk simmering," said Dany Rappaport, who manages 110 million reais ($59 million) for hedge fund InvestPort in Sao Paulo.
Petrobras' nonvoting stock posted its biggest tumble since June 3, shedding 3.6 percent to 31.38 reais.
Adding to Monday's losses, a sharp fall in Chinese equities set the tone for weaker demand for risky assets, such as Brazil's, said Nick Chamie, head of emerging markets research for RBC Capital Markets.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, fell 2.1 percent to 32.90 reais, reflecting the company's increased reliance on China, traders said.
Steelmakers fell, led by Gerdau's (
) 3 percent fall to 22.06 reais, highlighting worries over the sustainability of the global recovery.
), Brazil's second-largest bank, fell 0.6 percent.
Still, the index gained 3.2 percent in August, its second straight month of gains.
dived 6.7 percent on Monday, taking its total loss in August to 22 percent. Oil CLc1 plummeted 3.8 percent and the Reuters-Jefferies CRB index .CRB, a commodities benchmark that tracks 19 futures markets, fell 1.6 percent.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY slumped on Monday for a sixth day as flagging optimism over China and falling commodities led investors to take refuge in the U.S. dollar.
The real fell 0.5 percent to 1.889 reais to the dollar, its lowest since July 29. The real has fallen 2.4 percent since Aug. 21.
Foreign investors helped to push the real lower as more than $1 billion in currency options contracts settled in the BM&F derivatives exchange. The lower the currency, the bigger the profit investors can make.
"You have two clear drivers acting behind the rise in the dollar," said Reynaldo Bonfim, a partner with Pioneer Corretora de Cambio, one of Brazil's largest currency brokers.
The yield on the Jan. 2011 DIJF1 fell 3 basis points to 9.73 percent from Friday. (Additional reporting by Paula Laier and Luciana Lopez; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
