Swiss bank discretion has continued allure -HSBC
2009-08-31 10:00:00.0
(Reuters) - The world's wealthiest people are now "actively invested" and moving back into emerging markets on signs of global recovery, the head of HSBC's (
Alexandre Zeller, chief executive of HSBC Private Bank (Suisse), said improving market conditions had ratcheted up risk appetite among high-end clients who had moved into cash after the late-2008 financial meltdown.
But he said there was concern that persistently low interest rates and government stimulus measures could lead to inflation or even hyper-inflation in some markets, creating a new set of challenges for investors.
The HSBC unit's client assets under management rose to 186 billion Swiss francs ($176 billion) in the first six months of this year, up from 178 billion at the end of 2008, with the biggest gains in Asia and Latin America.
Zeller told journalists many entrepreneurs and wealthy families around the world continued to be interested in having their portfolios in Switzerland, whose private bankers' "notion of discretion" had persistent allure.
) UBS.B and U.S. authorities that dealt a blow to Switzerland's tax haven status, Zeller said foreign banks still reap many benefits in the eyes of clients from operating in the neutral, non-European Union country. [ID:nLJ85214]
While some banks have closed their doors to new U.S. clients as a result of the UBS case, or raised disclosure requirements for U.S. clients, Zeller said HSBC's Swiss operation was already focused mainly on the rest of the world. [ID:nLK440710]
"We are not a bank that is focused on the United States. We are marginally on this market," he said.
Any future consolidation in Swiss private banking is unlikely to change its international landscape, he said.
Zeller said HSBC Private Bank (Suisse) could be interested in acquisitions -- on the buying side, not as a takeover target.
"We want a certain growth but we don't want growth at any price," he said, stressing the need for both a reasonable price and an aligned strategy with any potential target. He did not offer details of potentially attractive buys.
Agnes Arlandis, the HSBC unit's head of emerging markets, said Asia was set to lead the global rebound and would also benefit from an improving U.S. outlook. Mexico was also likely to be a "prime winner" of U.S. economic recovery, with strength also expected in China and India, according to the HSBC expert.
"We believe the global recovery is now becoming a reality as some major economies have technically exited their recession," Arlandis said, also raising prospects of long-term inflation clouds but suggesting such upward price pressures were "unlikely to be a substantive concern in the next 12 months." (Editing by Dan Lalor) ($1 = 1.058 Swiss francs)
