PetroChina takes C$1.9 billion stake in Canada oil sands
2009-08-31 17:44:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Aug 26 2009
Wed, Aug 19 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
The company logo of PetroChina is displayed at a news conference in Hong Kong March 25, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
CALGARY, Alberta
Mon  EDT
CALGARY, Alberta
) is set to pay C$1.9 billion ($1.7 billion) for a 60 percent stake in two planned Canadian oil sands projects, China's biggest investment yet in one of the world's largest untapped oil regions.
PetroChina, the world's most valuable oil company, has signed an initial agreement to take majority control of the proposed MacKay River and Dover oil sands projects owned by Canada's closely held Athabasca Oil Sands Corp (AOSC), properties that could eventually produce as much as 500,000 barrels per day, the Canadian company said on Monday.
"They obviously see a lot of upside," Sveinung Svarte. ASOC's chief executive, said in an interview.
PetroChina's international arm will also provide some financing for AOSC, which controls about 1.3 million acres of oil sands properties in the Canadian province of Alberta.
"PetroChina is probably looking to lock in a sizable position in the oil sands," said Chris Feltin, an analyst at Tristone Capital. "But it's going to take a long time to develop Athabasca's projects."
The oil sands in northern Alberta have the largest crude reserves outside the Middle East. But while China's state-controlled oil companies have been aggressively acquiring conventional oil reserves around the world to power a growing economy, they have so far made only very small investments in the oil sands.
The recent dearth of investment may help smooth approvals for the deal from the Canadian government, which has recently been making an effort to improve relations with China.
"The Canadian government is looking for investment and injections of capital," said William Lacey, an analyst at FirstEnergy Capital. "I don't see why this wouldn't be viewed as a positive."
"We've been in contact with the Canadian government and the Alberta government to make sure they were aware this transaction was coming," Bill Gallacher, AOSC's chairman, said on a conference call. "We are going to obviously follow the required regulatory approvals pathway that's needed in order to make sure this transaction moves forward."
Athabasca and PetroChina plan to exploit the properties, which contain an estimated 5 billion barrels, using thermal techniques, in which the tarry-bitumen reserves are heated so they flow to the surface.
Athabasca Oil Sands has already filed for regulatory approval in Alberta to build two pilot projects to test production at the properties and expects to seek further approval for a 35,000 barrel per day project at the MacKay River site, which could be operating within five years.
Future expansions could take output from the two sites to between 300,000 and 500,000 barrels per day, Gallacher said, though no schedule for those additional phases has been set.
Svarte said the company would likely ship its initial output to U.S. refiners, but would consider other export routes if they open up.
PetroChina was an early backer of Enbridge Inc's (
) Northern Gateway pipeline, in 2005 signing a memorandum to consider taking up to half the space on what was then seen as a 400,000 bpd pipeline to take oil sands crude to an export port on Canada's West Coast.
PetroChina has never moved to cement that agreement, though Jennifer Varey, a spokeswoman for Enbridge, said the memorandum of understanding the two companies signed remains in effect.
Enbridge plans to apply for a permit to build the line later this year. If approved the now 525,000 bpd line could offer PetroChina a way to move its share of oil sands production to its home market.
The deal is PetroChina's second this year for a Canadian company. It's trying to buy Verenex Energy Inc VNX.TO so it can get the Canadian company's Libyan oil properties, but the North African country's government has said it would like to acquire Verenex itself and has so far refused to approve the acquisition.
PetroChina's American Depository Receipts fell $3.44 to $109.75 on Monday on the New York Stock Exchange.
