Lula's oil plan may bite Petrobras shareholders
2009-08-31 13:45:00.0
Lula's oil plan may bite Petrobras shareholders | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Lula's oil plan may bite Petrobras shareholders
Mon, Aug 31 2009
Mon, Aug 31 2009
Mon, Aug 31 2009
Mon, Aug 31 2009
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Mon  EDT
) by Brazil's proposed oil reform is punishing its shares as investors fret over exploration risks in new offshore oil fields and worry that its resources may become overstretched.
The proposal sent to Congress on Monday by President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva makes state-run Petrobras the sole operator of new subsalt fields, ensuring it broad access to the largest oil discovery in the Americas in three decades.
The likelihood of prolonged squabbling in Congress in the coming months over Lula's proposal is another concern, as is the risk of share dilution from the government's plan to pump capital into Petrobras to boost state control.
Growing nationalism and political pressure could dent profits and distract Petrobras' management, said Alexandre Povoa, who oversees $800 million in assets for Rio de Janeiro-based Modal Asset Management.
"Markets worry Petrobras can become a state publicity arm with a loose focus and sensitive to serious political noise," he said.
Preferred shares of Petrobras, the company's most-heavily traded class of stock, slid for the sixth-straight session on Monday, shedding 5.13 percent to 30.88 reais, their lowest level since July 16.
The company's depositary receipt traded in New York also dropped for a sixth session, down 5.6 percent to $39.14.
Petrobras said on Monday that the government's plan to raise its capital would be limited to $50 billion.
A capitalization of such size would trim the value of minority shareholders by an estimated 24 percent, according to Brazilian brokerage house Itau Securities. Petrobras, which was partly privatized in the 1990s, is currently 55 percent controlled by the government.
"The strange thing is to capitalize Petrobras with reserves that have yet to be proved," said Adriano Pires, president of the Brazilian Infrastructure Center, an industry group.
OVERSTRETCHED?
Under the rules announced Monday, Petrobras will have a minimum stake of 30 percent in new subsalt projects. But the proposed creation of a production-sharing system in which the government will own part of the oil is not necessarily to Petrobras' advantage, analysts said.
Under the existing concession system, Petrobras more than doubled output to 2.4 million barrels in the 10 years ended in January 2009, making it a darling of investors worldwide, including hedge fund tycoon George Soros.
"One lingering concern is that the subsalt plans might end up competing with the existing concessions that were profitable and favorable for the company," said Paula Kovarsky, an equity research vice president with Itau Securities.
Government officials have estimated there is a minimum of 50 billion barrels in the subsalt fields, which, if tapped, would make Brazil the world's fourth-largest producer after Saudi Arabia, Russia and the United States.
But tapping the oil, which lies about 160 miles off the southern coast under 5 miles of water, rock and salt, is a huge challenge and some say the government has played down the exploration risks.
"Will all these things be enough to make up for the fact of being a sole operator for the subsalt?" she said. "We'll see."
Petrobras shares trade at about 11 times the company's reported earnings during the past 12 months, according to Thomson Reuters data, compared with 11.5 times for Exxon Mobil (
), the world's largest oil company, 13.9 times for BP (
), and 14 times for Cnooc (
), China's biggest offshore oil producer.
"Concern over the political and operational challenges should punish the stock further," said Sao Paulo-based fund manager Roseli Machado, who manages 5 billion reais ($2.7 billion) in assets for Fator Administradora de Recursos.
The oil reform is likely to face stiff opposition in Congress, particularly among legislators whose districts currently receive royalties from Brazil's 2.1 million barrels per day of oil production. They stand to lose under Lula's plan to distribute oil revenues more broadly in Brazil to combat poverty and boost the country's development.
(Additional reporting by Brian Ellsworth and Denise Luna in Brasilia; Editing by Stuart Grudgings and Gunna Dickson)
