Europe shares close lower; up 4.7 percent in August
2009-08-31 00:56:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares closed lower on Monday, dragged down by falls in China and the United States, where financials slipped after a strong run.
index of top European shares fell 0.7 percent to close at 972.02 points, after hitting a 10-month high on Friday. The London market was closed for a holiday and will resume trading on Tuesday.
The index rose 4.7 percent in August and is up more than 50 percent from its lifetime low on March 9, as investors have become more confident on the prospects of economic recovery.
"There's been a pull-back in Europe after a good performance last week. Commodity prices are on the retreat following the performance of Asian markets this morning," said Gerhard Schwarz, head of global equity strategy at UniCredit, in Munich. "With the UK markets closed, we are a bit directionless."
The market would get direction from the European Central Bank's statement on Thursday and from U.S. labour data due Friday, he said.
Financials fell, notably in Ireland, hit by worries the government will not pay lenders the full price for commercial property loans when they are transferred over to a state-run "bad bank". [ID:nLR29290]
), Banco Santander (
), Deutsche Bank (
), Intesa Sanpaolo (
), Societe Generale (
Oil prices CLc1 tumbled 4 percent to below $70 a barrel as a fall in China's key stock index stoked worries about the country's economy. Royal Dutch Shell (
), Total (
Automakers .SXAP were also weaker in Europe, down 1.4 percent, and Porsche (
About 370,000 employees of Volkswagen and Porsche plan to take a stake of up to 5 percent in the automotive group, VW's labour chief Bernd Osterloh told German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung in an interview. [ID:nLT732067]
Back in Europe, euro zone consumer prices fell for the third month running year-on-year in August but by less than the record drop in July, and economists expect them to start growing again in coming months.
Among other individual movers in Europe, Deutsche Post (
) fell 1.8 percent, after Juergen Gerdes, the head of the company's mail unit, said it needed to cut costs to avoid losses over the long run.
) rose 0.5 percent, ahead of results on Tuesday and buoyed by an upgrade to 'buy' from 'add' from Oddo.
Across Europe, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC-40
As European bourses were closing, the Dow Jones
, S&P 500
were down 0.9-1.3 percent. (Additional reporting by Dominic Lau; Editing by Dan Lalor)
