Brazil's real falls for sixth day on risk aversion
2009-08-31 10:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's currency slumped on Monday for a sixth day, hitting its lowest in a month, as a tumble in Chinese stocks and commodities led investors to take refuge in the U.S. dollar.
The real BRBY fell 0.4 percent to 1.887 reais to the dollar, its lowest since July 29. The real has slid 2.4 percent since August 21, reflecting worries over China's flagging stock markets and doubts about the intensity of the global recovery.
Fueling declines, the expiration of more than $1 billion in currency options contracts settle in the BM&F derivatives exchange led foreign investors to push the real lower. The lower the currency, the bigger the profit investors can make.
"You have two clear drivers acting behind the rise in the dollar," said Reynaldo Bonfim, a partner with Pioneer Corretora de Cambio, one of Brazil's largest currency brokers.
Last week's currency decline should alleviate the financial strain suffered by exporters, who rely on a weaker real to make profits, this year. It might also mitigate pressure on the government to ease this year's 24 percent gain in the real.
Daily newspaper Valor Economico reported on Monday, citing people it didn't name, that the central bank may relax rules on the use of currency derivatives and allow banks to keep more of their dollars abroad to arrest the rally in the real. The central bank declined to comment on the Valor report.
, which tracks the 64 more liquid stocks in the Brazilian market, opened lower on Monday, shedding 1.8 percent to 56,668.48, its lowest level since August 19.
The sharp fall in Chinese equities set the tone for weaker demand for risky assets like Brazil's, said Nick Chamie, head of emerging markets research for RBC Capital Markets.
dived 6.7 percent on Monday, taking the total loss in August to 22 percent. Oil CLc1 plummeted 3.3 percent and the Reuters-Jefferies CRB index, .CRB, a commodities benchmark that tracks 19 futures markets, fell 0.9 percent.
) fell 2.9 percent to 31.86 reais, the lowest price since August 12. A bill to overhaul Brazilian oil laws is slated for presentation to Congress on Monday.
The bill could have wide-ranging repercussions in Brazil, where recently discovered massive offshore oil reserves have the potential to bring the country great wealth, according to analysts including Paula Kovarsky of Itau Securities.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, fell 2.4 percent to 32.81 reais, reflecting the company's increased reliance on China, traders said.
The reading, better than expected by analysts consulted by Reuters, cemented optimism that the economy is on the path to recovery, traders said. The yield on the Jan. 2011 DIJF1 rose 2 basis points to 9.78 percent from Friday. (Reporting by Guillermo Parra-Bernal, Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
