UPDATE 5-Huntsman to bid $415 million for Tronox assets
2009-08-31 14:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Chemicals maker Huntsman Corp (
On the table are titanium dioxide facilities in the Netherlands and the United States, a 50 percent joint venture interest in a titanium dioxide facility in Australia, and electrolytic production facilities.
Huntsman shares were up 2.5 percent, but some analysts where skeptical about the deal, due in part to excess capacity in the titanium oxide business and Huntsman's already burdened balance sheet.
Huntsman said it signed a "stalking horse" agreement, making its offer the first at a bankruptcy auction and creating a base bid price for the assets.
The offer could be trumped, and requires approval by the bankruptcy court. It was not immediately clear who else might want the assets, which have been on the market for months. Tronox filed for Chapter 11 protection last January.
The deal, expected to close in early 2010, would make Huntsman the world's second-largest producer -- behind DuPont Co (
) -- of titanium dioxide, a pigment used in products such as tattoo inks, food dyes and sunscreen.
"It would have been better for all parties involved for these assets to just go away or just shuttered, rather than be bought," Morningstar analyst Joung Park told Reuters.
The acquisition would add to operating earnings and cash flow immediately, it said.
"I believe this will be one of the best acquisitions we've ever done," Chief Executive Peter Huntsman told Reuters.
While he acknowledged there is excess titanium dioxide capacity in the market, he said the assets he is seeking are "among the most competitive" in the world.
Tronox likely would have had better performance as a stand-alone titanium dioxide company if it did not have environmental liability problems, Huntsman said.
Huntsman would not be responsible for the environmental litigation, and is not bidding for Tronox facilities in Savannah, Georgia.
Greenwich Consultants analyst Michael Judd said Huntsman appeared to be "buying low" with this bid. But he said he worried that if the economy hasn't fully bottomed, a deal could further strain Huntsman's already debt-laden balance sheet.
Also, he said, buying chemical assets in any market other than China, which is a large growth area for the entire industry, does not appear to be the best move.
Woodlands, Texas-based Huntsman tried to sell itself to Hexion Specialty Chemicals last year, a deal that ultimately collapsed because of the weak chemicals market.
Going on the offensive, Huntsman then sued Hexion and two banks that were set to fund the deal -- Credit Suisse (
"I know they have a lot of cash lying around," Morningstar's Park said. "But I think they could have done better and purchased a more attractive asset."
Shares of Huntsman were up 21 cents to $8.56 in afternoon New York Stock Exchange trading. (Reporting by Ernest Scheyder in New York and Ajay Kamalakaran in Bangalore; editing by Lisa Von Ahn, Steve Orlofsky and John Wallace)
