Mexico peso hits 6-week low on China, fiscal woes
2009-08-31 14:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico's peso slipped to a six-week low on Monday as a sell-off in Chinese stocks unnerved global investors and concerns mounted that Mexico will fail to pass tax reforms needed to stave off a ratings downgrade.
MEX01 lost 0.7 percent to 13.343 per dollar, hitting its weakest since July 21.
gave up 1.62 percent to 28,136, down from a more than one-year high reached on Friday.
The Shanghai market dove 6.7 percent to a three-month low, spurring losses around the globe as investors worried about whether major economies can pull convincingly out of recession and validate this year's rally in riskier assets.
"The peso is obviously suffering from what is going on externally, but there is a renewed focus on the potential for any kind of fiscal reform, which seems rather unlikely," said Clyde Wardle, a currency strategist at HSBC in New York.
Mexico's recently elected lower-house of Congress begins its session this week, and investors are nervous that lawmakers' plans to shore up public finances will fail to satisfy Wall Street ratings agencies, which are poised to downgrade Mexico's debt in the coming months.
Analysts are skeptical the divided Congress will make big strides to wean public finances off a dependence on the country's declining oil production.
Concerns about Mexico's fiscal outlook helped knock nearly 4 percent off the peso since Aug. 21. The currency has also been hurt by speculation the central bank will soon halt daily dollar sales that have boosted the peso.
The government's benchmark 10-year peso bond MX10YT=RR bid up 4 basis points to yield 8.19 percent.
"Higher debt issuance is likely the only certainty in 2010," Bank of America-Merrill Lynch analyst Edgar Camargo said in a report on Monday.
In stock trading, shares in miner Grupo Mexico (
) lost 2.21 percent to 19.95 pesos, cutting into a 11 percent run-up seen last week on bets the company could win control of bankrupt copper miner Asarco LLC. A ruling on Asarco's bankruptcy case is expected on Monday. [ID:nN31437449]
), Latin America's top wireless operator, fell 2.26 percent to 30.22 pesos.
Good results in a manufacturing sentiment survey due on Tuesday could help support markets as Mexico is counts on a rebound in the United States, its top trading partner, to drive the local recovery, analysts said,.
"We are seeing profit taking at the end of the month, but with good data tomorrow we could be bouncing right back," said Juan Jose Resendiz, head of analysis at Arka brokerage in Mexico City.
(Reporting by Michael O'Boyle; Editing by Andrew Hay)
