UPDATE 3-Bidvest sees autos upturn; UK weakness hits profits
2009-08-31 07:16:00.0
(Reuters) - South African industrial conglomerate Bidvest Group Ltd (
) said full year profit fell, impacted by weakness in the UK, as well as a contracting domestic auto market it said should pick up in the coming year.
The company, one of South Africa's largest by revenue and whose activities also cover food distribution and freight services, said vehicle sales dipped at home as banks remained conservative in granting credit.
"Until such time banks are prepared to finance (more freely), the vehicle industry (will) continue to be difficult," Brian Joffe, Bidvest's chief executive officer, said in a phone interview.
), which competes with Bidvest in the auto dealership market, also blamed low risk appetite from banks as the South African auto market remained sluggish despite 5 percentage points of rate cuts since last December.
New vehicle sales in the country fell 25.9 percent year-on-year in July, sapped by weak domestic demand and extending a two-year decline.
Joffe said Bidvest was looking to expand further in China, where it operates a meat and seafoods producer, Angliss China.
The group took 118.3 million rand ($15.14 million) in closure costs, mostly incurred in the UK.
"The tough decisions taken by the UK businesses were necessary and we are optimistic the rationalisation programme undertaken will yield improved results," Joffe said.
Shares in the company, which cut its final dividend by 23.2 percent to 190 cents per share, fell 1.61 percent to 109.81 rand by 1015 GMT, in line with the broader market.
"I think the company looks well positioned going forward ... they suffered a lot in the European and UK market. The indication is that prospects look more positive there," said Abri du Plessis, a chief investment officer at Gryphon Asset Management.
The firm, which makes about a quarter of its sales in Europe, said the UK economy appeared to have stabilised but the Benelux region was expected to continue to slow.
During the past year Bidvest acquired 50 percent of a sports marketing company, rebranded as Bidsport, which is eyeing opportunities for the 2010 World Cup to be held in South Africa.
Underperforming areas included its UK-based 3663 First for Foodservice unit, which has struggled as a recession forced many of the restaurants and pubs it supplies out of business.
Bidvest said it planned to complete the 250 million euro acquisition of East European food distribution businesses -- the Czech Republic's Nowaco and Poland's Farutex -- in early October.
Bidvest said its balance sheet remained strong. While it viewed conserving cash as a priority, it had the capacity for further strategic acquisitions should opportunities arise.
(Additional reporting by Gugulakhe Lourie; editing by John Stonestreet)
