FOREX-Yen hits 7-wk peak on Japan vote, China stocks
2009-08-31 01:46:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen hit a seven-week peak against the dollar on Monday as short-term players chased it higher following a thumping win for the opposition Democratic Party in Japan's election, breaking chart supports for the greenback.
The yen edged up after the landslide election victory on Sunday, and then gathered pace as automatic dollar sell orders were triggered close to 93.00 yen per dollar, traders said.
Falling Chinese shares also prompted investors to buy the yen and sell other currencies perceived as risky, including higher-yielding Australian dollar.
"There were a few stale longs liquidated this morning, with dollar/yen and euro/yen selling," said a senior trader at a European bank in Hong Kong.
"Shanghai being down 5 percent has muddied the picture as well as to whether it's a reaction to the election victory or risk aversion. It's probably a bit of a combination of both."
on trading platform EBS, its weakest level since mid-July. The euro also dropped 1 percent to 132.44 yen EURJPY=R and edged lower 0.1 percent to $1.4287
Traders said dollar/yen had broken chart levels around 93.00, triggering stop losses around 92.90, after Japanese exporters sold the dollar to repatriate overseas earnings at the month-end.
Japan's Nikkei share index
slid in volatile trade from an 11-month high hit after the Democrats' election win.
China's benchmark stock index extended losses and fell over 5 percent
The Democrats' leader, Yukio Hatoyama, has said he would not name a cabinet until the new parliament had voted him in as prime minister but he is expected to set up a transition team quickly. [ID:nT356076]
"The yen's firmness has been helped by hopes for a change, but how the DPJ-led government will work is unclear so the impact may not last too long," one senior trader for a Japanese bank said.
Democratic Party officials have said they would respect the independence of the Bank of Japan and are unlikely to intervene to weaken the yen, maintaining Japan's five-year absence from currency markets. [ID:nPOLJP]
"There will be ups and downs in the dollar/yen ranges but we have to wait and see the new cabinet, especially who will take the finance minister's position," said a trader from a European bank in Tokyo.
Traders and analysts in bond, stock and foreign exchange markets surveyed by Reuters on Monday said dollar/yen is likely to be at 95 yen at the end of March 2010 after trading at 92.50 yen at year-end. [nTKF106564]
Japan's industrial output rose in July, marking its fifth straight monthly increase, as exports recover on the back of stimulus spending around the world.[ID:nECONJP][JPIP1=ECI]
(Additional reporting by Wayne Cole and Anirban Nag, Charlotte Cooper and Kaori Kaneko in Tokyo; Editing by Joseph Radford)
