Beijing's derivative default stance rattles market
2009-08-31 02:04:00.0
Beijing's derivative default stance rattles market | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Beijing's derivative default stance rattles market
Thu, Aug 27 2009
Wed, Aug 26 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Mon  EDT
China's SOE regulator, the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC), has told six foreign banks that SOEs reserved the right to default on contracts, Caijing magazine quoted an unnamed industry source as saying in an article published on Saturday. [ID:nLT454907]
A SASAC media official said he was waiting for the "relevant department's" official comment before he can clarify to media.
The report, the hot topic among bankers from Shanghai to Singapore on Monday, deals another blow to investment banks hoping to sell more derivatives hedges in China, the world's fastest-expanding major economy and top commodities consumer.
"If we were among the banks receiving that letter, we would be very angry. But now the key is to find out more details on the letter: In whose name the letter was issued, government or corporate? And under what reasons for possible defaults?" said a Singapore-based marketing executive with a foreign bank.
"If it's in the name of the government, the impact will be very negative," said the executive, who did not want to the named due to the sensitive nature of the matter.
), China Eastern (
) -- among the Chinese SOEs mired in huge derivatives losses since late last year -- had issued letters to banks, said the Singapore-based bank source, who said he had heard of the letters and that they were all in the same format.
"It's a handful of companies who are being encouraged by regulators to re-negotiate. It's outrageous, but it's China so everyone is treading very carefully," said a second banking source.
SASAC took over the job of overseeing SOEs' derivatives trading from the securities regulator in February after several Chinese firms reported huge losses from derivatives.
For a factbox of China's derivatives debacles [ID:nPEK206094] (Reporting by Eadie Chen and Chen Aizhu in Beijing, Alfred Cang in Shanghai, George Chen and Michael Flaherty in Hong Kong; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
