European shares fall on banks, autos and China
2009-08-31 06:41:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares edged down by midday on Monday, led by financials and automakers after a tumble in Chinese stocks hurt sentiment as China's economy has been one of bright sparks for the global recovery.
By 1022 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
index of top European shares was down 0.5 percent at 973.06 points, after reaching a 10-month high on Friday. The London market was closed for a holiday and will resume trading on Tuesday. Financials fell, with Commerzbank (
), BNP Paribas (
), Natixis (
), Credit Suisse (
), Societe Generale (
), KBC (
), Aegon (
Oil prices CLc1 dropped more than 2 percent to just above $71 a barrel as a fall in China's key stock index stoked worries about the country's economy. Royal Dutch Shell (
), Total (
"The worry is that (China) will stop putting money into the system. That will hurt China," said Philippe Gijsels, senior equity strategist at Fortis Bank, in Brussels. "Of course, that has a very important impact on the world economy, or the sentiment at least."
The slide in Chinese shares, as well as a decisive result for the opposition in Japanese elections, boosted the yen, which hit a seven-week high against the dollar.
Meanwhile, euro zone consumer prices fell for the third month running year-on-year in August, data showed, but by less than the record drop in July and economists expect them to start growing again in coming months.
The pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 index has rallied 51 percent since hitting a floor in early March, and is up nearly 17 percent so far this year on hopes of a 'V'-shaped economic recovery.
However, Gijsels said the bounce was just a bear market rally, buoyed by governments' liquidity injections and consumer demand in the United States and Europe would remain weak.
"I do not see a strong pick-up in employment because quite a few layoffs are still in the pipeline. If you look at the previous troughs, the labour market only picked up six to nine months after the economy picked up," he said.
Automakers .SXAP were also weaker in Europe, down 1.3 percent, and Porsche (
About 370,000 employees of Volkswagen and Porsche plan to take a stake of up to 5 percent in the automotive group, VW's labour chief Bernd Osterloh told German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung in an interview. [ID:nLT732067]
Among other individual movers in Europe, Deutsche Post (
) fell 2.7 percent, after Juergen Gerdes, the head of the company's mail unit, said the unit needed to cut costs to avoid posting losses over the long run.
German Bayer BAYG.DE dropped 0.8 percent. On Sunday, unlisted competitor Boehringer Ingelheim released positive results about one of its drugs which rivals Bayer's Xarelto.
France's Vivendia (
) rose 1.5 percent, buoyed by an upgrade to 'buy' from 'add' from Oddo.
) advanced 0.9 percent after the builder reported second-quarter results that beat expectations, and confirmed its 2009 forecast.
Across Europe, Germany's DAX
was down 0.8 percent, while France's CAC 40
slipped 0.7 percent. (Additional reporting by Christoph Steitz; Editing by Dan Lalor)
