China may need return to loose credit: economist
2009-08-31 06:14:00.0
(Reuters) - China may have to return to a loose credit policy later this year, or risk having to implement further fiscal stimulus, if the rebound in the property sector loses steam, a leading economist said on Monday.
New lending dropped dramatically in July to 356 billion yuan ($52 billion) after a surge of more than 7 trillion yuan in the first half of the year, prompting concerns that credit could slow to a trickle for the rest of the year.
from their peak in early August, including a 6.7 percent plunge on Monday.
"We are very seriously concerned that the government could swing its stance from an excessively loose monetary policy to moderate tightening, although it is still too early to draw a conclusion," Gao Shanwen, chief economist at Essence Securities, told the Reuters China Investment Summit.
Gao said he expected lending to remain subdued in August and probably September as well, potentially contributing to further weakness in the stock market and sapping momentum from the property sector, which has been one of the key drivers of growth in the past several months. Government stimulus spending and the lending surge powered the economy to 7.9 percent annual growth in the second quarter after the global downturn slowed it to a crawl late last year.
If property investment and newly started building projects weaken by September or October, policy makers may have to reverse course and open the taps of credit again by encouraging banks to lend more, he said.
"(In that case) the most likely scenario will be the return to active expansion in credit," he said.
"If the implementation of a tight credit policy continues without correction, I'm afraid a second stimulus package will become necessary," he added.
Gao's expectation of a return to loose credit policy runs counter to that of many economists, who expect the central bank to start another modest tightening cycle sometime next year.
Gao expects the economy to accelerate in year-on-year terms, picking up to 9.2 percent in the third quarter and about 10.4 percent in the fourth quarter, but he said sequential momentum would slow from the second quarter.
He sees exports eventually picking up in response to stronger underlying demand, though he does not see that becoming evident for another few months.
In any case, Gao predicted that any policy moves would wait until the fourth quarter, probably sometime in November, as regulators await more data before taking steps.
"The rebound of the property investment in the future is key to the quality, extent and sustainability of economic recovery. We hold a positive view on the outlook, though there are some uncertainties," he said.
(Additional reporting by Langi Chiang and Aileen Wang; Editing by Ken Wills)
