PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - Aug 31
2009-08-30 23:34:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Sun  EDT
87 percent of defined benefit pension schemes are now closed to new members, according to figures released Sunday by the Association of Consulting Actuaries. The ACA's survey of more than 300 employers also showed that the number closing to future contributions from the rest of the workforce is increasing, and that 18 percent no longer take contributions from existing members. Most employers are considering a move to career-average pensions, with only a fifth planning to move employees to defined contribution schemes.
Financial Services Authority chairman Lord Turner has defended his proposals for a tax on financial transactions after his comments, made in a Prospect magazine interview last week, provoked a backlash from the City. Turner said that complaints from financial services groups that such a tax could damage the City were "ridiculous", insisting that his proposals were for a global tax. Turner also pointed out that introducing a tax would be outside the remit of the FSA.
Banks and lenders are likely to face calls for a reduction in mortgage rates after government bonds markets underwent a sharp rise. The rise in bonds means a fall in swap rates -- which are used to set fixed-rate mortgages -- and borrowing costs, but mortgage brokers have warned that lenders seeking to bolster profits may be reluctant to pass on the lower cost of borrowing. Demand for mortgages is currently outweighing supply, and financial institutions have voiced concerns that lower rates would attract too much business.
Conservative think-tank Policy Exchange said on Sunday that Britain is in need of a publicly-funded infrastructure bank to prioritise and fund energy, transport, communication and utility projects as well as schools and hospitals. One of the authors of the report, Oxford energy policy professor Dieter Helm, said that the 500 billion pounds investment required in infrastructure "would have been an inconceivably large amount even ahead of the credit crunch". The think-tank suggested that the bank could be created by combining the Public Works Loan Board with Partnerships UK.
House prices in England and Wales rose 0.1 percent in August, according to property intelligence group Hometrack, with the sector bolstered by a shortage of homes on the market. The increase was the first since July 2007 and came on the back of three months of unchanged prices. However, Hometrack director of research Richard Donell said: "The results of the survey show that far from a national housing market on the up, the headline figures are being skewed by price rises that are restricted to relatively small pockets of the market suffering from a lack of housing for sale."
) has shown that a net 2.5 billion pounds was ploughed into the market by private investors between October 2008 and the end of May. However, private investors sold a net 52 million pounds of their equity holdings during June and July due to fears about a possible market correction. The research also indicates that private investors have seen a sharp decline in income from dividends, with payments totalling 2.75 billion pounds during the first half of 2009, a 16 percent fall on the previous year.
C&J Clark has announced that Peter Bolliger will step down as chief executive when he retires next year following eight years in charge of the shoe retailer. The company reported pre-tax profits of 87 million pounds, a 16 percent improvement on the previous year. Clarks' chairman, Peter Davis, praised Bolliger for "building a strong team around him and modernising the business in organisational terms, in its infrastructure, in driving our retail and wider commercial success around the globe".
Engine Group, the independent communications company, said that it expects to out-perform the broader marketing industry in 2009 while predicting a flat financial performance this year. Engine reported organic revenue growth of 10 percent in 2008 and joint chief executive and chairman Peter Scott said the company could return to a 10 percent growth rate in 2010. Including acquisitions, revenue at the company increased 53 percent in 2008 to 58.7 million pounds, but the company recorded a pre-tax loss of 1 million pounds after write-offs which included a 3.1 million pound exceptional charge relating to a lease write-off and 2 million pounds in share option charges.
According to research published in the New England Journal of Medicine, tests of AstraZeneca's (
) new blood thinning drug ticagrelor, designed to treat heart disease, have shown that it is 16 percent better than the current market leading drug Plavix. The two-year trial conducted on 19,000 people showed that 9.8 percent of heart patients treated with the drug died compared with 11.7 percent among patients treated with Plavix. AstraZeneca said that it plans to file for approval by the end of this year and hopes to bring the drug to market within 10 to 18 months.
The Canary Wharf Group CYWHF.PK is set to return to the property market following a recapitalisation at its majority owner Songbird Estates SBDb.L. The 836-million-pound fund raising agreed on Friday was backed by a consortium led by the Qatar sovereign wealth fund Qatar Holding, and included the China Investment Corporation. According to a person close to Qatar Holdings, the money raised will be used to pay back a Citigroup loan and to fund new investments in the London property market. Qatar Holding will have three board seats once the transaction is complete in mid-October.
