INSTANT VIEW: Japan's opposition heads for election landslide
2009-08-30 08:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's opposition was headed for a historic victory in an election on Sunday, exit polls showed, a win that would oust the long-ruling conservative party and give the untested Democrats the job of reviving a weak economy.
An exit poll by broadcaster TV Asahi showed the Democratic Party of Japan was on track for a landslide win with around 315 seats in parliament's powerful 480-member lower house.
-- The Democratic Party (DPJ), as winners of Japan's election on Sunday, will face a raft of challenges including ballooning social welfare costs in a fast-aging society and tattered public finances.
JUN KATO, SENIOR CHIEF ANALYST, SHINKIN CENTRAL BANK RESEARCH
INSTITUTE, TOKYO
"A huge victory for the Democrats will likely increase hopes of clearing Japan's political deadlock, which would give a positive impression to foreign investors, supporting share prices. So, for a short-term reaction, the JGBs are likely to be weighed down in reaction to an expected rise in stocks,
"But that would be only temporary and in the medium term, the JGB market will be supported because Japan is expected to stay under deflationary pressure and the economy is seen as sluggish.
"Also views that the Bank of Japan will keep a low interest rate policy for a while and given private corporations' weak funding needs, Japanese banks are expected to buy longer-dated bonds."
PELHAM SMITHERS, HEAD OF ASIAN EQUITIES, PALI INTERNATIONAL,
"If it's a clear cut victory as that exit poll suggests, it should be viewed positively by financial markets. For equities positively, negatively for bonds. DPJ has been quite emphatic about further pump-priming legislation. So the expectations would be that such victory would result in sizeable fiscal stimulus.
"You have to remember that the DPJ was split off from the LDP. It is not, necessarily considerably different from the existing LDP leadership. Most feel a degree of tiredness in the LDP. In the end the LDP is extraordinarily differential to the Japan civil service. There is a possibility and probability that the DPJ will be able to exercise autonomy from the bureaucracy.
"It's a strong mandate and will make it difficult for the Ministry of Finance to block or water down the fiscal spending packages."
KOICHI NAKANO, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR, SOPHIA UNIVERSITY, TOKYO
"The next electoral challenge is going to be the upper house election in about a year. It's going to be crucial how they spend the first year in office, so in that sense they have to get focused very quickly to get things accomplished without wasting too much time on setting up a new scheme of government.
KIRBY DALEY, SENIOR STRATEGIST, NEWEDGE GROUP, HONG KONG
"Sadly this victory does not bode well for the economy.... The policies the DPJ have put forward, while addressing some issues relating to domestic demand, would reverse any thought of fiscal austerity at the heart of Japan's problems.
"The DPJ's spending plans could impact the nation at a time approaching the point of no return with respect to the aging population.... If real reforms are not taken in the next five to 10 years, Japan's fiscal well-being could be beyond the point of no return. This government is not positioned to tackle this issue at all.
"This also smells very much like a 'kick the bums out' election rather than a mandate for the policies of the DPJ, as most Japanese do not truly support the type of fiscal irresponsibility championed by the DPJ.
"A few months down the line, much like the Democrats in the U.S., we could see there was no mandate of ideas but rather pure dissatisfaction with the LDP.
"If the DPJ is successful in implementing its spending programs, we will certainly see upheaval in the currency and JGB markets. There has been a lot of complacency over the price at which Japan has been able to issue debt in the last 20 years. If and when Japan goes out to global markets, it will be a very different picture. We could see JGBs reacting to the true fiscal situation."
TOKICHI ITO, DEPUTY GENERAL MANAGER, FOREX TEAM, TRUST &
CUSTODY SERVICES BANK, TOKYO
"The yen could be dragged lower if stocks rise. But the impact may wear off in the early part of the week or maybe even after Monday's Asian trading hours.
"In the near-term, the dollar's upside against the yen is likely to be limited at levels around 95 yen."
JONATHAN ALLUM, JAPAN STRATEGIST, KBC FINANCIAL PRODUCTS,
"If it means, which it probably does, improving relations with Japan's neighbors -- Korea and China in particular -- the DPJ doesn't have the kind of baggage the LDP had, then that's probably a positive step."
