INSTANT VIEW: Japan's opposition heading for election landslide
2009-08-30 07:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's opposition was headed for a historic victory in an election on Sunday, exit polls showed, a win that would oust the long-ruling conservative party and give the untested Democrats the job of reviving a weak economy.
An exit poll by broadcaster TV Asahi showed the Democratic Party of Japan was on track for a landslide win with around 315 seats in parliament's powerful 480-member lower house.
-- The Democratic Party (DPJ), as winners of Japan's election on Sunday, will face a raft of challenges including ballooning social welfare costs in a fast-aging society and tattered public finances.
LIU JIANGYONG, JAPAN EXPERT, TSINGHUA UNIVERSITY, BEIJING
"The Democrats have a positive attitude toward relations with China. They are willing to stabilize ties, compared with where they have been previously.
"But there are still problems in bilateral relations, which need hard work from both sides to resolve.
"Also, there are anti-China forces active in Japan. They will probably try to tie down the new government when it comes to dealing with China.
"Generally though, relations are going to improve. Both sides have a lot at stake. Through talks and better communication, China and Japan will not see a worsening of ties."
KOICHI HAJI, CHIEF ECONOMIST, NLI RESEARCH INSTITUTE, TOKYO
"The Democrats seem to have won hugely, which means the policy deadlock in parliament will be solved. That in itself is positive in terms of economic policy.
"The initial market response will be positive and I think stock prices will rise, largely on hopes that things will change. A victory this big is clearly a positive for the market.
"The problem is how much the Democrats can truly deliver in the first 100 days. If they can come up with a cabinet lineup swiftly, that will ease market concerns over their ability to govern.
"Because hopes for change are so big, the disappointment would be huge if the Democrats can't deliver results. The first three months will be crucial."
MASAYOSHI OKAMOTO, HEAD OF DEALING, JUJIYA SECURITIES, TOKYO
"This is really something. Foreign investors are likely to welcome the stable government, but then there's also the worry about them (the Democrats) having too much of a majority. Calling it a dictatorship is going too far but there's the worry about them having too much power.
"The stock market is likely to respond positively to this and rise, but very soon a mood of caution will set in. If it ends up being too one-sided a government there's likely to be a fair amount of worry.
"I think the market's rise may end very quickly, perhaps even as early as the morning. This will be especially true if the Democrats act too prideful in their victory.
"Given that there's an Upper House election next summer, if voters are unhappy with the Democrats after this the LDP could win big and we could be right back where we are now, with political paralysis."
LEE MYON-WOO, EXPERT ON JAPAN POLITICS, SEJONG INSTITUTE,
"I would call this a revolution for Japan through election. A change of government for Japan is not unprecedented, especially with the shift to the Japan New Party in 1993, but this means a complete and total change.
GERRY CURTIS, PROFESSOR, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
"This is not a story about how the LDP, with an unpopular prime minister and facing economic problems, lost an election. This is about the end of the post-war political system in Japan. It is the only time any party other than the LDP has won a majority in the lower house of the Diet (parliament). It marks the end of one long era, and the beginning of another one about which there is a lot of uncertainty."
NORIHIKO NARITA, PROFESSOR, SURUGADAI UNIVERSITY, SAITAMA
"The historical role of the LDP has ended. It had extended its life through coalitions with the Socialists and the New Komeito party, and then through the personal popularity of (ex-prime minister Junichio) Koizumi but now, finally, its historical role has ended.
"I think the Democratic Party administration can last until the next general election, though I'm not sure about Mr. Hatoyama.
"They are saying that they will escape from bureaucratic dominance of politics, but they must also skillfully use bureaucrats to implement their policies. How to cooperate with bureaucrats will be a very important point."
-- For a 24 page PDF analysis of the election, click:
-- A victory in the lower house by the opposition Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) will break a deadlock in parliament, where the DPJ and its allies currently have control of the less powerful upper chamber, allowing them to delay bills.
-- Financial markets would generally welcome an end to the political stalemate, analysts and investors have said, but warn a rise in spending could push up bond yields.
-- The Democrats have pledged to refocus spending on households, promising child allowances and aid for farmers. The DPJ have also vowed to take control of policy from Japan's bureaucrats, who are often blamed for failing to tackle problems such as the country's pension system.
