"Fleeing fighters" stream into China from Myanmar
2009-08-29 23:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Groups of men who said they had been fighting Myanmar government troops in fierce battles over recent days streamed into China on Sunday, underlining the longer-term problems the fighting there could cause for China.
The men, wearing blue pants and coats that they said Chinese government troops on the border had told them to wear, described bloodshed and continuing enmity in Kokang in northeast Myanmar's Shan state following the deployment of government troops there.
Many of the men said they had escaped on Saturday after the latest upswing in fighting in the largely ethnic Chinese enclave. Tens of thousands of people have already fled over the border to the town of Nansan in southwest China's Yunnan province.
"We're soldiers from the Kokang army. But we had to give up. The fighting was too much," said Xiong Zhaole, dressed in blue and walking with about six other men along a road near a border crossing.
"We were trying to defend our people, but the Myanmar troops were pushing us back."
Asked if he would be willing to resettle in Kokang if Myanmar junta troops took control of the area, Xiong said: "We couldn't possibly go back."
The reluctance of people like him to return underscores the tricky calculus facing Beijing in the conflict, which erupted after the military moved in on the area as part of efforts to ensure ethnic groups participate in elections next year, according to reports by Chinese media and Myanmar exile groups.
Beijing is one of its neighbour Myanmar's few diplomatic backers and has deflected pressure from Western governments over the military government's tough steps against protesters and pro-democracy campaigners.
But the many thousands of refugees who have recently poured into Yunnan province to escape the fighting have highlighted the brittle balance Beijing has sought between working with the Myanmar government and accommodating the local forces who have long run Kokang, where the trouble erupted.
Many, but not all, of the refugees interviewed told Reuters they would be afraid to return home if the Myanmar army succeeds in putting the remote hill country under its control.
That could make Beijing's balancing act more difficult, and leave it with many displaced Myanmar residents to cope with.
"We want Chinese people to run us. We're scared of the Myanmar army and now they have the upper hand," said Li Deming, a native of Kokang who had tramped into Nansan, the Chinese border town now housing thousands of refugees in tents and half-completed buildings.
Li said he would hesitate to return home if the Myanmar army routs the Kokang Group, which has ruled the area and is led by Peng Jiasheng, also known as Phone Kyar Shin. Like many of the refugees, Li spoke heavily accented Mandarin Chinese.
"They are like the Japanese invaders (during World War Two). They rob and kill and rape," said Mu Zhengchang, a businessman who said he ran shops in both Kokang and nearby Nansan.
"I think a lot of people like me will wonder how to survive in Nansan if the Myanmar army beats Peng," he said.
Peng has said his forces captured at least 50 soldiers as well as killing more than 30 on Thursday and Friday, the Chinese Global Times newspaper reported on its website (www.huanqiu.com).
"Kokang is run by warlords, and warlords and drugs are like twins, so that's how Kokang works," said one refugee in the main refugee camp in Nansan. He could not give his name, because the interview was interrupted by Chinese officials. (Editing by Jason Subler and Sanjeev Miglani)
