FACTBOX: Issues in the Doha round of trade talks
2009-08-30 04:21:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Sun, Aug 30 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Sun  EDT
In return the richer developing countries will cut industrial tariffs, opening up their markets for industrial goods to businesses in both rich and poor countries.
The difficulty comes in the exceptions to these cuts, known as flexibilities.
As a result, what they see as the main aim of the Doha talks -- the elimination of an unfair agricultural trading system that favors developed countries -- will not be delivered.
The United States, for example, says it cannot improve its offer on agriculture until it has a better idea how the big emerging countries such as Brazil, China and India will use their flexibilities.
While the principle is accepted, there are big differences over the way it would work.
The United States, backed by some developing country food exporters such as Uruguay and Costa Rica, argued the safeguard must not be used to choke off the normal growth in trade, and that tariffs must not rise above "pre-Doha" levels.
India and other big countries such as Indonesia said they needed a quick and powerful safeguard to protect their millions of subsistence farmers from the unforeseen impact of market opening, even if that meant big rises in tariffs.
-- Sectoral deals. The United States is pushing for agreements that would go beyond any general cut in industrial tariffs to eliminate duties altogether in some sectors, such as chemicals or electronic goods.
Such deals would not apply to everyone but would be negotiated with groups of key players in those sectors. Given the use of flexibilities (see above), Washington sees sector deals as the best way of creating new market opportunities.
Big emerging countries such as China and India, whose participation would be essential for any deal to be viable, say they are resisting efforts to strongarm them into sector deals, which they insist must be purely voluntary.
-- Cotton. The meeting in July last year never got as far as discussing cotton, the issue which is seen as a touchstone of efforts to create a fairer global trading system.
African countries want the United States to make bigger cuts in its cotton subsidies than in other agricultural products. They say that U.S. cotton subsidies make it uneconomic for their farmers to produce, and they cannot afford similar state aid.
