NEWSMAKER-Japan's Aso leads party to crushing defeat
2009-08-30 10:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) picked Taro Aso as its leader a year ago in the hope he would turn around its sagging fortunes and preserve its five-decade grip on power.
Instead, he led the conservative, pro-business LDP to a historic defeat in a general election on Sunday.
Aso said he took responsibility for the loss after media projections showed the LDP had shed two-thirds of its seats in the lower house election, adding the party should pick a successor soon.
After Aso became the party's fourth leader in four years last September, policy flip-flops and gaffes ravaged his approval ratings, sparking turmoil in the LDP and opening the way for the opposition Democratic Party to take power.
The prime minister's job was "filled with dark loneliness from beginning to end", Aso once said as his ratings dropped.
The 68-year-old, who represented Japan at skeet shooting in the Montreal Olympics in 1976, had cultivated an image as a "cool old dude" and a fan of the "manga" comics popular with youth.
A Catholic in a land of Shinto and Buddhism, the dapper dresser was supposed to stand out from the grey men in suits that dominate Japanese politics.
The hope was that the grandson of a prominent post-war prime minister would rally the party's standing in the polls and call a quick general election.
But his efforts failed to win over voters irritated by his brash manner and his party's apparent failings.
Though sometimes called "the man with a 1.5 metre radius" for his ability to win over those close around him with amusing patter, voters grew tired of his off-the-cuff remarks and lack of charisma when giving speeches.
Such remarks managed to offend people ranging from doctors and parents to the elderly, while Aso has also been ridiculed in the media for misreading kanji, the Chinese characters used in Japanese writing.
The grandson of former Prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida, who negotiated the peace treaty ending World War Two, Aso is married to a daughter of another prime minister and his sister is married to a cousin of Emperor Akihito.
His inability to name the price of a cup of noodles, an inexpensive snack food favoured by cash-strapped diners, was seized upon to show he was out of touch with ordinary Japanese struggling with job cuts and falling wages.
More recently, some local media raked him over the coals for saying poor people shouldn't get married.
An outspoken nationalist, Aso wanted to see Japan play a bigger global security role -- and he had sought to appeal to his party's most conservative base in the campaign by accusing the opposition Democrats of being weak on security.
In 2006, after becoming foreign minister, he said there was nothing wrong with discussing whether Japan, the only country to suffer an atomic bombing, should possess nuclear weapons.
Aso also triggered a furore in the two Koreas in 2003 for remarks seen as praising Japan's 1919-1945 colonisation of the Korean peninsula.
But since becoming premier he forged close ties with South Korea President Lee Myung-bak, and relations with China have remained on an even keel. He has also avoided visiting Tokyo's Yasukuni shrine for war dead, seen by many in Asia as a symbol of Japan's past militarism.
