PRESS DIGEST - British business - Aug 29
2009-08-28 23:27:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Fri, Aug 28 2009
Fri  EDT
The China Investment Corporation, China's sovereign wealth fund, has agreed to rescue the majority owner of Canary Wharf. Songbird Estates SBDb.L appeared to be sliding towards bankruptcy due to their 880 million pounds of debt. That was until a consortium headed by CIC declared their intention to invest in Songbird with a rescue rights issue so that it can repay its creditor, and tenant, Citigroup (
). The move is seen as a gamble by the consortium who feel that Britain's commercial property market has reached its lowest point.
) has chosen OMD, a division of Omnicom (
), to take charge of its 800-million-pound global media planning and buying account. The account is one of the most coveted deals available in the struggling advertising industry and its loss to OMD is a large blow for the world's largest advertising group WPP (
), who were hoping to be awarded control of the account.
) may be considering an 11th-hour bid for the company. The rules stipulate that any bid must take place by Sept. 11t. If neither the CVC consortium nor Stagecoach makes any further moves, then it is expected that National Express will launch a rights issue to reduce its 1 billion pounds of debt.
Nisa-Today's has turned down a second takeover approach by Bibby Line group, the distribution company which owns 51 percent of Costcutter. The new offer was worth around 1,200 per share, a 20 percent increase on the first offer, valuing Nisa-Today's at 133 million pounds. Nisa said the approach represented "a significant undervaluation of Nisa-Today's, especially as the majority of any payment would be deferred and conditional on future performance".
) has warned that trading conditions "remain challenging" after revenue growth at its rail business, which includes South West Trains, was 0.9 percent for the 12 weeks to July 26. That figure is down from a 6.2 percent like-for-like rise in the year to April. The British transport group reported that revenue on British buses rose 4.4 percent but North American revenue slid 5.8 percent as the coach operations struggled due to the recession.
Official figures from the Office of National Statistics have shown that Britain's economy performed better in the second quarter than had been previously thought: contracting by 0.7 percent, against its original estimate of 0.8 percent. The revision to the GDP figures was fuelled by an increase in estimates for the manufacturing, energy, wholesale and motor vehicles sectors, giving hope that the recession is finally coming to an end. The ONS added that there was anecdotal evidence that the government's scrappage scheme is helping the motor industry.
) has successfully secured a 485-million-pound debt deal with its banks, cheering investors, despite plunging profits. The troubled regional publishing group, largely hit by the slump in advertising, was forced to deny rumours it was planning to sell The Scotsman, as pre-tax profits fell 56 percent to 27.5 million pounds in the first half. The group said total advertising revenues were down 32.7 percent on the same period in 2008.
NISA-TODAY'S REJECTS NEW BIBBY OFFER
Nisa-Today's has rejected a second takeover attempt by Bibby Line Group, which owns 51 percent of the Costcutter convenience store chain. Bibby offered to acquire the business for 134 million pounds but was rejected on value grounds and the fact that the deal would have meant the loss of Nisa's mutual business model. Nisa-Today's effectively acts as a co-operative using the buying power of the group of retail members to negotiate deals with suppliers.
TOP INVESTORS DECLARE WAR ON CITY BANKS' FEES
A group of Britain's biggest fund managers are working on plans to take over the underwriting of rights issues from large City investment banks which charge fees that they consider excessive and unreasonable. The group, which comprises M&G, Aviva (
) Investors, Legal & General (
), Standard Life (
), are collaborating with the smaller corporate advisers Lazard (
) and Rothschild [ROT.UL]. This attempt to break the hold of large investment banks on underwriting pre-dated Lord Turner's warning on the excesses of the financial sector this week, but also indicate a similar unease about the dominance of a few major financial institutions.
Songbird Estates, the owner of 60 percent of the Canary Wharf development, is to raise equity financing to address its 880 million pounds of debt. It will be aided in this task by the sovereign wealth funds of Qatar and China in addition to Morgan Stanley (
) and GF Investments, who have agreed to subscribe to and underwrite a share issue that will allow Songbird to repay the entirety of its debt to Citigroup. Songbird was previously struggling with its debts and looked to be on the verge of collapse before its rescue by the consortium.
Aga Rangemaster has declared a pre-tax loss of 2.4 million pounds for the first six months of 2009, but claimed that the fall in demand for its stoves has flattened after the precipitous decline from last September. Sales dropped 19 percent to 117.8 million pounds in the six months to 30th June, and the company's net cash has fallen away from 16.9 million pounds this time last year to 2.3 million pounds.
