Japan scrambles jets as Chinese plane flies over disputed isles
2012-12-13 06:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan scrambled fighter jets on Thursday after a Chinese government plane entered what Japan considers its airspace over disputed islets in the East China Sea, escalating tension between Asia's two biggest economies.
Sino-Japanese relations took a tumble in September after Japan bought the tiny islands, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, from a private Japanese owner.
Patrol ships from the two countries have been shadowing each other since then in a standoff that has raised concern that a collision could escalate into a clash. Thursday's incident was the first time both sides used aircraft in the dispute.
"Despite our repeated warnings, Chinese government ships have entered our territorial waters for three days in an row," Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary Osama Fujimura told reporters.
"It is extremely regrettable that, on top of that, an intrusion into our airspace has been committed in this way," he said, adding that Japan had formally protested through diplomatic channels.
Japan's military scrambled eight F-15 fighter jets, the Defence Ministry said. Japanese officials later said the Chinese aircraft had left the area.
It was the first time a Chinese aircraft had intruded into Japan's airspace near the disputed islands, Japan's Defence Ministry said.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda later instructed the government to be "all the more on guard", the Kyodo news agency reported.
China's state maritime agency said a marine surveillance plane had joined four Chinese vessels patrolling around the islands and the fleet had ordered Japanese boats to leave the area immediately.
"The Diaoyu islands and affiliated islands are part of China's inherent territory. China's flight over the islands is completely normal," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei told a briefing in Beijing.
"This is serious ... intrusion into Japan's airspace is a very important step to erode Japan's effective control over the area," said Kazuya Sakamoto, a professor at Osaka University. "If China sends a military plane as a next step, that would really make Japan's control precarious."
Toshiyuki Shikata, a Teikyo University professor and a retired general, said the use of aircraft by both sides was significant.
"Something accidental is more likely to happen with planes than with ships," he said.
Abe has vowed to take a tough stance in the dispute over the islands, which are near potentially huge maritime gas reserves, and has said that the ruling Democratic Party's mishandling of its diplomacy had emboldened China.
Smaller Asian countries such as the Philippines have also become increasingly worried about Beijing's growing military assertiveness and its claims to disputed islands in the South China Sea.
Washington does not take a position on the sovereignty of the islands but says they are clearly covered by a 1960 security treaty obliging the United States to come to Japan's aid if attacked.
"We are encouraging all sides to take appropriate steps so that there will be no misunderstanding or miscalculation that could trigger an environment that would be antithetical to peace and stability," Campbell told reporters in Malaysia.
China says the islands are its "sacred territory" and says its claim predates Japan's.
Nationalization of the islands in September was intended to keep them out of the hands of a fiery nationalist politician, to head off a more damaging confrontation with China.
But the move triggered a wave of protests in China that shuttered Japanese factories and stores, disrupted trade and prompted China to strengthen its own claim to the disputed territory. Japanese carmakers saw their sales in China slump in the weeks after the islands were sold.
(Additional reporting by Terril Yue Jones in BEIJING, Siva Sithraputhran in KUALA LUMPUR; Editing by Robert Birsel and Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is hilarious. 8 F-15 to combat a single unarmed marine surveillance plane who has also left the area. Looks like Japan is trigger happy and biting its nails. Ha! Ha! Ha! Please take note Ms Clinton (hilarious)
Dec 13, 20125:49am EST--
China and Japan have tension?
China and Japan have tension?
Well that hasn¡¯t happened before, except for the past 1000+ years.
Does China really want Japan to kick their rear AGAIN?
Dec 13, 20127:25am EST--
China is the largest country on the planet and I suspect that it will not be long before they represent the largest economy as well. They are returning to the glory days of Chinese strength and their assertiveness will only increase as the years pass. We can only hope that the world will be able to maturely handle their ascension to the world stage ¨C and, of course, that China will not shoot itself in the foot on its journey upwards. Great things can happen in our future if we are able to work constructively with the Chinese. But if these kinds of disputes are some sort of indication of future relations and they escalate into military confrontation, I fear there will be no future at all.
Dec 13, 20127:48am EST--
