China, U.S. talks on cyber security go well: Xinhua
2013-07-10 01:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Talks between China and the United States on cyber security, overshadowed by revelations of U.S. electronic surveillance by former spy agency contractor Edward Snowden, have gone well, state media said on Wednesday, with both sides pledging to improve cooperation.
Cyber security is one of the main topics for high-level talks this week between the world's two largest economies, as both countries trade accusations about hacking attacks on each other.
Snowden's revelations of American electronic surveillance around the world have given China an argument to counter U.S. complaints that it steals private intellectual property (IP) from U.S. companies and research centers.
But China's official Xinhua news agency implied that the talks, on the sidelines of a strategic security dialogue on Monday and Tuesday, had made progress.
"The two sides held candid in-depth discussions on cyber security, including the mechanism of a bilateral cyber working group, international cyberspace rules, and measures to boost dialogue and cooperation on cyber security," Xinhua said.
Both sides, it said, agreed to improve the group's operations so it could "play a positive role in enhancing mutual trust, reducing mutual suspicion, managing disputes and expanding cooperation", it added.
The talks follow the positive tone struck by President Barack Obama and new Chinese President Xi Jinping at a summit last month in California. Nevertheless, Obama demanded Chinese action to halt what he called "out of bounds" cyber spying.
In addition, a total of 249 Chinese government and academic websites were hacked from January to May, 54 of which were apparently targeted by U.S.-based Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, the English-language daily said.
"It's hard to say from the data whether these threats were made solely for political reasons, but Chinese government websites were apparently targeted more," Du Yuejin from the National Computer Emergency Response Team and Coordination Centre of China told the newspaper.
China's stance seems to be stiffened by Snowden's revelations of widespread surveillance by the National Security Agency and his assertion that the agency hacked into critical network infrastructure at universities in China and Hong Kong.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
All countries have spies and other ways for intelligence gathering purposes, includng China.
All countries have spies and other ways for intelligence gathering purposes, includng China.
Difference with China is they are thieves, who steal company secrets in regards to others inventions. That is despicable, as they cannot invent their own, and instead steal from others. Companies need to keep their ideas OFF the internet, or any electronic device that can be hacked. Take no chances with this thieving nation.
I remember when China claimed to have invented their high speed train, but then low and behold it was actually stolen from Siemens, as it was nearly identical. So they not only steal, but take credit as well for what they did not invent.
Jul 10, 20137:49am EDT--
