China's domestic growth opens new business vistas
2009-08-28 09:30:00.0
China's domestic growth opens new business vistas | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
China's domestic growth opens new business vistas
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
People play cards in front of an electronic board showing stock information at a brokerage house in Hefei, Anhui province August 25, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
By Alan Wheatley, China Economics Editor
By Alan Wheatley, China Economics Editor
Fri  EDT
Hardly a day goes by now without China Inc. striking a deal to buy assets overseas, usually in the resources sector. That trend will probably continue.
The new business opportunities opening up in the world's third-largest economy, for foreign as well as local firms, will be the overarching theme of next week's Reuters China Investment Summit.
Reuters reporters in Shanghai, Hong Kong and Taipei, in addition to Beijing, will quiz a score of executives from real estate developers such as SOHO China (
); private-equity firms including Sequoia Capital and Permira; and banks such as J.P. Morgan (
) and, Standard Chartered (
Of the 7.1 percent growth in gross domestic product in the first half of the year, 6.2 percentage points came from investment and 3.8 percentage points from consumption; with external demand collapsing, net exports reduced GDP growth by 2.9 percentage points, according to government data.
Investment boomed thanks to a 4 trillion yuan ($585 billion) stimulus package, centered on infrastructure, complemented by record lending by China's mainly state-owned banks.
Wensheng Peng, chief China economist at Barclays Capital, brushed aside concerns that Beijing's pump-priming was paying for white elephants; China's rail network was still woefully underdeveloped and many of its airports overcrowded, he said.
"There is still a lot of room to boost infrastructure spending in the next 3-5 years at least," Peng said. "The greater concern is related to consumption because the government has much less influence. You cannot control what people buy."
Here, too, though, the evidence suggests the government's overwhelming response to the crisis has buoyed consumer confidence.
Car ownership was below 40 per 1,000 people in 2007, compared with 400-815 in advanced economies, Macquarie analysts Leah Jiang and Shirley Zhao said in a recent note.
Underscoring the scope for catch-up, car ownership in eastern China is three times that of the poorer interior.
"We believe there will be an emerging demand for small cars outside the major cities, which will be an important driver for auto sales over the next few years," Jiang and Zhao said.
Western China, which exports relatively little because it is far from the sea, in fact reported much stronger growth in overall retail sales and fixed asset investment in the first half of the year than central and eastern China.
Whether these trends can be sustained is likely to be a major theme of the summit, which runs from August 31 through September 2.
"As the Chinese government seeks to boost domestic demand to sustain China's growth, developing Western China is becoming a priority again this year due to its high growth potential and huge market," said Ting Lu, Merrill Lynch's China economist.
), the country's biggest personal computer maker and the world's No. 4.
Lenovo accounted for nearly half of all computers sold under a rural subsidy programme in China in the first six months of this year, helping to boost its China sales by 14 percent in the second quarter. By contrast, growth in many developed countries was negative, the firm said on August 6.
"The biggest challenge now for most Chinese companies is how can they increase their scale to a level where they are able to compete internationally," said Ellen Tseng, an analyst at Nomura Securities in Taipei.
"Lenovo, for example, tried to expand outside of its traditional markets but faced a lot of difficulty there because, when compared to its peers, it still doesn't have the critical mass to do so," she said.
(Additional reporting by Kelvin Soh in Taipei and Simon Rabinovitch in Beijing; Editing by Ken Wills)
