TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear program
2009-08-28 13:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran has slightly reduced the scale of its nuclear fuel production campaign and has fulfilled demands for more effective monitoring of its Natanz uranium enrichment site, the U.N. atomic watchdog said on Friday.
Details of Iran's nuclear program first emerged in August 2002 when the exiled opposition National Council of Resistance of Iran reported the existence of a uranium enrichment facility at Natanz and a heavy water plant at Arak. Here is a timeline of Iran and its nuclear program in the last two years.
November 2, 2007- Britain, France, Germany, the United States, Russia and China agree to push ahead with more sanctions.
March 3, 2008 - U.N. Security Council adopts a third sanctions resolution targeted at Iran's nuclear program.
July 19 - Iranian officials rule out any freeze in uranium enrichment during talks in Geneva on the program, attended for the first time by a senior U.S. diplomat.
August 2 - An informal deadline lapses for Iran to respond to an offer from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia for talks on its disputed nuclear program.
August 5 - Iran sends a letter to the powers but gives no concrete reply to a demand to freeze its nuclear activity, a step the United States says amounts to obfuscation. Washington and London say the powers may consider more U.N. sanctions.
February 5, 2009 - Russia says it plans to start up a nuclear reactor at the Bushehr plant by the end of 2009.
February 19 - An IAEA report shows a significant increase in Iran's stockpile of low-enriched uranium; enough, physicists say, for conversion into highly enriched uranium for one bomb.
March 20 - After years of U.S. attempts to isolate Iran, new President Barack Obama calls for "engagement that is honest and grounded in mutual respect." Iran cautiously welcomes the overture, but said it wanted to see "practical steps."
April 9 - Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says Iran has mastered the nuclear fuel cycle and also tested more advanced machines for enriching uranium. He also inaugurates the nation's first atomic fuel fabrication plant near Isfahan.
June 5 - A quarterly IAEA report says Iran now has 7,231 centrifuge enrichment machines installed, a 25 percent increase in potential capacity since March.
August 28 - The IAEA reports Iran has slightly reduced the scale of its uranium enrichment. But it has also raised the number of installed, though not all enriching, centrifuge machines by some 1,000 to 8,308.
(Writing by David Cutler, London Editorial Reference Unit;)
