Songbird issue shares to buy back $1.4 billion Citi loan
2009-08-28 09:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Songbird Estates SBDb.L, owner of much of London's Canary Wharf office complex, said on Friday it is raising funds with an issue of new shares to purchase and repay its senior loan facilities with U.S. bank Citi by October 20.
In March, Songbird said it risked breaching covenants on an 880 million pounds ($1.43 billion) Citi loan, due in May 2010, caused by a slump in the value of its properties.
Songbird said Qatar Holding, China Investment Corp (CIC), Morgan Stanley Real Estate Funds (
By 1250 GMT, Songbird shares had reversed an earlier gain of 8 percent to be down 2.2 percent, underperforming the broader UK property stocks index, which was up 0.7 percent.
"This deal secures the future of Songbird on the best possible basis for our shareholders," David Pritchard, chairman of Songbird, said in a conference call.
Songbird said it will purchase the Citi loan at a 5 percent discount to the outstanding principal and interest following the share issue, which is to be split roughly into two-thirds ordinary shares and one-third preference shares.
Qatar Holding and CIC will together take up the 275 million pounds issue of preference shares, making the two sovereign wealth funds Songbird's largest shareholders with about one-third of its shares, Pritchard said.
), currently one of Songbird's largest shareholders with 10.5 percent of its listed shares, had decided not to take part in the share issue and would therefore have its stake significantly diluted, Pritchard said.
"They have concluded that it is not in their long-term interest to be a minority shareholder in what is after all a competing business," he said.
Following the share issue, Songbird said it plans to simplify its existing share capital structure by converting the three classes of existing ordinary shares into a single class of ordinary shares, all of which will be traded on London's AIM.
Relating to the loan purchase, the four investors have also committed to deposit 150 million pounds into an escrow account within the next two working days, Songbird said.
The complex's operator, Canary Wharf Group, majority owned by Songbird, said in April it had cut its long-term debt costs by about 84 million pounds after buying back 120 million pounds of mortgage securities at big discounts.
(Reporting by Daryl Loo; Editing by Andrew Macdonald)
