BUY OR SELL-China Internet stocks: growth game or timing out?
2009-08-28 10:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese Internet stocks have rocketed this year as investors look for the next Google (
) among companies serving the 300 million Web surfers in China, the world's biggest Internet market.
) has soared 160 percent this year, and business-to-business website operator Alibaba.com 1688.HK is up 250 percent, while leading portals Sina Corp (
But in an increasingly competitive market, some analysts argue that investors have set their expectations too high. Even industry leader Baidu generated just $463 million in revenue last year, a tiny fraction of Google's $21.7 billion.
Bulls say the rise is built on hopes for China's massive Internet market, populated by a diverse number of business models that are lush grounds for growth.
), Shanda Interactive Entertainment SNDA.O, NetEase.com (
), given the popularity of Internet gaming in China and their potential to expand into social networking and the Web portal business.
ThinkEquity analyst Atul Bagga said Chinese gaming companies were showing revenue growth of 30 percent to 40 percent, while trading at 10 to 15 times their estimated 2009 earnings. By contrast, their U.S. counterparts show zero to 5 percent growth and carry a price/earnings ratio of 15 percent to 20 percent.
"So in the relative terms to the U.S., some of these (Chinese) firms are cheap," Bagga said.
Perfect World is a favorite among analysts because of its strong game pipeline and overseas recognition. Its shares are trading at 19.6 times estimated 2009 profit, compared with a forward price-to-earnings ratio of 19.6 for leading U.S. game developer Electronic Arts ERTS.O.
Although the stock has risen 128 percent year-to-date, it is still 16 percent below the analysts' consensus price target, according to Thomson Reuters data. Its short interest ratio of 0.9 has been trending downward since the middle of last month, according to Schaeffer's Investment Research, also indicating bullish sentiment.
For Web portals, Hong Kong-listed Tencent Holdings (
), which runs China's largest instant messaging platform, is a popular pick. Net profit is expected to rise 50 percent in 2010 from the average market forecast for 2009, according to a poll of 16 analysts by Reuters Estimates, although the forward P/E ratio is a rich 37.
Competition could affect Baidu's leading market share as Web portals such as Sina ramp up their own search capabilities, said Credit Suisse analyst Wallace Cheung.
"Obviously the company will still grow," he said. "But revenue market share-wise, Baidu will not perform as well in the next two years, and will most likely drop due to competition from Google."
Schaeffer's said Baidu's short interest ratio is 1.7, while in options trading, its put/call volume ratio has been trending upward since the start of August. That indicates a more bearish market sentiment.
Equity put options grant investors the right to sell the company's shares at a fixed price within a specified period, while calls convey the right to buy the stock at a given price and time.
In addition, Baidu is trading at a super-rich 53.3 times its estimated 2009 earnings, compared with 21.4 for Google.
Some bears also recommend selling Shanda and NetEase, which are facing slowing growth as their in-house developed computer games mature.
Shanda shares hit a record high in June but have since fallen about 20 percent. The stock has a short interest ratio of 5.3, suggesting investors are largely pessimistic about it. (Editing by Doug Young, Lincoln Feast and Lisa Von Ahn)
