UPDATE 3-Bank of China sees loan rate slowing in H2
2009-08-27 08:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of China (
), the country's biggest foreign-exchange lender, expects to scale back lending in the coming months as Beijing moves to stem a break-neck increase in liquidity fuelled by a massive economic stimulus programme.
) President Li Lihui said the pace of lending was likely to be slowed in the second half of the year "by a relatively big amount," after a surge in loans helped second-quarter earnings beat analysts' forecasts.
He added demand for credit was likely to be lower in the second half, and that his bank's loan growth for all of 2009 was expected to beat the industry average.
Li's comments came as further evidence that lending growth could slow sharply after hitting a record 7.4 trillion yuan ($1.08 trillion) in the first half, potentially adding to worries about the strength of China's economic recovery.
A likely end to an unprecedented lending surge that sustained the world's third-largest economy in the first half of the year may slow income growth at banks but will also reduce the level of bad-loan accumulation.
Li said that his bank was also studying plans to raise capital, including potentially issuing subordinated bonds.
"We will study all options in the plan in a balanced way to decide the fund-raising channel which will be in the best interest of the Bank of China," Li said.
Despite the cautious note on loans, Bank of China on Thursday sounded an upbeat note on prospects for China's economy through to the end of the year.
"As China's economy is currently experiencing a critical period of stabilisation and recovery. The government will continue with its macroeconomic policies of maintaining a proactive fiscal and moderately relaxed monetary policy with a view to building up the economic base for further recovery," it said in a statement.
"As a result, the national economy is expected to maintain momentum ... and create a favourable environment for banks."
The Beijing-based lender, in which Royal Bank of Scotland has a 2.69 percent stake, recorded a 22.55 billion yuan ($3.3 billion) net profit for April-June, up 10 percent from a year earlier. Six analysts polled by Reuters were on average expecting 20.13 billion.
For the first six months, the bank posted a profit of 41.12 billion, it said in a filing to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. (
For graphics on Bank of China earnings, please click
The bank's total outstanding loans and advances surged 31 percent to 4.3 trillion yuan over the six months through June.
Its net interest margin narrowed to 2.04 percent at the end of June from 2.72 percent a year earlier, following a similar trend at rivals ICBC (
), as margins were squeezed under Beijing's loose monetary policies.
Bank of China's net interest income derived from lending operations dropped 8.34 percent to 74.7 billion yuan in the first half of 2009. Net fee and commission income rose 2.64 percent to 23 billion yuan.
Bank of China's Hong Kong-listed shares have soared 80 percent this year, compared with a 40 percent gain in the benchmark Hang Seng Index. Its domestic A-shares were up 33 percent during the same period. ($1=6.831 Yuan) (Reporting by Michael Wei; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman, Chris Lewis, John Stonestreet)
