Apple falls on lower shipment forecasts, muted China debut
2012-12-14 11:03:00.0
Apple falls on lower shipment forecasts, muted China debut | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Apple falls on lower shipment forecasts, muted China debut
Fri, Dec 14 2012
Thu, Dec 13 2012
Wed, Dec 12 2012
Tue, Dec 11 2012
Tue, Dec 11 2012
An Apple logo is seen at the Apple Worldwide Developers Conference 2012 in San Francisco, California June 11, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Stephen Lam
Fri  EST
Jefferies analyst Peter Misek trimmed his iPhone shipment estimates for the Jan-March quarter, saying that the technology company had started cutting orders to suppliers to balance excess inventory.
Shares of Apple suppliers Jabil Circuit Inc, Qualcomm Inc, Skyworks Solutions Inc, TriQuint Semiconductor Inc, Avago Technologies Ltd, and Cirrus Logic Inc also fell in early trading.
Apple shares have lost a quarter of their value since they hit a life high of $705.07 on September 21, as it faces increasing competition from phones using Google Inc's Android operating system.
The brokerage said it was modeling more conservative growth for the world's biggest technology company after making supply chain checks that revealed that fewer iPhones were being built.
"Some of our Chinese sources do not expect the iPhone 5 to do as well as the iPhone 4S," UBS analyst Steven Milunovich wrote in a note to clients.
Apple launched the iPhone 5 in China on Friday, a move widely expected to bring the Cupertino-based company some respite from a recent slide in market share in China, but early reports indicated that demand may not be as great as expected.
"The iPhone 5 China launch has been surprisingly muted but (we) are unsure how much weather (snow) or the required pre-ordering (to prevent riots) are factors," Misek said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If you want bang for your buck¡­ you¡¯d buy something else.
Dec 14, 20123:36pm EST--
I am a geek and agree with Tiu, or used to. But on my wife¡¯s last birthday I bought her an iPad2 and turned in my papers as her tech support person. PC after PC, Android pads, etc¡­ it was always me installing, training and going into settings and getting blamed because of something she did (the married man blame game).
I am a geek and agree with Tiu, or used to. But on my wife¡¯s last birthday I bought her an iPad2 and turned in my papers as her tech support person. PC after PC, Android pads, etc¡­ it was always me installing, training and going into settings and getting blamed because of something she did (the married man blame game).
Since her iPad she has taken off running. Their hardware has been the gold standard of knockoff competitors, but the real show is software. Fast, self explaining and user oriented. I program in c# on a PC, I used a droid phone because I like to be in control of every setting. But the PC and droid are geek devices. Apple is for the user experience. If you add up the time you spend in confusion, then Apple saves you money, price is not everything, your time and frustration has value.
Dec 14, 20125:46pm EST--
May this be the beginning of a downward spiral for apple!
Dec 14, 20127:29pm EST--
