Analysts hail Guess quarterly results, see growth ahead
2009-08-27 13:14:00.0
Analysts hail Guess quarterly results, see growth ahead | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Analysts hail Guess quarterly results, see growth ahead
Wed, Aug 26 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Tue, Aug 4 2009
Tue, Aug 4 2009
Thu  EDT
) and six others raised their price targets on the stock on Thursday, a day after the apparel brand's quarterly profit soundly beat Wall Street estimates on sales growth in Europe and higher margins.
Guess shares, which are trading at about 17 times forward earnings compared with about 28 times for the apparel sector, were up 10 percent at $35.47 in afternoon trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
Guess has been able to bolster results with help from its diverse markets and businesses, ranging from accessories to jeans. The company has also been expanding in Europe and in high-growth areas like China and Latin America.
Jefferies & Co analyst Randal Konik said the company's global multi-concept and multi-channel distribution strategy helps it target multiple customer segments and reduce risks.
Standard and Poor's Equity Research, which raised the company to "buy" from "hold," sees above-average growth for the brand through 2012.
"We believe Guess remains one of the most appealing longer-term business models... with even further margin and top-line drivers when the consumer returns," said Brean Murray Carret's Eric Beder, who raised his price target on the stock to $39 from $33.
Wedbush Morgan analyst Betty Chen expects strengthening business momentum in North America retail, expansion in Europe and increased penetration in Asia, coupled with solid expense and inventory control, to help Guess deliver earnings above consensus.
Receding currency headwinds and easier comparable sales and margin comparisons ahead suggest that the company "could be setting up nicely for more big earnings beats in the second half of 2009," Credit Suisse analyst Omar Saad said.
On Wednesday, Guess, best known for its denims, forecast third-quarter earnings between 46 and 49 cents per share, on revenue between $465 million and $485 million.
