Chinese firms in Hong Kong IPO rush - paper
2009-08-28 12:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Two Chinese industry groups will kick off IPOs worth more than $2.5 billion in Hong Kong soon after they received a green light from the city's stock exchange, racing to beat a possible market downtrend, a newspaper reported on Friday.
Investment bankers expressed hope the two new listings could create healthy momentum for other IPO candidates, the South China Morning Post said.
Metallurgical Corp of China and Sinopharm Holdings are expected to tap the market next week after their listing plans were heard by the Hong Kong Stock Exchange exchange on Thursday, the report said, quoting bankers involved in the offerings.
"Everything went smoothly and next week it is definitely possible for the first round of pre-marketing or even the launch a management roadshow," a person close to Metallurgical's offering was quoted as saying. "Nobody wants to market their shares during a downturn."
Hong Kong's blue-chip Hang Seng Index
hit a 12 month high of 21,197 points on August 4 but it has lost nearly five percent since then.
At least nine Chinese companies are queuing to raise more than HK$30 billion ($3.87 billion) in Hong Kong IPOs, the newspaper said.
Sinopharm, China's largest pharmaceutical distributor, has recruited at least five institutions including China Life Group (
), Bank of China (
) as cornerstone investors in its proposed Hong Kong flotation, the newspaper said.
Sinopharm, majority owned by state-run China National Pharmaceutical Group, is expected to raise $1.03 billion in the Hong Kong IPO. [ID:nHKG262363]
Resources firm, China Metallurgical which has an iron mining joint venture in Australia with CITIC Pacific (
), plans to raise upto $4 billion in a dual listing with about $1.5 billion from Hong Kong and $2.5 billion from Shanghai. [ID:nBJD002958]
The listing hearings of the two companies were passed and China Metallurgical will be listed in Shanghai on Sept 21 and in Hong Kong on Sept 24. Sinopharm will be listed in Hong Kong on Sept 23, the Hong Kong Economic Journal reported.
), a mainland magazine publisher, said it planned to raise up to HK$141 million ($18.2 million) in a Hong Kong IPO with dealing in shares expected to begin on Sept 9.
Communication appliance maker China All Access aims to raise HK$500 million ($64.5 million) in an IPO. Other candidates include funeral services provider Sino Life, Evergrande Real Estate, Glorious Property, and South China City, local newspapers reported. ($1=HK$7.750) (Reporting by Alison Leung; Editing by Chris Lewis)
