Gold steady above $940/oz, firm dollar weighs
2009-08-27 05:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold prices held steady above $940 an ounce on Thursday, underpinned by light physical buying, but the topside was capped by firmness in the dollar, which makes the precious metal expensive for investors holding other currencies.
Trade was slow with many major players away on summer vacation, and it could stay that way until after the U.S. Labor Day holiday in early September, traders said.
Spot gold traded at $944.70 an ounce as of 0526 GMT, up marginally from New York's notional close of $944.10.
It hit a one-week high of $957.65 on Friday, but has since come under pressure as the dollar gained ground amid caution over the global economy, tempering demand from such countries as India.
"There's a small amount of physical buying in the low $940s, but nothing dramatic. That's why prices have got stuck here," said Peter Tse, a dealer at Scotia Mocatta in Hong Kong.
"I suspect that will remain the case until after the U.S. Labor Day holiday when most people, including fund managers, return from their holidays," he said.
He added that gold could be caught in a range between $935 and $955 in coming days, focusing mainly on the currency and equity markets for near-term direction.
"It seems that gold doesn't really have its own momentum to move anywhere."
In the currency market, the dollar held onto broad gains on Thursday as investor fatigue toward riskier assets like stocks set in, while there were concerns that China's plan to curb redundant investment could dent Chinese shares. <USD/>
Holdings of the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, the SPDR Gold Trust, stayed unchanged at 1,061.83 tonnes on Wednesday from the previous business day. <GOL/SPDR>
Among other precious metals, platinum was little changed, hovering below the previous day's high of $1,249.50 an ounce marked after news of a strike at Impala Platinum's (
South Africa's biggest union later said the strike at the world's No.2 platinum producer's biggest mine may spread to the entire company after wage talks broke down.
Platinum stood at $1,230 per ounce, compared with New York's notional close of $1,232.
(Additional reporting by Chikako Mogi; Editing by Joseph Radford)
