Taiwan to let Dalai Lama visit, China response awaited
2009-08-27 02:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan, which turned away the Dalai Lama last year on fears of upsetting China, has approved a visit by the Tibetan spiritual leader next week to comfort victims of a deadly typhoon, the government said on Thursday.
However, regardless of what its official statements turn out to be, the Chinese government may be unlikely to retaliate with any steps that could choke off growing bilateral trade, investment, tourism and people-to-people exchanges. [ID:nTP212738]
Chinese public opinion is easily riled by shows of support for the Dalai Lama, but Beijing is also aware any strong moves could play into the hands of Taiwan opponents of President Ma Ying-jeou, who has sought to ease tensions with Beijing.
"We've ... decided to let the Dalai Lama visit as he is coming here to pray for the dead victims, as well as the survivors," Ma told reporters while visiting typhoon survivors.
The president's office, under fire for perceptions his response to typhoon Morakot was too slow, and national security officials decided in a meeting on Wednesday to permit a visit from Aug. 31-Sept. 3, the Government Information Office said.
"President Ma has done the right thing after a long, long time," said Khedroob Thondup, a Taipei-based member of the Tibetan parliament in exile. "If they refused His Holiness, there would have been a backlash."
The Dalai Lama was always eager to visit Taiwan and is looking forward to the trip, his aide told Reuters from the Indian hill town of Dharamsala, headquarters of the Tibetan government-in-exile.
"The main purpose for the visit is to comfort the typhoon victims and offer prayers," Tenzin Taklha said on Thursday.
"Immediately after the typhoon (the Dalai Lama) sent a letter of condolence and expressed his sympathy and sorrow." Taklha said he was hopeful the visit would occur soon, though he said no dates have been finalised.
Taiwan, home to a large exiled Tibetan community and millions of Buddhists, allowed visits by the Dalai Lama in 1997 and 2001.
President Ma last year quashed hopes for a new visit by the Tibetan spiritual leader, saying the timing was wrong as his government was working to improve relations with China. Taiwan Buddhist groups criticised the decision.
Since taking office in 2008, Ma's administration has avoided action that could anger Beijing as he pursues trade ties.
However, Karma Chopel, a senior member of the exiled Tibetan government, said that since Ma took office there had been a change for the better between Dharamsala and Taiwan.
"It is a change in situation and the visit could be significant for the Tibetan cause, specially in the eyes of the international community," Chopel, a former speaker in the exiled government's parliament, told Reuters.
Invited this week by local governments in south Taiwan, where the Aug. 7-9 typhoon is feared to have killed nearly 700 people in mudslides, the Dalai Lama will comfort survivors, many of whom are homeless, Taiwan's information office said.
"The Dalai Lama will be in Taiwan for religious purposes, so we welcome that," Tony Wang, presidential office spokesman, told a news conference.
"I don't think his visit will harm cross-straits ties, which have improved since May 20 last year," he said, referring to the date when Ma took office.
China has claimed sovereignty over self-ruled Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong's forces won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek's KMT fled to Taiwan. Beijing has vowed to bring Taiwan under its rule, by force if necessary.
The 73-year-old Dalai Lama fled Tibet in 1959 after a failed uprising against Chinese rule in the region, occupied by People's Liberation Army troops in 1950.
The Dalai Lama's visit might irritate Beijing but the storm will blow over, said ruling Nationalist Party (KMT) Secretary-General Wu Den-yih.
"Beijing will be a little uncomfortable, but if they understand how severe the disaster is they will show some respect to Taiwan's people," Wu told Reuters.
Zhu Feng, professor of international security at Peking University, said: "I think that there won't be major damage from this visit, because trade and investment will continue. But it will damage channels of political communication for at least a while." (Additional reporting by Bappa Majumdar in NEW DELHI, and Chris Buckley and Benjamin Kang Lim in BEIJING; Writing by Jerry Norton; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
