UPDATE 1-Ireland's C&C broadens scope with Anheuser beer deal
2009-08-27 05:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Irish drinks group C&C (
), pushing its shares up nearly 13 percent.
C&C said on Thursday the acquisition, which includes Scotland's top lager, Tennent's, would allow it to market its Magners cider in Northern Ireland and Scotland and give it a strategic partnership with ABI, the world's largest beer maker.
The deal includes the Tennent's Wellpark brewery in Glasgow, and will leave AB InBev with just three breweries in the UK, although one of those in London will close next year.
For the Belgium-based brewer it will help cut debt after InBev bought Budweiser-brewer Anheuser-Busch last November for $52 billion in the world's biggest cash takeover. It has now raised just over half of its own target of $7 billion by November by selling assets in Korea, China, the U.S. and now Scotland.
"This is designed to strengthen our cider business," said John Dunsmore, C&C's chief executive, a former head of brewer Scottish & Newcastle who was hired in November to revive C&C's fortunes in the face of falling sales.
C&C said the purchase, which needs shareholder approval and will be funded internally and with bank loans, would be immediately earnings accretive, sending its shares racing up over 12 percent.
"It looks like a very positive deal on the face of it," said one Dublin-based dealer. "It might go a small bit higher from here, maybe up 15 percent but it wouldn't go more than that."
Dunsmore said he expected cost savings and revenue synergies of 10 million pounds a year by 2012 from the purchase, which includes distribution rights to Stella Artois and Beck's beers.
Excluding the purchase, C&C reiterated its guidance that full-year operating profit would be at the top end of a previously stated guidance range of 77 million euros to 82 million euros despite a 5 percent fall in revenues in the five months to the end of July.
Cider revenues fell 4 percent in that period, while spirits and liqueurs fell 22 percent. In Ireland, volumes of C&C's Bulmers cider rose 3 percent as an intensive marketing campaign paid off despite severe recession and a wet July. (Reporting by Carmel Crimmins, editing by Will Waterman)
