RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asian shares fall, wary of buying fatigue
2009-08-27 03:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian shares fell on Thursday and the yen rose after Wall Street largely shrugged off encouraging U.S. home sales and durable goods data, leaving investors wary about chasing shares higher.
European shares were set to open little changed, with financial spreadbetters expecting Britain's FTSE 100
to open flat, Germany's DAX
to open flat and France's CAC
Shares in Japan fell 1.6 percent after the Nikkei average hit a 10-month closing high the previous day, with exporters losing steam and caution setting in ahead of national elections on Sunday.
"There's a sense of buying fatigue among investors globally and that is leading to profit-taking," said Tsuyoshi Segawa, an equity strategist at Mizuho Securities in Japan.
Shares in China's benchmark stock index
fell 1 percent after a big share offer announced by the country's second-biggest listed property developer China Vanke (
On Wednesday, orders for long-lasting U.S. manufactured goods registered the biggest advance since July 2007, but orders excluding transport goods were slightly below expectations. New home sales jumped in July by their fastest pace in 10 months. [ID:nN26259327]
Investors on Wall Street were cautious, with shares bouncing after the favourable data but then fizzling out. [.N]
gained just 0.04 percent while the Standard & Poor's 500 Index
In Tokyo, exporters such as digital camera maker Canon Inc (
Market watchers said investors have factored in a big win by the opposition Democratic Party in Sunday's election and the focus is shifting to what happens after the vote, including who will be the next finance and economy ministers. [nPOLJP]
Australian shares dipped 0.1 percent .AXJO, even in the wake of data showing that new capital expenditure in Australia rose 3.3 percent in April-June from the previous quarter, outstripping forecasts and suggesting the economy is growing faster than expected. [ID:nSYD468294]
STERLING SAGS, DOLLAR DIPS
In currencies, sterling
hit a six-week low against the yen as the Japanese unit surged broadly on concerns that China's plan to curb redundant investment could dent Chinese shares.
"It seems like the daily moves of 1 yen or 2 you see in the market now are being driven by short-term speculative money," said Toru Tanaka, senior manager of treasury and foreign exchange at Mitsubishi Corp.
and the euro also slipped 0.7 percent to 133.34 yen EURJPY=R. Against the dollar, the euro dipped 0.1 percent to $1.4237
Gold prices were also stable, with spot gold XAU= at $944.20 per ounce, up slightly from New York's notional close of $944.10.
U.S. crude futures CLc1 eased and hovered near $71 a barrel, after a sharp fall this week on the back of an unexpected rise in U.S. crude inventories. [O/R] (Additional reporting by Masayuki Kitano) (Editing by Kim Coghill)
