RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asian shares slip, wary of buying fatigue
2009-08-26 23:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian shares mostly eased on Thursday and the yen rose after a flat day on Wall Street following encouraging home sales and durable goods data left investors cautious about chasing shares higher.
Shares in Japan fell 1.6 percent after the Nikkei average hit a 10-month closing high the previous day, with exporters losing steam and caution setting in ahead of national elections on Sunday.
"There's a sense of buying fatigue among investors globally and that is leading to profit-taking," said Tsuyoshi Segawa, an equity strategist at Mizuho Securities in Japan.
Shares in Shanghai's volatile index
opened down after the country's second-biggest listed property developer China Vanke (
On Wednesday, orders for long-lasting U.S. manufactured goods registered the biggest advance since July 2007, but orders excluding transportation goods were slightly below expectations. New home sales jumped in July to their fastest pace in 10 months. [ID:nN26259327]
Investors on Wall Street were cautious, with shares bouncing after the favourable data but then fizzling out.
gained just 0.04 percent while the Standard & Poor's 500 Index
In Tokyo, exporters such as digital camera maker Canon Inc (
Market watchers said investors have factored in a big win by the opposition Democratic Party at the polls and focus was shifting to what happens after the vote, including who will be the next finance and economy ministers. [nPOLJP]
, weighed down by falls in financials such as Shinhan Financial Group (
) as metal prices were weighed down by news the world's top consumer, China, would take steps to curb industrial overcapacity. [ID:nPEK157466]
New capital expenditure in Australia rose 3.3 percent on the quarter in the second quarter, outstripping forecasts and suggesting the economy is growing faster than expected. [ID:nSYD439944]
Australia's benchmark S&P/ASX 200 index .AXJO gained 0.1 percent.
STERLING SAGS, DOLLAR DIPS
In currencies, sterling
hit a six-week low against the yen as the Japanese unit surged broadly on concerns that China's plan to curb redundant investment could dent Chinese shares.
and the euro also slipped 0.4 percent to 133.83 yen EURJPY=R, although it was unchanged on the day at $1.4250
Gold prices were also stable, with spot gold XAU= at $945.35 per ounce, up slightly from New York's notional close of $944.10.
U.S. crude futures CLc1 eased but held above $71 a barrel, after a sharp fall this week on the back of an unexpected rise in U.S. crude inventories. [O/R] (Editing by Kim Coghill)
