PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - Aug 27
2009-08-26 16:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 26 2009
Sun, Aug 23 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Wed  EDT
) reported a full-year loss of A$234.4 million for the year to the end of June, and cancelled dividend payments. The company also said that the costs associated with a transformation program had risen by A$46 million, increasing the total cost of the three-year program to A$140 million. Chief executive Sue Morphet said that the group, which owns brands including Bonds, Holeproof and Berlei, is now recovering after undergoing a 'most confronting' few months. Page 16.
Listed food company Goodman Fielder yesterday reported its full-year results, including net profit of A$177.1 million. The group said it will spend more on marketing and product development this year following indications that the company's core business of consumer food has been strengthening since the second half of 2009. Chief executive Peter Margin said he expects the market to continue improving, and that the company will start benefiting from cost reductions and improved pricing it has put in place. Page 16.
Media investment group Consolidated Media Holdings CMJ.AX released its full-year results late yesterday, including a net profit of A$427 million. Executive chairman John Alexander praised the performance of the group's pay television assets in particular. Consolidated Media yesterday announced it had sold its 26.7 percent stake in online jobs site Seek for A$441 million, generating a A$302 million profit. The media group will hold a briefing on the results today. Page 19.
Private investment group Seven Network SEV.AX, which is 48.4 percent owned by West Australian businessman Kerry Stokes, yesterday released its annual results. However, the company's chief operating officer, Peter Lewis, said that they were a 'difficult set of results to comprehend,' as Seven had made a string of investments using some of the A$3.2 billion gained from the sale of media assets in 2006. The group has around A$1.1 billion in cash remaining, but is yet to say what it intends to do with the funds. Page 19.
) and United States-based hardware group Lowe's Companies (
), led to shares in the Australian company rising A7 cents to A$28.70, a ten-month high. The A$500 million new venture is to purchase hardware distributor Danks Holdings for A$88 million, and intends to open 150 'big-box' stores over the next five years. Woolworths has not yet announced details of the stores, but is expected to provide competition to hardware sector leader Bunnings. Page 17.
Oil and gas company Arrow Energy AOE.AX yesterday announced full-year results, including a record net profit of A$366 million, helped by asset sales of A$881 million. Chief executive Nick Davies said 'the underlying business is performing extremely well,' and forecast record production and operating profits this year, underpinned by the opening of a coal seam gas-fired power station in Queensland near the town of Dalby, which is 50 percent owned by Arrow. Page 18.
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia is believed to be among the institutions which have reached the second round of bidding for the Swiss and Asian private banking assets of Dutch banking and insurance company ING Group. Other bidders are thought to include Credit Suisse Group, DBS Group Holdings, Julius Baer Holding and Britain's Standard Chartered. The assets are expected to generate between US$1.8 billion and US$2 billion for ING, which it will use to help repay a 10 billion euro lifeline it received from the Dutch government last year. Page 19.
) has come under criticism over its latest capital raising, with retail shareholders complaining that institutional shareholders have been given greater access to the discounted shares. Stuart Wilson, chief executive of the Australian Shareholders Association, said that institutions had received A$2 billion in a July placement, while retail investors were this week restricted to A$750 million in new shares. Mr Wilson said shareholders may oppose the re-election of NAB board members. Page 19.
According to documents tendered by telecommunications company One.Tel's liquidators and released yesterday by the New South Wales Supreme Court, former managing director Jodee Rich was behind the breakdown of relations between liquidators and representatives of its creditors. A letter tendered to the court states that Mr Rich tried to broker a settlement suit last year worth A$230 million down to A$17 million, of that Mr Rich would receive A$2 million. One.Tel creditors have lost A$340 million in the collapse of the telephone company in 2001. Page 25.
) yesterday reported that its full-year loss had increased from A$182 million to A$244 million due to difficult operating conditions. The company also revealed that it paid chief executive Mark Rowsthorn a cash bonus of nearly A$742,000, and gave a 'golden handshake' to an executive of A$2.16 million. Despite conducting a capital raising of A$2.35 billion to ease debts, the company admits that it cannot see signs of a recovery in its business this financial year. Page 25.
) before they would commit to a A$5 billion joint copper-gold venture in the country. Rio chief executive Tom Albanese said that the Oyu Tolgoi project is the world's best undeveloped copper-gold mine. The government's decision has taken some pressure off Mr Albanese, who has lived through the ill-timed Alcan acquisition, turned-down a BHP Billiton (
Nicholas Bolton's private company, Australian Style Investments, has called a shareholder meeting in a bid to wind up the Multiplex Prime Property Fund. Earlier this year, Mr Bolton made a similar call regarding toll road operator BrisConnections, before selling his voting rights to the project constructor, infuriating many of the company's unit holders. Mr Bolton currently owns 19.9 percent of the Multiplex fund, which could generate up to A$10 million for Mr Bolton if the fund was wound up and its assets sold at book value. Page 27.
) has admitted that its exposure to collapsed financial advisory firm Storm Financial may exceed the 160 customers it first thought. As part of a review of its lending book, the bank has found that a staff member in a Queensland branch had approved a loan to a high-risk Storm client. The bank's deputy chief executive officer Graham Hodges acknowledged the malpractice when he gave evidence into the bank's involvement in the collapse at the Ripoll inquiry into financial products and services. Page 3.
Mining company Macarthur Coal MCC.AX has posted a net profit for the year end to June 30 of A$168.86 million, more than doubling last year's figure of A$72.7 million. The miner's results were due to contractual agreements at the peak of the resources and an increase in Chinese buyers in the last six months. Chief executive Nicole Hollows believes the company is optimistic about the demands from its long term customers, as non traditional coal buyers, mostly from China, increased from 9 percent in 2008 to 33 percent. Page 3.
Mining company Sino Gold Mining SGX.AX was placed in a trading halt yesterday, as Canadian miner Eldorado Gold Corp looks to negotiate a A$2.2 billion scrip-only takeover. Eldorado is Sino's majority holder with 19.9 percent holdings. Sino has stated that the current negotiations are not a done deal, as Eldorado's bid is based on a 0.55-for-one deal, which translates to a 21 percent premium on Sino's last traded share price of A$7.24. Jake Klein, the chief executive of Sino, was not able to comment on the takeover deal. Page 3.
Mining company Lihir Gold LGL.AX has surprised the sharemarket despite taking a larger than expected write-down of A$489 million on its experimental Ballarat goldmine. Investors responded positively to news that the failed Ballarat project was almost behind the company, and that there has been greater resource expansion on its Lihir island and Cote d'Ivoire operations, with shares rising 7.8 percent to A$2.75. Managing director Arthur Hood said the company had interested parties willing to buy the Ballarat mine. Page 3.
