Huntsman CEO worries about W-shaped recovery
2009-08-26 00:32:00.0
(Reuters) - While the "cash-for-clunkers" auto rebate program gave the U.S. economy a strong boost, the end of the recession remains uncertain, the head of chemical maker Huntsman Corp (
"I think that you might see something more of a W-shaped recovery," Chief Executive Officer Peter Huntsman told Reuters.
The government's clunkers program provided a much-needed jolt to sales as customers in the automotive industry needed more of Huntsman's paints and other products, the CEO said.
Yet the program, as well as low raw material prices and other macroeconomic factors, may have created a "false illusion" about any end to the recession, said Huntsman, 46.
On the positive side, destocking -- where customers use up existing inventory and hold back on new purchases -- appears to be over.
"The supply chain that we're seeing is extremely tight," Huntsman said.
There is concern, though, that customers may be taking advantage of low prices and building reserves, rather than responding to an increase in consumer demand, he said.
The Woodlands, Texas-based company recently received a $1.7 billion payment from Credit Suisse (
) to settle claims that the banks interfered with Hexion Specialty Chemicals' failed attempt to buy Huntsman.
Some stockholders were disappointed that the company settled before a trial, and made their displeasure known by sending the stock down sharply after the settlement.
Yet Huntsman defended the decision, saying a settlement was in the best interest of the company in order to avoid a protracted skirmish.
"We're not a litigious company," he said. "We're a company that's in the chemical industry."
The settlement gave Huntsman a comfortable cash cushion from which to operate during a time of slow sales, even as many competitors struggle.
That could potentially be a marketing point to customers wary of signing multiyear supply contracts with chemical makers, Huntsman said.
"The money's in the bank, (the lawsuit is) settled, we're focused on the business," he said.
Huntsman, who has eight children, took the company's reins from his father, Jon, nine years ago.
A large portion of the company's shares are held by a family trust, as well as various philanthropic endeavors connected with Jon Huntsman, who founded the company in the 1980s.
"The stars just lined up perfectly for that to happen," he said.
But when asked if he's interested in still interested in selling, the CEO gave an emphatic no.
"This isn't the time to be trying to sell yourself, even if you wanted to," he said.
The company sees Asia -- specifically China -- as a key growth area as the standard of living among the region's residents gradually increases, Huntsman said.
"As I look at China, I don't get excited by cheap labor," he said. "I get excited by the fact that you have hundreds of millions of people that are literally being lifted up that economic ladder."
President Barack Obama recently appointed Huntsman's brother, former Utah Governor Jon Huntsman Jr., as ambassador to China.
While Huntsman was quick to stress that the siblings strive to avoid a conflict of interest, he said his brother's new position could be seen as a "sign of the Huntsman's family long-term commitment" to China.
India, Singapore and the Middle East are also strong growth areas, he said.
Shares of Huntsman were up 16 cents, or 2.1 percent, at $7.72 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange. The stock price has ranged from $2.04 to $14.50 in the past 52 weeks.
(Reporting by Ernest Scheyder; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn)
