Japan's Abe would try to keep China ties calm-lawmakers
2012-12-14 02:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Despite tough talk on the campaign trail, former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will try to avoid a serious clash with China if his Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) wins Sunday's general election, as expected, senior party officials said.
Ties between Asia's two biggest economies took a dive after Japan nationalized islets at the heart of a long dispute in September, prompting violent protests in China and a standoff in waters around the isles that has raised fears of a clash.
In a bid to underscore Japan's control over the East China Sea islands, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, the LDP has promised to consider manning them and building structures on them, a move bound to outrage China.
LDP lawmakers knowledgeable on foreign policy, however, suggest that an Abe administration, while remaining assertive in the territorial row, would be keen to improve ties and strike a pragmatic tone with its Asian neighbor.
"We don't want to do anything to further worsen the current state of affairs," Yoshitaka Shindo, an LDP lawmaker outspoken on territorial disputes, told Reuters in an interview.
"We need to calm down the situation and smooth over our relations as Japan doesn't want to run into any military collision with any neighboring country," Shindo said.
The LDP's tough campaign tone seems to have been intended to appeal to a growing sense of nationalism among some voters and keep them from turning to the right-leaning Japan Restoration Party, newly founded by popular Osaka Mayor Toru Hashimoto.
He chose China as the destination of his first overseas trip and refrained from going to the Yasukuni Shrine for war dead, seen by many as a symbol of Japan's past militarism.
"We have to set up a hotline between Tokyo and Beijing, so any potential accidents don't escalate into something bigger," said Yoshimasa Hayashi, a former defense minister and a junior cabinet minister during Abe's previous term in power in 2006.
Ships from both countries have been shadowing each other near the disputed islands and on Thursday, a Chinese government plane entered what Japan considers its airspace over the area.
"This can take some time, but that is not a problem. We have to create such a framework and continue our talks," he said.
Still, analysts and Abe's advisers say that while Abe may be cautious ahead of an election for parliament's upper house next summer, his stance toward China will inevitably harden compared with his previous term given a tilt to the right in Japan's political sphere.
"This time around, Abe is more reliant on his right-wing backers who formed a part of the broader coalition that helped him get elected as the LDP chief," said Sophia University professor Koichi Nakano.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
All these territorial problems have been unilaterally created by Japan, and set up by the US. All Japan has to do is to quit occupying Chinese island. For the long-term interests of Japan, it should look to Asia. Without China, this strategy of moving toward Asia is doomed to fail. As for the US, it¡¯s a country whose philosophy is based on wars, mobs, and all kinds of negative mentality. Whichever country the US had supported ended up paying the price of destruction, both culturally and materially. Abe is not a kind of leader who has the vision to steer the course of Japan. Hope for the Japanese that they would find one good politician in the future.
Dec 15, 20124:21pm EST--
Abe is naive to believe that lip service will be enough. Chinese Americans like me have stopped buying Japanese in the United States. Even the yearly Japanese food tasting promotion at the local Asian supermarkets here in the States have the event name changed to Asian food tasting. Dah! I just didn¡¯t show up. It¡¯s a huge supermarket chain, spanning multiple states, that specialize in Asian foods. Every week there is food tasting. To call something Asian food tasting, is just a trick by the Japanese sponsors to de-emphasize that the promotion is paid for by Japanese food merchants. Nobody is fooled. I just didn¡¯t show up like I used to, in previous years! Until Japan comes clean with its war crimes with the Japanese people, with western news agencies like Reuters and many others, and most importantly, stop its subtly demonizing propaganda in NHK¡ª until then, nothing will make me buy Japanese again. I won¡¯t even if somebody puts a gun to my head, like the Japanese were so famous for doing to hundreds of millions innocent Asian victims, including their own, to force young kids to march to the front in virtual suicide! Abe won¡¯t be able to fulfill his pledge with mere words.
Abe is naive to believe that lip service will be enough. Chinese Americans like me have stopped buying Japanese in the United States. Even the yearly Japanese food tasting promotion at the local Asian supermarkets here in the States have the event name changed to Asian food tasting. Dah! I just didn¡¯t show up. It¡¯s a huge supermarket chain, spanning multiple states, that specialize in Asian foods. Every week there is food tasting. To call something Asian food tasting, is just a trick by the Japanese sponsors to de-emphasize that the promotion is paid for by Japanese food merchants. Nobody is fooled. I just didn¡¯t show up like I used to, in previous years! Until Japan comes clean with its war crimes with the Japanese people, with western news agencies like Reuters and many others, and most importantly, stop its subtly demonizing propaganda in NHK¡ª until then, nothing will make me buy Japanese again. I won¡¯t even if somebody puts a gun to my head, like the Japanese were so famous for doing to hundreds of millions innocent Asian victims, including their own, to force young kids to march to the front in virtual suicide! Abe won¡¯t be able to fulfill his pledge with mere words.
JUSTICE. TRUTH. HONESTY WITH WAR CRIMES AND ITS OPPORTUNISTIC PREDATORY ACTIVITY, GOADING OTHER ASIAN COUNTRIES TO CONFLICT BY BRIBES WITH UNDESERVED GAINS¡ª UNTIL JAPAN STOPS ALL THAT, I WILL NOT BUY ANOTHER JAPANESE PRODUCT, EVER AGAIN IN MY LIFE.
Dec 15, 20126:34pm EST--
What Abe can do is to learn from Americans. Show up at the Nanjing Massacre commemoration on the next Dec 13th,
What Abe can do is to learn from Americans. Show up at the Nanjing Massacre commemoration on the next Dec 13th,
which commemorates the killing of 300,000+ civilians, women, children, and uncountable rapes ordered by the Japanese war criminals whom current official Japan ministers recently paid war tribute to. There is no excuse for the massacre. There is no excuse of cover up and denial of the deaths of 30-50 millions of COMPLETELY innocent Asians killed by Japanese soldiers, with the support of their blindly obedient families at home. JUSTICE. NOTHING LESS. NOTHING MORE. JUSTICE. MILLIONS OF SOULS ARE SCREAMING AT THE JAPANESE NEO-NAZIS FROM THEIR GRAVES.
Dec 15, 20129:13pm EST--
