UPDATE 2-Gem Diamonds profit falls, sees H2 profit up vs H1
2009-08-26 07:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Gem Diamonds Ltd (
) posted a 31 percent fall in first-half pretax profit on lower revenue, but said it expected second-half profit to improve sequentially.
The weakness in rough diamond prices in the fourth quarter continued into the first quarter, but improved in the second quarter, the London-headquartered diamond producer said on Wednesday.
"We think we are going to make a bigger bottom-line profit than we have made at the moment... We don't expect price to rise dramatically going forward, but on the other hand it doesn't look it's going to fall either," Chief Executive Clifford Elphick told Reuters.
However, Gem Diamonds does not expect to put back any of its mines, which are currently under "care and maintenance", into production at current diamond prices.
"The prices are not sufficiently high to justify opening any of our operations which are on care and maintenance," the chief executive said.
The Ellendale E9 operations in Australia and the Letseng mine in Lesotho in Africa are the only producing operations after a drop in diamond prices forced the company, and many of its rivals, to put a number of mines on care and maintenance and to mothball future projects.
The company, whose assets are spread across nine countries, remained cautious on the U.S. market but said it saw a growth in demand for diamonds from China.
"In China and Asia, excluding Japan, there is significant demand over all categories but it is coming of such a small base that it doesn't make up for the drop in the U.S.," Elphick said.
But, demand for diamond wedding jewellery remained strong in the Middle East, Asia and the United States, he added.
For the six months ended June 30, Gem posted a pretax profit of $17.2 million, compared with a profit of $25.2 million last year. Revenue fell 29 percent to $117.8 million.
Shares in Gem Diamonds, were up 2 percent at 265 pence at 1100 GMT on the London Stock Exchange. They touched a high of 281.50 pence earlier in the session. (Editing by Jarshad Kakkrakandy and Gopakumar Warrier)
