Commentary: The legacy of Eunice Kennedy Shriver
2009-08-26 09:32:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Honorary chairperson of the Special Olympics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, smiles during a Special Olympics global law enforcement torch run ceremony in the Rose Garden of the White House in Washington, July 26, 2007. Credit: Reuters/Jason Reed (UNITED STATES)
Wed, Aug 26 2009
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed  EDT
(Reuters.com) -- Not long ago, I had the honor of attending a life-changing sporting event in China that brought together people from around the world in the spirit of community. Inside a Shanghai stadium, a colorful display of music, dance and pyrotechnics dazzled a massive audience of 80,000 people that included Chinese President Hu Jintao, many heads of state and numerous celebrities.
However, these magnificent opening ceremonies were soon overshadowed by the determination, courage and enthusiasm of 7,500 athletes who competed in the days that followed.
That inspirational event - the 2007 Special Olympics World Summer Games - and this year's Special Olympics World Winter Games in Boise, Idaho, had a profound impact on me. There is truly nothing more uplifting, more powerful and more positive than sharing the Special Olympics experience.
These events were made possible by the vision of one remarkable woman, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, who helped change the world for people with intellectual disabilities by founding the Special Olympics. Mrs. Shriver inspired a movement by using sports as a catalyst for respect, acceptance and inclusion. By doing so, she helped transform America and the world's view of the mentally disabled from patients to friends, neighbors and athletes.
When Mrs. Shriver first approached Coca-Cola more than 40 years ago asking us to be a founding partner of Special Olympics, she saw that we shared a vision of celebrating humanity and moments of connection, community and optimism. Since then, we've had the honor and pleasure of working with her and her family to help spread the Special Olympics movement to all corners of the world.
Our company is truly proud to be part of changing lives and attitudes and unlocking the full potential of the human spirit through our longstanding association with Special Olympics. Our associates and bottling partners around the world treasure this relationship because of its impact on the athletes and on the global community. Meanwhile, our customers are better retailers for working with us to help promote the message of the Special Olympics movement around the world.
Our relationship with Special Olympics is also critically important to our business, because Coca-Cola exists to inspire consumers through unique and meaningful experiences like the ones Special Olympics helps to create.
Perhaps one of Mrs. Shriver's greatest contributions was changing the relationship between companies and organizations like Special Olympics by actively seeking corporate support on more than a financial level. She persuaded, in the way only she could, Coca-Cola and other sponsors to be involved in a deeper and more meaningful way.
My involvement with Special Olympics began when I joined The Coca-Cola Company more than 30 years ago, and today I proudly serve as a member of the Special Olympics Board of Directors. Our Company routinely offers our associates an opportunity to serve as volunteers at Special Olympics events. We also feature Special Olympics athletes in television commercials and other advertising, and are involved with fundraising and marketing efforts to help share the Special Olympics message of inclusion to more people in more countries.
There is no question that Coca-Cola is a better company because of our association with Mrs. Shriver and Special Olympics; China and the other host countries are better communities as a result of having Special Olympics World Games in their backyards; and finally, the world is a better place thanks to the great legacy she leaves behind.
We express our heartfelt thanks for everything she did to make the world a better place for all people, and our gratitude for the opportunity to be a part of making her vision a reality.
Thanks to her, the oath of Special Olympians continues to inspire millions around the world: "Let me win, but if I cannot win, let me be brave in the attempt."
