China dismisses top provincial official after corruption probe
2012-12-13 02:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China has dismissed a top official in the southwestern province of Sichuan after putting him under investigation for "serious disciplinary violations", the official Xinhua news agency reported on Thursday.
Sichuan's deputy party boss, Li Chuncheng, is the most senior person to be investigated since Xi Jinping became leader of the Chinese Communist Party.
Xi has vowed to crackdown on corruption, warning last month that if corruption was allowed to run wild, the party risked major unrest and the collapse of its rule.
"The central government has decided to remove all leadership positions of (Li)" due to suspicion of "serious disciplinary violations", Xinhua said in a brief report on its website, without elaborating.
Xi, who was named party leader in mid-November and will assume the presidency at an annual meeting of parliament in March, has appointed Wang Qishan, a man known as "the chief firefighter" for his ability to deal with crises, as his top graft fighter.
State media said a week ago that Li was being investigated by the party's discipline watchdog.
Li had served in Sichuan since 1998 and had been party chief of the prosperous provincial capital, Chengdu. He was only appointed as the province's deputy party boss in September of last year.
Li had also been elected to the party's Central Committee, a ruling council with about 200 full members and 170 or so alternate members, at last month's congress as an alternate member.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; editing by Jonathan Standing)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I live in China and I thought his anti corruption campaign was very successful so far. I counted something like 19 leaders/chiefs were arrested so far, some coming under investigation because common people posted evidence on the internet for all to see. Very exciting here in China and everyone is very satisfied so far. Also this new president boycotted red carpets, extravagance and ceremonies of his arrivals. Which he seems to have managed to keep his word as the media reports that no unnecesarry extravagance was permitted. He seems to be the very model to lead a Anti corruption campaign in my opinion.
Dec 13, 20127:00am EST--
