UPDATE 3-China Life eyeing investments in AIA, Ag Bank
2009-08-26 04:00:00.0
(Reuters) - China Life Insurance Co (
), the world's top life insurer by market value, said it may invest in IPO candidates Agricultural Bank of China [ABC.UL] and the Asia unit of American International Group (
), as it looks to improve its returns.
) said it has talked to underwriters for AIA, which bailed-out U.S. insurer AIG is looking to list via a Hong-Kong initial public offering, about an investment as part of its broader interest in branded firms.
"We're definitely interested in any influential, branded financial institutions with sound results," China Life Chairman Yang Chao told a media briefing on Wednesday.
"From a long-term perspective, the investment return should be very positive, as AIA is a strong company," said Paul Lee, an analyst with Tai Fook Research in Hong Kong.
) as its joint global coordinators for a more than $4 billion IPO for AIA, its Asian life insurance unit. [ID:nHKG20632]
Earlier this year, sources said China Life was among the bidders vying to buy AIA, a 90-year-old business with more than $60 billion of assets under management and regarded as AIG's Asia crown jewel. That attempt to sell the company ultimately failed.
In another potential deal, China Life is considering an equity tie-up with Agricultural Bank of China, the only one of China's top four banks that has yet to make a public offering.
China Life should be able to secure decent returns from buying stakes in the policy lender as a strategic investor before its eventual IPO, said Tai Fook's Lee, who estimates the size of the deal will exceed 10 billion yuan.
"Agricultural Bank of China is a good partner with us," said Yang. "It contributes a big portion to our bank assurance business. Achieving mutual benefits is the goal for both sides."
China Life, which leads rival Ping An Insurance (Group) Co (
) in the mainland market, said late on Tuesday it earned 18.2 billion yuan ($2.7 billion) in the first half, up 15 percent from a year ago, but lagging a market forecast for a 22.8 billion yuan profit. [ID:nHKG127082]
For an earnings Graphic, click:
At the briefing, China Life President Wan Feng said it would see a rise in full-year premiums.
Under Chinese accounting standards, China Life's premiums started falling in March on a year-on-year basis, and have been dropping since, though the rate has been slowing.
For January-July, its premiums were 191.1 billion yuan, down from 203.0 billion in the same 2008 period.
), one of its major investments.
China Life owns about 960 million Minsheng shares, and can sell 97 pct of those starting from Aug. 23, according to Minsheng's interim results. (Additional reporting by Alan Wheatley in BEIJING and Alison Leung and Doug Young in HONG KONG; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Ian Geoghegan)
