RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Japan stocks hit 10-mth high; China rallies
2009-08-26 02:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese stocks rose to a 10-month high on Wednesday, driven by a modest shift into defensive sectors, while stocks in Shanghai turned positive on the week as investors cheered corporate results.
Thin summer trading volumes, however, kept prices choppy and markets generally remained in ranges.
Major European stock futures were down 0.2 percent STXEc1 after the cash market closed at the highest since early October, while U.S. stocks futures were up 0.4 percent SPc1, set to extend gains after U.S. single-family home prices grew for a second straight month.
The Ifo survey of German business sentiment is expected to show an across the board pickup later on Wednesday, playing into the story that recoveries are taking hold around the world.
"There's no mistake that the economy is on a recovery track from both the macro and micro perspective, and the market is in an upward trend," said Junichi Misawa, senior fund manager at STB Asset Management in Tokyo.
Still, having already priced in an upturn in the global economy, investors were looking for more signs that growth can be sustained once the impact of massive government stimulus spending fades.
rose 2.3 percent on Wednesday but has still lost around 13 percent so far in August, on track for its biggest monthly decline since the darkest month of the financial crisis in October 2008.
Japan's Nikkei share average closed up 1.4 percent
, at the highest since October 3.
However, while news of the capacity cut shored up the stock, it also reinforced worries about persistent weakness in global consumer demand, which is key to a solid recovery.
Japan's exports slipped in July as annual declines in exports to the United States and China accelerated, a sign that the impact of stimulus measures in major economies worldwide may be starting to wane. [ID:nT59910]
"Things have stopped getting worse, but a return to trend gains in production and trade is a pipe-dream," Patrick Bennett, Asia foreign exchange and rates strategist with Societe Generale in Hong Kong, said in a note.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
Inventory data from the American Petroleum Institute late on Tuesday showed a big buildup in U.S. crude oil stocks last week, keeping a lid on the market.
Still, that appeared to be only a short-term setback. Analysts raised their 2010 median price forecast for a fifth straight month to $73.39. [ID:nLO617588]
and has been less reactive this week to Chinese stock market moves. Earlier in August, sudden drops in the Shanghai market sucked the Australian currency down with it.
The ICE Futures U.S. dollar index .DXY, which gauges its value against a basket of six other major currencies, was steady on the day and hardly changed in August.
Investors are eager to know if the dollar will resume a downward trend in September, as more dealers return from holiday and trading volumes pick up. (Additional reporting by Aiko Hayashi in TOKYO) (Editing by Kim Coghill)
