HK, China shares lifted by earnings momentum
2009-08-26 12:31:00.0
(Reuters) - China shares rose 1.5 percent in the morning session on Wednesday, rebounding from early weakness with a boost from property stocks after upbeat earnings from a major property developer.
) also buoyed Hong Kong's benchmark index which gained 0.4 percent.
An early slip on the Shanghai index had extended the previous day's 2.6 percent decline, as the market struggles to stablise following a two-week, 20-percent slide earlier in the month that ended this year's stunning 90-percent rally.
"The Shanghai market is playing out the classic battle between greed and fear," said Pauline Loong with CIMB-GK Securities in a note on Wednesday.
"The market's real fear is not that possible monetary tightening will derail economic recovery but it will dry up the liquidity that has pumped up market turnover and given rise to the greed that set off a seemingly (until recent weeks) unstoppable rally."
) advanced 2.4 percent after the country's top life insurer, posted a 15.2 percent rise in first-half profit as a booming stock market boosted its returns on investments.
) rose 0.7 percent in Shanghai as analysts cheered the strong growth in the insurer's new business value.
By 0410 GMT, the benchmark Hang Seng Index
was up 91.90 points at 20,518.85.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, was up 0.6 percent at 11,729.64.
The official China Securities Journal cited forecasts from industry analysts for steady growth in listed property developers' earnings as property prices rise.
), the country's national flag carrier, climbed 6.3 percent to 7.65 yuan after saying net profit in the first half jumped 155 percent, helped largely by fuel-hedging gains. [ID:nHKG241125]
In Hong Kong, the stock (
China's biggest homebuilder, China State Construction Engineering (
was up 44.226 points at 2,960.029 by midday.
The index slipped in early trade on investor concern over a possible tightening of lending and liquidity in the markets, analysts said, fuelled in part by the central bank's annual report released late on Tuesday, which emphasised stable credit growth and rational levels of liquidity in the banking system.
"The central bank's statement on rational levels of liquidity in the banking system is making investors wary about coming back into the market, and the index is expected to remain sluggish," said Chen Jinren, senior analyst at Huatai Securities.
Analysts said the index appeared to have established a reasonably solid floor at its recent low of 2,761 points, although it would struggle with resistance near 3,000 points, suggesting it may consolidate within that range in the near term.
China continues to face significant challenges to its economic recovery, including weak demand for its exports, the head of the main planning agency was cited as saying on Tuesday. [ID:nLP276239]
