TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear program
2009-08-25 07:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran has not expanded the number of centrifuges enriching uranium at its Natanz nuclear site since the end of May after increasing capacity steadily over the previous three years, diplomats said.
Details of Iran's nuclear program first emerged in August 2002 when the exiled opposition National Council of Resistance of Iran reported the existence of a uranium enrichment facility at Natanz and a heavy water plant at Arak. Here is a timeline of Iran and its nuclear program in the last two years.
November 2, 2007 - Six powers -- Britain, France, Germany, the United States, Russia and China -- agree to push ahead with more sanctions.
January 11-12, 2008 - ElBaradei makes a rare visit to Tehran to push for swifter cooperation in wrapping up the IAEA inquiry.
March 3 - U.N. Security Council adopts a third sanctions resolution targeted at Iran's nuclear program.
July 19 - Iranian officials rule out any freeze in uranium enrichment during talks in Geneva on the program, attended for the first time by a senior U.S. diplomat.
August 2 - An informal deadline lapses for Iran to respond to an offer from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia for talks on its disputed nuclear program.
August 5 - Iran delivers a letter to world powers but gives no concrete reply to a demand to freeze its nuclear activity, a defiant step the U.S. says amounts to obfuscation. The next day the United States and Britain say powers may consider more U.N. sanctions.
February 5, 2009 - Russia says it plans to start up a nuclear reactor at the Bushehr plant by the end of 2009.
February 19 - A new IAEA report shows a significant increase in Iran's reported stockpile of low-enriched uranium since November to 1,010 kg, enough, some physicists say, for possible conversion into high-enriched uranium for one bomb.
March 20 - After years of attempts to isolate Iran by his predecessor George W. Bush, new U.S. President Barack Obama calls for "engagement that is honest and grounded in mutual respect." Iran cautiously welcomes the overture, saying it wanted to see "practical steps."
April 8 - The United States takes another tentative step toward better ties with Iran by saying it will become a full participant in any nuclear talks, but no sign of detente follows as Iran renews vow not to halt or freeze enrichment at current levels.
April 9 - Ahmadinejad says Iran has mastered the nuclear fuel cycle and also tested new, more advanced machines for enriching uranium.
-- Ahmadinejad inaugurates the nation's first atomic fuel fabrication plant near Isfahan.
June 5 - A quarterly IAEA report says Iran now has 7,231 centrifuge enrichment machines installed, a 25 percent acceleration in potential capacity since March. It has stockpiled 1,339 kg of low-enriched uranium, enough for conversion into high-enriched uranium sufficient for one atom bomb, some nuclear analysts estimate.
