FTSE at near 11-month closing high on U.S. data
2009-08-25 00:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index
set a near 11-month closing high on Tuesday as economic figures from the United States helped turn the market positive, with stronger oils and banks outweighing weaker mining stocks.
The index ended 20.57 points higher at 4,916.80 -- its highest close since early October after a sixth straight session of gains. The index is up 11 percent this year and has jumped 42 percent from a low hit in March.
"We've seen a bit of rotation, some profit taking this morning, which is a healthy thing. But this is a market that is not to be denied," said Stephen Pope, chief global strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald.
The positive newsflow emanating from the United States this afternoon and the slight strengthening in the Shanghai market towards its close helped a turnaround, Pope added.
U.S. consumer confidence increased in August to 54.1 from an upwardly revised 47.4 in July, more than expected, the Conference Board said.
Ben Bernanke's renomination as U.S. Federal Reserve chairman also cheered investors. [ID:nLP233065
), Royal Dutch Shell (
However, Cairn Energy (
) lagged, down 1.4 percent, as the oil explorer said its large Indian oilfields would begin producing oil this week but warned in its half-yearly report that meeting targets for the next stages of the development was becoming increasingly challenging. [ID:nLO642559]
) rose 3.9 percent, with traders citing talk that the lender was looking to buy back shares from the UK government.
Elsewhere, talks to sell some of RBS's Asian assets to Standard Chartered remain "in full swing", sources familiar with the matter said after a newspaper report said they were on the rocks. [ID:nLP175192]
The state-controlled bank also announced plans to cut pension benefits for tens of thousands of UK employees as it reins in costs, angering unions which accused the lender of dealing a "body blow" to staff. [ID:nLP305239]
Other banks were mixed, with HSBC HSBC.L and Barclays (
) 1.0 and 0.1 percent higher respectively, while Lloyds Banking Group (
) was also a top blue chip riser, gaining 2.4 percent as JP Morgan upgraded its strategy stance on the European telecoms sector to "overweight" and advised exposure to the British mobile telecoms stock.
The investment bank said the telecoms sector is favoured by cheap valuations, increasingly stable and predictable results and seasonal trading patterns that has led it to consistently outperform in the final months of most years since 1995.
), Severn Trent (
Miners were the main negative influence as copper prices MCU3 weakened, reflecting further uncertainty over a recovery in China.
) was among the top blue chip fallers, down 3 percent ahead of first-half results due on Wednesday, while Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Kazakhmys (
), Xstrata XTA.L, Rio Tinto (
), and BHP Billiton (
BHP Billiton, the world's biggest miner, will cut up to 70 jobs at its Mt Keith nickel mine in Australia to ensure the operation's viability, it said. [ID:nSYU007095] (Editing by David Holmes)
