UPDATE 2-Gemalto outperforms in first half, shares shine
2009-08-25 05:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Gemalto, the world's largest maker of chips found in mobile phones and credit cards, posted forecast-beating first-half earnings, bucking the downturn in technology spending, and kept its 2009 profitability goal.
Chief Executive Olivier Piou told Reuters in an interview that visibility was now back to "normal" on the group's prospects and that share buybacks would continue this year.
"Like many industrial companies, we can feel that a certain confidence has returned to the world economy, less so in Europe than in the U.S. and emerging markets," he said.
Gemalto's mobile division, its largest, saw softer sales, but its security unit, the smallest which the group has flagged as the most promising, turned in its first profit.
"Security is certainly going to be one of our growth engines in the future," Piou said.
He added that the share buybacks that Gemalto has undertaken so far this year would continue as a way to return money to shareholders. Gemalto has not issued dividends in the past, and will not decide on whether to start doing so until next spring.
Gemalto, which specializes in digital security, has resisted the global recession better than most technology companies as it sells primarily to big corporations like telecommunications operators and banks, and not directly to consumers.
Net income dipped to 62.3 million euros ($189.13 million) in the first half, while operating income rose 6.5 percent to 74 million. Revenues rose 1.2 percent to 800.4 million euros, with all three divisions showing growth.
"It's pretty impressive: all the results are better than expected," said Odon de Laporte, technology analyst at CA Cheuvreux. "They could have raised the forecasts for the year because they seem pretty conservative now."
Gemalto's smart cards are used in mobile phones and portable electronic devices for applications like processing payments or downloading music. Gemalto's main competitors are Germany's Giesecke + Devrient and France's Oberthur OCS.PA.
Sales in Gemalto's biggest division, which markets SIM cards for mobile phones, dropped 6 percent, as telecom operators in the United States and Europe slowed spending on high-end cards in response to the recession.
But China's roll-out of its third generation wireless network has started to boost sales and is expected to pick up pace later this year and next, Piou said.
Gross margins in mobile were the strongest ever at 42 percent, Piou said, despite the average selling price for SIM cards, a closely watched indicator, falling 14 percent in the first half of the year on constant currency basis.
The bright spot of Gemalto's performance was its smallest division, which sells security products like biometric passports.
After four years of heavy investment in the new business, the security division turned a profit for the first time this quarter with sales up almost 30 percent to 130.4 million euros. (Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
