European shares slip back from 10-month high
2009-08-25 04:55:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares fell back in early trade on Tuesday from the 10-month closing highs they hit in the previous session as investors took profits and after declines in Asia.
At 0832 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
The European benchmark index is still up 50 percent from its lifetime low of March 9, as investors have become more confident on the prospects for worldwide economic recovery. Data on Tuesday confirmed that Germany, the region's biggest economy, exited recession in the second quarter. [ID:nLO664090]
"We've enjoyed the euphoria. (The fall in shares) is profit-taking and worries about China," said David Buik, senior partner at BGC Partners. "And the U.S. Budget deficit has reared its ugly head again. But I don't see it as a serious correction, which won't happen till people get back from holiday."
The sell-off was across the board, but the heavyweight banking sector took most points off the index.
), Banco Santander (
), UBS (
Shares in France's Natixis (
), which reports on Thursday, have been suspended from trading for the day, following a report that majority owner BPCE will guarantee some of its toxic assets. [ID:nLP149825]
), Antofagasta (
), BHP Billiton (
), Lonmin (
), Rio Tinto (
Crude prices CLc1 slipped 0.8 percent to less than $74 a barrel, impacting oil shares. Total (
), ENI (
), BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
) fell 2.7 percent after warning that meeting targets for the next stages of the development was becoming "increasingly challenging", as it reported a first-half loss after tax. [ID:nLO642559]
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100
, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC-40
Defensive sectors, notably pharmaceuticals and telecoms, were among the small number of risers.
) gained 1.4 percent after JPMorgan upgraded the telecoms sector to "overweight", and advised exposure to the stock.
The broker said the telecoms sector is favoured by cheap valuations and seasonal trading patterns that have led the sector to consistently outperform in the final months of most years since 1995. It was also "overweight" in France Telecom FTE.PA, which rose 1.8 percent, and KPN (
), up 1.6 percent.
Among drugmakers, GlaxoSmithKline (
Beauty products giant L'Oreal (
), which reports results on Thursday, rose 1.5 percent after Jefferies upgraded it to "buy" from "hold".
In other broker-inspired moves, German tourism group TUI (
Japan's Nikkei 225
closed 0.8 percent lower. China's benchmark Shanghai Composite
was down 2.6 percent, having been down more than 5 percent earlier.
Analysts pointed to the volatility in the Chinese market, which has enjoyed a strong run, and said that in the longer term, it is not correlated to other markets. Later in the session, investors' attention will switch to key macroeconomic data from the United States on house prices and consumer confidence. (Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
