GLOBAL MARKETS-World stocks slip after five-day run up
2009-08-25 07:29:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks fell back after five days of gains on Tuesday and the dollar firmed as investors waited for fresh clues on whether the global economic recovery was truly picking up steam.
Wall Street looked set for a modest start, however.
Emerging markets led declines. China's volatile Shanghai Composite Index
Globally, the MSCI all-country world stock index .MIWD00000PUS was down 0.2 percent. The index hit a year high on Monday, however, and is up more than 20 percent for the year-to-date.
"We continue to believe that we are emerging from the recession and are entering a period of positive, but sub par, growth levels," Bob Doll, BlackRock's chief investment officer for global equities, said in his weekly note.
Earlier, Japan's Nikkei 225
"It should be positive for markets such as the stock and bond markets in the sense that an element of uncertainty has been removed," said Takahide Nagasaki, chief FX strategist at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
The yen rose, gaining in particular against the euro and sterling as the retreat in European shares curbed demand for currencies considered to be high-risk.
Trading was thin as many market participants were away on summer holidays and analysts said currency movements were largely being dictated by other asset markets, making them vulnerable to a pullback in stocks and commodities.
"Some capital markets still look a bit overpriced relative to the hard economic data, so some of the correction we've seen in the pro-cyclicals is to be expected," said Phyllis Papadavid, currency strategist at Societe Generale in London.
Euro zone government bond prices were higher to flat. Two-year bond yields EU2YT=RR were unchanged at 1.314 percent and 10-year yields EU10YT=RR slipped 3 basis points to 3.282 percent. (Additional reporting by Charlotte Cooper and Naomi Tajitsu, editing by Mike Peacock) (To read Reuters Global Investing Blog click
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
