MONEY MARKETS-China repo, bill yields up ahead of IPO rush
2009-08-25 03:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China's short-term rates and bill yields edged higher on Tuesday as banks started to set aside funds in anticipation of an IPO related cash squeeze.
In Singapore, the cost of funding dollars fell to another record low tracking new troughs set by Euribor and Libor rates after assurances by the world's leading central bankers meeting in Jackson Hole, Wyoming that they were not in any hurry to raise interest rates.
The 3-month dollar rates SIUSDD=ABSG dipped to 0.39214 percent from Monday's 0.40286 percent. It is less than a tenth of the peak struck last October after the collapse of Wall Street titan Lehman Brothers, which lead to a scramble to hoard cash.
Although rates have remained soft on the confidence that central banks will not tighten monetary conditions amid a still nascent economic recovery, analysts say the reversal could be triggered by technical and not fundamental factors.
"I am concerned about the period between September 23, the last FOMC meeting in the third quarter and mid-November. That period will see a lot of volatility," said Suresh Ramanathan, strategist at CIMB Investment Bank.
In China, repo rates and short term interest rate swaps rose after announcements of major new share offerings and following the news the stock regulator would review an application for a large IPO.
China's stock regulator said it would review on Wednesday an application by Metallurgical Corp of China for a Shanghai IPO aiming to raise 16.85 billion yuan ($2.5 billion), and approved a Shanghai IPO by train maker China CNR Corp to raise nearly $1 billion. [ID:nSHA263168] [ID:nPEK330731]
"Liquidity is still there in China but because of the government's recent efforts to redirecting liquidity from stocks and property to the real economy, we have to wait and see the impact on the rates market," said Anindya Dutta, Calyon's head of interest rate derivatives in Asia ex-Japan.
Meanwhile, Malaysia's central bank is expected to keep rates steady at a record low of 2 percent later on Tuesday after the country posted its first drop in output in seven and a half years when first quarter GDP fell 6.2 percent from a year ago.
And with the authorities expecting growth to return only in the fourth quarter, in contrast with Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore which have already pulled out of recession in the second quarter, markets are increasingly confident of rates staying low for some time.
For example, the three month swaps kicking in after three months MYRQB3KL3MF3M= were down 12.5 basis points to 2.023 percent. It is only the one year swap which kicks in after three months MYRQB3KL3MF1Y= at 2.308 percent that shows the possibility of a rate hike.
This is in contrast with other markets like Australia, where the central bank is expected to hik rates as early as in November. Implied money market rates CSRBA1Y=CSAU show investors have 169 basis points of tightening priced over the next 12 months. (Editing by Jan Dahinten)
