China's Shandong Steel to take 67 pct stake in Rizhao -paper
2009-08-24 23:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China's state-owned Shandong Iron and Steel Group, the world's eighth-largest steel maker, will take a 67 percent stake in Rizhao Iron and Steel, one of the sector's largest non-state firms, the 21st Century Business Herald reported on Tuesday.
Billionaire Du Shuanghua, who founded Rizhao and owns about 70 percent, will retain a minority stake in Rizhao, the newspaper reported.
Du had agreed to the plan in which Shandong would give Rizhao cash to bolster its capital position in return for the controlling stake, the newspaper added, citing unidentified sources.
The consolidation is part of a plan by the Shandong provincial government to streamline its steel sector, one of the country's largest and most fragmented. The province hopes to build a state-of-the-art steel mill in Rizhao's home city with annual capacity of 20 million tonnes.
), a property investment and heat energy supply company, bought about 30 percent of the core assets in Rizhao.
Analysts and local media have said that the transaction reflected a move by Du Shuanghua to protect his interests in the consolidation. Du is China's eighth-wealthiest person, according to Forbes' ranking for 2008, with an 11 billion yuan ($1.61 billion) fortune.
Fast-growing Rizhao produces 8 million tonnes of crude steel annually and has attracted analysts' attention for its high profit margins.
In the first half of 2009, when most Chinese state-owned steel mills suffered heavy losses, Rizhao made a net profit of about 1.8 billion yuan, while the two major listed units of Shandong reported a combined loss of 1.3 billion yuan.
Shandong Iron and Steel Group has won huge credit lines from domestic commercial banks to complete the acquisition of the Rizhao stake, domestic media have reported.
China has struggled to consolidate its fragmented steel sector, the world's largest, as it strives to build up major firms that can complete globally. But the consolidation plan faces resistance from local governments keen to protect jobs and tax revenue and from managers who are reluctant to give up control. ($1=6.831 Yuan) (Reporting by Alfred Cang; Editing by Ken Wills)
