GLOBAL MARKETS-Stocks, oil rally on data, recovery hopes
2009-08-24 14:06:00.0
(Reuters) - European and Asian stocks extended last week's rally on Monday and crude oil marched higher after U.S. economic news and stronger-than-expected data from the euro zone spurred expectations for economic recovery.
Global stocks as measured by MSCI's all-country world index .MIWD00000PUS rose 1.2 percent and was on track for a fifth straight session of gains.
The yen fell while the U.S. dollar slid against commodity currencies, such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, as investors became more comfortable with riskier trades given the upbeat assessment of the world economy. [ID:nN24405571]
"Economic data is in favor of a stronger recovery than expected. We can be quite bullish on risky assets," said Romain Boscher, head of equity management at Groupama Asset Management.
Euro zone industrial new orders in June rebounded 3.1 percent month-on-month, or more than expected, the European Union statistics office Eurostat said. [ID:nLO524595]
In the United States, economic activity improved again in July from extremely weak levels earlier this year, suggesting the recession is waning, a report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago showed. [ID:nNYS005332]
In addition, China's latest data for July indicated that while growth was moderating after a strong second quarter, the recovery remained on track to achieve the government's goal of 8 percent growth for the full year. [ID:nSHA356842]
"The Chinese news was good and we had some positive news out of Europe as well," said Rob Montefusco, a trader at Sucden Financial in London. "Technicals are pointing upwards." [O/I]
But U.S. stocks pared earlier gains. About 1 p.m. (1300 GMT), the Dow Jones industrial average
was up 15.34 points, or 0.16 percent, at 9,521.30. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 1.11 points, or 0.11 percent, at 1,027.24. The Nasdaq Composite Index
was down 1.49 points, or 0.07 percent, at 2,019.41.
European shares hit their highest closing level in nearly 10 months, boosted by banks and miners.
index of top European shares ended 0.9 percent up at 975.19 points, the highest closing level since early November.
Banks were among top gainers, with DJ STOXX banking index .SX7P rising 1.8 percent.
Japan's Nikkei average
jumped 3.4 percent, booosted by hopes for a global recovery and lifted by camera maker Canon Inc (
Copper prices rose to their highest in more than a week, helped by strong investment demand and bets the economic crisis is petering out.
Jesper Dannesbee, a senior commodities strategist at Societe General, said real demand has not improved that much it but will improve gradually through the year.
"This is follow through from Friday. There is a general appetite for risky assets driven by cheap money and lax monetary policy," Dannesbee said.
Gold edged below $950 an ounce, under pressure from a firmer dollar, but remained rangebound as support from higher oil prices and investor demand prevented it falling further.
U.S. Treasury debt prices rose, with the 30-year bond gaining more than a full point, as investors did some bargain hunting after Friday's sharp losses and after the Federal Reserve bought government debt. [ID:nN24452496]
Benchmark euro zone government bonds ended flat as data bolstered the recovery view, but caution on its sustainability eased the selling pressure. [ID:nLO615955]
"The stock market has been the barometer for growth and potential inflation," said Troy Buckner, managing principal of NuWave Investment Management in Morristown, New Jersey. "And yes. it's been an extreme correlation between equity market movements and commodities, especially copper, aluminum and crude oil."
But Buckner said that prices have climbed "too far too fast," leading his firm to short crude and heating oil, while reducing long positions in copper and aluminum.
U.S. crude CLc1 rose 51 cents to $74.40 a barrel. (Reporting by Ryan Vlastelica, Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss, Chris Reese in New York; Jamie McGeever, Atul Prakash, Alex Lawler and Ian Chua in London and Richard Valdmanis in Portland, Maine; writing by Herbert Lash)
