PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - Aug 25
2009-08-24 23:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Aug 24 2009
Mon, Aug 24 2009
Mon, Aug 24 2009
Mon, Aug 24 2009
Sun, Aug 23 2009
Mon  EDT
The CBI employers' organisation expects a quarter of large employers to freeze their hiring of new university graduates for the coming year. A March survey showed that around a quarter of large CBI members had stopped recruiting. CBI education and skills policy director Susan Anderson said: "We would probably envisage a similar number to be frozen in the next graduate round." BT (
The RAC Foundation proposes that the government should sell off part or all of the British road network to improve its strategic management and raise billions of pounds. The proposals would see major roads and motorways sold to a private firm in the same way that rail, water and gas networks have been privatised. Analysts have voiced concerns that government deficits and commitment to other spending commitments could lead to cuts in road projects.
Mortgage experts have warned that lenders may face further losses from mortgage fraud committed by criminal gangs who targeted mortgage providers at the height of the property market boom. Simon Bevan, national lead partner in charge of the fraud services unit at BDO Stoy Haywood, estimates that mortgage fraud has risen from 13.4 million pounds in 2008 to 197 million pounds in the first half of 2009 -- a figure he believes is "still just the tip of the iceberg". Bevan believes that domestic mortgage fraud could reach one billion pounds by the end of the recession and that commercial property mortgage fraud could reach five billion pounds. "I think we are probably 18 months away from the peak of the fraud cases coming through," he said.
) showed further evidence of a recovery in the British housebuilding sector, reporting net cash for the first time in two years. Net cash of 7 million pounds was an improvement on the 8-million-pound debt reported at the end of June and reflected a programme of property sales and reduced building work over the past six months. Bovis made a profit of 1.2 million pounds in the six months to June 30 before 9.8 million pounds of exceptional charges. Revenue for the first half was down to 122.6 million pounds from 149.3 million pounds.
RETAILERS SPURN LOW INTEREST RATES TO HOARD CASH, SAYS G4S
Retailers are holding more cash on their premises as a result of falling interest rates, according to G4S (
) chief executive Nick Buckles. Nevertheless, G4S saw strong figures at its cash business, with organic growth of 7.9 per cent year-on-year in the six months to the end of June. Its security division saw growth of 4.9 per cent. Revenue at the group was up from 2.7 billion pounds to 3.49 billion pounds, while pre-tax profits rose from 108.9 million pounds to 128.6 million pounds.
) saw first half sales rise to 2.29 billion pounds, from 1.96 billion pounds last year. A large part of the group's new business over the past six months came from value retailers such as Wal-Mart, Supervalu and Kroger. Chief executive Michael Roney said: "The discount chains appear to be holding up better than the high or middle end. That's a sign of frugality." First-half pre-tax profits rose to 94.6 million pounds from 93.8 million pounds, while earnings per share rose to 20.3 pence from 19.8 pence.
Discussions over the sale of Royal Bank of Scotland's (
) have hit a stumbling block, according to sources familiar with the matter. Standard Chartered is currently carrying out due diligence on RBS's consumer deposit base in China and is said to have discovered that far more RBS customers than it had envisaged are tied into specific products, limiting any purchaser's ability to shift customers to alternatives.
Adnams ADNM.PZ has received fresh criticism from the activist shareholder Guinness Peat Group over the brewer's dual share structure and the group's corporate strategy. In a letter sent to other shareholders, GPG claimed to have the support of 300 other investors in the Suffolk-based brewer who are also unhappy about the way the company is being run. GPG also questioned Adnams' move into wine retailing saying that the company should concentrate on building its beer and pub business in its East Anglia heartland.
) has announced that it has doubled its order book during the course of one year. The continued demand for investment in oil and gas has allowed the oil services company to ride out the effect of the falling price of oil. In the six months to June, the company's pre-tax profit increased 8 per cent to 174 million dollars on revenue that remained flat at 1.6 billion dollars. Earnings per share increased 22 per cent to 42.7 cents and the company raised its interim dividend to 10.7 cents from 7.5 cents in the same period last year.
Development Securities' chief executive, Michael Marx, said the company was in the right place at the right time with the right money to capitalise on a "remarkable market" for property investment. Marx said that the property investment group would target opportunities for large-scale development projects in Britain as well as purchasing lower-priced investment property as part of the company's return to the commercial property market. Development Securities (
) reported that during the first six months of the year its net assets declined 11.2 per cent to 143 million pounds and that the value of the company's investment portfolio fell by nine per cent, leading to a pre-tax loss of 19.1 million pounds for the half year period.
