RPT-GLOBAL ECONOMY WEEKAHEAD-Recovery, but at what cost?
2009-08-24 09:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Recent data suggests economies in the United States and Europe may be on the mend, but observers are far from convinced that they are ready to stand on their own, without the crutch of massive government spending.
That leaves global policy-makers and investors in a fix, likely to be underscored this week by revised global growth estimates and a fresh projection for the U.S. budget deficit, already expected to end 2009 in record-breaking territory.
Revised growth readings rarely rate much attention, but with initial estimates showing recessions ended in Germany, France and Japan last quarter and eased in the United States, investors will watch for more evidence of improvement.
Barclays economists expect the U.S. economy shrank at a 1.5 percent annual rate in the April-June period, worse than the government's initial 1 percent estimate but still much better than the 6.4 percent contraction registered in the first quarter.
The UK and Germany will also revisit second-quarter growth estimates, and investors will be keen to see if Germany's initial 0.3 percent growth reading was too good to be true.
But while data is improving and stock markets around the world have rallied, consumer spending, particularly in the United States, remains sluggish. What's more, many fear what little bank lending there is, is dependent on a steady flow of easy federal money.
"We're buying growth with government spending, and doing that while eyeing an exit strategy and balancing the budget in the long run, well, that's very difficult," said David Gilmore, a partner at Foreign Exchange Analytics in Essex, Connecticut.
That's still a record -- and equal to a whopping 11 percent of U.S. gross domestic product. But an updated projection on Tuesday from the Congressional Budget Office may be grimmer, setting up a potential clash of fiscal outlooks and possibly throwing up another roadblock to President Barack Obama's drive for a $1 trillion overhaul of the U.S. health-care system.
The U.S. Treasury, set to sell $109 billion in government debt next week, estimates 2009 issuance could hit $2.05 trillion by Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year.
"The deficit will require action -- either reducing spending or raising taxes -- and I highly doubt we can do enough on the spending side," said Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist at IHS Global Insight in Lexington, Massachusetts.
"That's the elephant in the room," he said. "It's in nobody's interest to see the dollar collapse."
Others fear the economy, and the banking sector in particular, is still ill-equipped to handle a more austere fiscal and monetary environment.
"Yes, everyone should be worried about large deficits, but the question is where would we be without them," Gilmore said, adding that public spending and interest rates near zero percent have kept the economy afloat.
Global central banks, which have poured trillions of dollars into their economies since the crisis began in 2007, have seemed to agree.
Similar caveats have emerged from Europe. Axel Weber, head of Germany's Bundesbank, admonished markets to tamp down their optimism: "It is too early to say everything is behind us."
Even China has sent discouraging signals. Shanghai stocks are down some 13 percent this month, while a rise in bad loans has some expecting regulators to toughen lending supervision.
For central banks, the problem will be weaning the market off all that cheap money, a lot easier said than done.
"If recovery is sluggish, they will be reluctant to see those reserves disappear, but the huge amount of money has people worried about inflation. It's an enormous challenge," said Rudolph Penner, former director of the Congressional Budget Office and now a fellow at the Washington-based Urban Institute.
It's not quite sink-or-swim time yet for the global economy. In the United States, only a fraction of the $787 billion stimulus package has been spent.
Ultimately, the private sector will have to start spending. And this time, economists say, Europe, which releases several national consumer sentiment surveys this week, China and others will have to lead the way.
"Americans have changed their behavior," Gilmore said. "The U.S. consumer engine has idled down from eight cylinders to four and that's where it's going to stay for quite some time." (Editing by Leslie Adler)
