GLOBAL MARKETS-Oil gains but U.S stocks falter on worries
2009-08-24 17:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Crude oil extended gains on Monday but a rally in world equity markets sputtered in the United States after investors questioned whether stock prices had outpaced the potential strength of economic recovery.
"We have been recently seeing a disconnect between the two markets. Stocks were up on economic optimism and bonds were up on economic concerns," said Peter Boockvar, equity strategist at Miller Tabak & Co in New York.
"Investors are finally catching up with this, and seeing Treasuries as a sign that they should not be buying so much," Boockvar said.
closed up 3.32 points, or 0.03 percent, at 9,509.28. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
slipped 0.56 point, or 0.05 percent, at 1,025.57. The Nasdaq Composite Index
fell 2.92 points, or 0.14 percent, at 2,017.98.
Economic data was cheered by some investors, but others saw reasons for caution. A rise in the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank's Midwest manufacturing index was led by a surge in auto output after the White House's "cash for clunkers" program. [ID:nCHB002620]
In addition, Nouriel Roubini, one of the few economists who predicted the magnitude of the world financial crisis, said in an Financial Times article a recovery is likely to be anemic and there is a "big risk" of a double-dip recession.
The lock-step in which commodity prices have tracked equity markets higher in recent months is an anomaly and could come under pressure, said Troy Buckner, managing principal of hedge fund NuWave Investment Management in Morristown, New Jersey.
"It's been an extreme correlation between equity market movements and commodities, especially copper, aluminum and crude oil," he said. "Prices have moved too far too fast."
NuWave has bet crude and heating oil prices will fall, while it has reduced long positions in copper and aluminum.
U.S. crude CLc1 rose 48 cents to settle at $74.37 a barrel after peaking at $74.81, the highest intraday price since Oct. 21. Brent crude LCOc1 gained 7 cents to $74.26.
"The stock market's rise is driving crude oil futures higher, with the outlook controlled by economic optimism," said Phil Flynn, analyst at PFGBest Research in Chicago.
U.S. gold futures fell, losing more than 1 percent in thin volume. U.S. December gold futures GCZ9 settled down $11 at 943.70 an ounce in New York.
The dollar strengthened against a basket of currencies, putting downward pressure on gold by making dollar-priced commodities more expensive for holders of other currencies. [USD/]
, while the euro slipped 0.2 percent to $1.4293
European shares hit their highest closing level in nearly 10 months, boosted by banks and miners.
index of top European shares ended 0.9 percent up at 975.19 points, the highest closing level since early November.
Banks were among top gainers, with DJ STOXX banking index .SX7P rising 1.8 percent.
Japan's Nikkei average
jumped 3.4 percent, booosted by hopes for a global recovery and lifted by camera maker Canon Inc (
) and other exporters. (Reporting by Ryan Vlastelica, Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss, Chris Reese in New York; Jamie McGeever, Atul Prakash, Alex Lawler and Ian Chua in London and Richard Valdmanis in Portland, Maine; writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
