U.S. sends Guantanamo detainee to Afghanistan: lawyer
2009-08-24 00:30:00.0
(Reuters) - The Obama administration on Monday released a detainee from the U.S. prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and sent him home to Afghanistan, the latest departure from the controversial prison that is set to close in five months.
Mohammed Jawad was accused of throwing a grenade that injured two U.S. soldiers and their interpreter in Kabul in 2002. Jawad, one of the youngest prisoners held at the prison, was now with his family in Kabul, according to one of his lawyers, Air Force Major David Frakt.
"He has a meeting scheduled with President (Hamid) Karzai later this evening. He wanted to welcome him home," Frakt told Reuters, adding that initially Jawad was poised to be transferred to an Afghan prison upon arrival.
"They were treating him as a prisoner who was being transferred and we had to remind them that he was a free man," he said.
Jawad is the latest detainee to be released from the facility, which President Barack Obama has promised to close by mid-January 2010. However, some lawmakers question whether he can deal with the remaining 228 prisoners there by then.
In June, three detainees were sent to Saudi Arabia, one went home to Chad and another to Iraq. Four Chinese Muslim Uighurs held at Guantanamo were resettled in June in Bermuda because they feared persecution back home in China.
In the Jawad case, he was arrested in 2002 and his lawyers argued that he was only 12 years old. The Pentagon disputed that and has said bone scans suggested he was 18 when he was sent to Guantanamo in early 2003.
His situation was particularly difficult for the Obama administration not just because he was so young, but also because much of the evidence against him had been thrown out because two judges said it was obtained through torture.
In July, Judge Ellen Huvelle ordered him released from Guantanamo, where he was held for more than six years.
U.S. Justice Department officials have said they were considering trying to prosecute Jawad in U.S. federal court, but no charges have been filed. While prosecutors have said they have new evidence against him, Jawad's lawyers dispute that.
