UPDATE 2-Top PwC China M&A partner Xie quits
2009-08-24 06:34:00.0
(Reuters) - PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) [PWC.UL], one of the world's four biggest auditing and consultancy firms, said on Monday its long-time China partner Xie Tao had resigned, confirming an earlier Reuters report.
The resignation of Xie, based in Beijing for PwC as its corporate finance leader for the China market, was a surprise to many dealmakers in China as he has handled more than 100 mergers and acquisitions over the past decade there, sources told Reuters.
"PricewaterhouseCoopers China can confirm that Xie Tao, a partner in the Beijing branch, has resigned from his position to pursue opportunities outside the firm," PwC said in an emailed statement on Monday in response to Reuters' questions.
"Xie Tao will be leaving the firm after more than 20 years service during which he has worked in a number of PwC China's branches and divisions," PwC said.
Xie focused on acquisition support, system review and implementation, tax planning and negotiation, project facilitation and the financial review of deal targets for both global and domestic clients, according to PwC's China Website.
He has also managed several assignments connected with the listing of state-owned enterprises in China and abroad, said PwC on its website, without naming its clients.
"His job is more like an investment banker as he helps dealmakers get deals done rather than just audit these financial numbers," said one source who worked with Xie on a China M&A deal.
"When you talk about PwC's transaction service in China, Xie's name will easily be the first one to come to your mind," the source said, adding he was surprised by Xie's sudden and unexpected departure.
There was no immediate replacement for Xie at PwC and Xie has not made a decision on his next move, said the sources, with direct knowledge of the matter, but who declined to be identified as they are not authorised to speak to the media.
A government official-turned chartered accountant, Xie was one of the most senior PwC partners in China, and he often worked closely with the firm's major private equity clients in China to help them negotiate and implement transactions.
Resignations of senior partners at the Big Four firms are rare, though junior staff often move for quick promotion and pay rises, usually to rivals in the financial industry.
It is normally required of senior accounting and consultancy executives who resign, that they not work for any rival Big Four company for at least six months to avoid conflicts of interest related to clients, industry executives said.
Xie submitted his resignation earlier this month and it was approved by the firm, the sources close to Xie said. He will hand over some ongoing deal advisory projects to his colleagues in the next few weeks, they said.
In China, PwC's major rivals include Ernst & Young [ERNY.UL], Deloitte & Touche [DLTE.UL] and KPMG [KPMG.UL], while it also faces growing challenges from smaller local firms as China's Ministry of Finance is keen to strengthen the country's own accounting industry. (Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Muralikumar Anantharaman)
