RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asia gains lift world stocks to 10-mth highs
2009-08-24 02:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks jumped more than 2 percent on Monday, lifting world shares to a 10-month high, after upbeat U.S. housing data and optimistic comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke spurred buying of riskier assets.
European shares were set to push higher at the start, with futures on the Dow Jones Eurostoxx 50 index STXEc1 up 0.8 percent in early trade.
), the world's second largest refiner, gave a boost to Shanghai shares, which posted a third straight day of gains and started to stabilise from a slide that had spooked investors around the world.
South Korea's Samsung Electronics (
) jumped 3.4 precent to a record high and drove the KOSPI to a 13-month high on signs of improving pricing power for the world's top memory chip maker. [.KS]
"People are feeling a lot better and putting their money to work back in the market," said Chris Kimber, a client adviser with Bell Potter Securities in Australia.
Mounting signs of improvement in the U.S. housing market, the source of the international financial crisis and deepest global recession in decades, have given investors more confidence to buy shares and commodities, betting on stronger growth in the months ahead. [ID:nN21378170]
Japan's Nikkei average
jumped 3.3 percent, the biggest one-day gain in 3-? months. But market players said the Nikkei's gains were mainly driven by a jump in futures. Volume on the Tokyo Stock Exchange first section fell to its lowest in a month. The broader TOPIX
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS rose 2.7 percent, bouncing back from last week's drop of more than 3 percent, mainly due to a sell-off in Shanghai shares. On Friday the U.S. S&P 500
Hong Kong's Hang Seng
was up 1.9 percent, while the Shanghai Composite
Despite persistent worries that Chinese officials could crack down on bank lending and choke off the funds that have partly flowed into the stock market, analysts said that Beijing was likely to remain cautious about winding back its loose monetary policy until the economic recovery was on solid footing.
"The flow of official statements still incite us to believe that China's top policy makers will likely avoid a too strong tightening in order to keep economic growth and the job creation processes on track," said analysts at Calyon in a note to clients.
Some analysts expected the Shanghai market to stabilise as domestic companies, which had shifted funds into the market earlier in the year on a temporary basis, stop pulling those funds out. [ID:nSP424264]
Bernanke told the Fed's annual gathering of global central bankers on Friday that prospects were good for a return to global growth but warned it would be a long, slow climb back to normal conditions. [ID:nN21401432]
But Bank of Japan Governor Shirakawa said policymakers must avoid the asset bubbles caused by low interest rates, contrasting with the cautious tone of other top central bankers. [ID:nT259294]
Nouriel Roubini, one of the few economists who accurately predicted the magnitude of the world's recent financial troubles, sees a "big risk" of a double-dip recession, according to an opinion piece posted on the Financial Times' website on Sunday. [ID:nN2376788]
The Nikkei's gains shoved Japanese government bonds lower, pushing benchmark yields off a five-week low hit on Friday. Bond dealers also shed paper to make room for a five-year bond auction the next day.
The 10-year yield JP10YTN=JBTC edged up 1.5 basis points to 1.325 percent. U.S. Treasuries also lost ground and pushed benchmark 10-year yields up a basis point to 3.572 percent US10YT=RR, further up from a five-week low touched on Friday.
The dollar .DXY edged up thanks to gains against the low-yielding yen, which fell broadly as investors moved funds out of the Japanese currency and into higher-risk, higher-yielding assets.
A rebound in commodity prices underpinned the Australian currency, which is a big exporter of metals, particularly to China. Shanghai copper prices SCFc3 jumped by the 5 percent daily limit, while U.S. crude CLc1 edged up 21 cents to $74.10 a barrel. (Editing by Kazunori Takada)
