Chinese banks lend aggressively in early July, risking another crackdown
2013-07-10 22:57:00.0
(Reuters) - New local currency yuan loans extended by China's big four state-owned banks stood at an unusually large 170 billion yuan ($27.7 billion) in the first week of July, the official Shanghai Securities News said on Thursday, a move that may alarm regulators trying to strangle distorted credit growth.
Traders said similarly aggressive lending by Chinese banks in early June caused the central bank to set off an acute liquidity squeeze in the country's interbank market.
The credit crunch caused a panic among money dealers, provoking a dramatic decline in domestic equity indexes and raised international concern about the health of the country's financial system.
), China Construction Bank (
), Agricultural Bank of China (
) -- were unusually high compared with the estimated 270 billion yuan for all of June, the newspaper said.
"The abnormality is believed to be a burst of new lending after restrictions at the end of June," the report said.
Traders said the People's Bank of China (PBOC) convened a meeting in response, warning banks of aggressive lending, and pointing out that some banks had borrowed short-term money on the money markets and used it to extend medium- and long-term loans -- a mismatching of assets and liabilities which increased systemic risk.
The PBOC followed up by refusing to inject liquidity at a large scale even as appetite for cash increased sharply, causing short-term rates to set all-time record highs with some tenors rising from their customary 3-4 percent range to as high as 25-30 percent.
The report said part of the reason for the jump in lending is cyclical, as cash returns to the system after the end of the first-half reporting period.
Chinese banks are required to meet regulatory tests of financial soundness, including a 75 percent loans-to-deposit ratio, at the end of each month, and they frequently tap the interbank market for cash to do so, causing temporary upward pressure on short-term rates.
(Reporting by Lu Jianxin and Pete Sweeney; Editing by Shri Navaratnam)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jul 10, 201311:06pm EDT--
Yeah, but the government is beholden to the finance sector. I wonder, will the government or the big bad finance sector be moving into all those empty towns and development malls dotting the country. I do not believe the Chinese Communist Party is as well prepared as it pretends to be. The government of the People¡¯s Republic of China is at an advantage over consensus governments, since they can basically plow ahead without asking. But this has made them very reckless in some cases. And there is really no precedent for the way things are going. The helmsmen are driving a truck with very very big wheels, and a slow steering column. And no precedent means history is unable to bless the next phase.
Jul 10, 201311:34pm EDT--
China¡¯s Big Four Banks lent a total of $27.51 billion in the week ending July 5, up 839.13% week-on-week, marking a strong rally in new loan disbursement.
Jul 11, 20132:13am EDT--
