Pork will keep China's inflation on the back-burner
2009-08-24 06:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Pork, a trigger of past inflationary bouts in China, is likely to be a suppressant of price pressures in coming months and give the government leeway to keep monetary policy loose until the economic recovery is on solid ground.
A record flood of bank lending in the first half has fueled concerns that Chinese consumer price inflation, in negative territory since February, could soon accelerate -- and accelerate quickly.
Monetary conditions are unquestionably crucial in determining the course of inflation, but recent history has shown that China's single most important price is that of pork.
Food makes up a third of the Chinese consumer price index and pork is the key component of that. A sweeping pig cull because of disease in 2007 sent pork prices soaring and sparked the country's worst inflation in more than a decade.
At first glance, pig market trends are unsettling.
Retail pork prices have risen for 11 weeks straight and are up more than 10 percent during that time, which would seem to augur for an aggressive rebound of inflation in China.
For a graphic showing the relationship between pork prices and inflation in China, double click-on:
"There is no possible way that we will see pork-led inflation again because of the general over-supply of pigs," said Feng Yonghui, chief analyst for Soozhu.com, a hog industry website.
China needs about 410 million live hogs, including 41 million sows, for the market to be in equilibrium, according to the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), a central planning agency. Official data showed that China had 447.2 million live hogs and 48.3 million sows at the end of June.
U.S. hog futures have plunged 34 percent in three months and could be dragged lower by swelling supplies after a slump in export demand. China's pork prices have historically had little relationship to world prices, because it satisfies nearly all of its demand domestically and exports next to nothing.
In China, fresh pork cost 11.69 yuan ($1.70) per 500 grams in the week ending August 21, the NDRC said. That was 11 percent higher than two months earlier, though still 20 percent below the 2008 peak.
"Maybe the short-term price rises can last until September, but we do not expect pork prices will continue like that afterwards," said Guo Huiyong, an analyst who follows animal husbandry at Beijing Orient Agri-Business Consultant.
Low prices earlier this year meant that breeders were barely breaking even after soymeal-based feed costs rose, which might have discouraged them from raising more hogs. It takes six months to raise a hog for slaughter, so the ebb in prices could theoretically crimp the pork supply by the end of this year.
China's central bank said last month that the consumer price index, which fell 1.8 percent in the year to July, would start rising in the fourth quarter; in other words, the pork supply shock could hit just as broader price pressures perk up.
This, in turn, could force the central bank into raising interest rates prematurely. With signs that the economy's momentum has slowed a touch in recent weeks, most analysts think Beijing wants to keep monetary policy loose well into next year.
But the government, keenly aware of the 2007 pork-led inflation precedent, has stepped into the breach with a stockpiling program. Much as China has supported its metal producers and grain farmers by buying excess supply, it began in June to do the same with pork.
Its initial purchase of 120,000 tonnes of pork, while paltry next to China's annual output of more than 40 million tonnes, was enough to put a floor under the price -- and to encourage hog restocking, even though not justified by real demand.
"The overall supply of pork will still be in surplus in coming months. The government's stockpiling has given the market and breeders a misleading signal," Guo said.
Another factor keeping pigs in ample supply is the basic reluctance of farmers to cut stocks. Many came to regret the huge cull in 2007, a reaction to the spread of blue-ear disease, when subsequent pork shortages led prices to soar by 50 percent.
"Household pig farms may not make money from hogs, but they can still make money from selling piglets, so there was no massive slaughter even in the worst days," said Zhao Huian, manager of a pig-farm cooperative in Xiangtan, Hunan province.
At current pork prices, in fact, breeders can earn about 100 yuan per head.
"Pork sells very well recently and we can make a decent profit from it. I do not think the good situation will change soon, at least in the short term," said Shao Zuohuan, a farmer in Zhejiang Province.
The Shanxi statistics bureau concluded that live hog stocking was on the rise, limiting the scope for price increases, after a survey of 182 large pig farms and 166 rural households.
The Hunan statistics bureau, which surveyed 37 pig-producing counties, forecast that live hog prices would hover in the range of 10-11 yuan per kilogram over the rest of the year, basically level with current prices.
Feng, the Soozhu.com analyst, said many big pig farms had made lots of money in the last round of pork price inflation and could patiently wait for the next round of rising prices.
"With plenty of cash in hand, they can endure even the longest winter," he said.
The over-supply will continue until there is a steep cull of sows, something which will not occur until there is a new disease outbreak or the bankruptcy of big pig farms, Feng said.
(Additional reporting by Niu Shuping and Shao Xiaoyi; Editing by Jan Dahinten)
