N.Skog says newsprint demand bottoming
2009-08-24 10:34:00.0
(Reuters) - The steep drop in demand for newsprint has ended, though the long-term outlook is still weak in many markets, the head of Norway's Norske Skog (
"It looks like the steep fall in demand is behind us on the volume side," Chief Executive Christian Rynning-Toennesen told the Reuters Paper and Packaging Summit.
"It's impossible to be certain, but in China the consumption of newsprint has regained the level from before the financial crisis. In Europe the steepest decline is behind us, and has bottomed out in several markets," he added.
"U.S. demand will still decline, but by less than in the last six months."
Newsprint demand has suffered in the global economic downturn, which has knocked print advertising, leading to fewer pages in newspapers generally and some publications abandoning paper altogether to go digital.
Shares in Norske Skog, the world's No.2 newsprint producer, had jumped 7.1 percent to 10.83 crowns by 1406 GMT, outperforming a 2.7 percent rise in the Dow Jones Stoxx Basic Resources index .SXPP.
The paper industry needs consolidation but is unlikely to see big transactions for some time, Rynning-Toennesen said.
"It will probably take some time, until financial markets normalize and each company has cut capacity to sufficiently restore the market balance," the Norske Skog chief added.
The company has slashed its newsprint capacity by 23 percent in less than two years and does not have any plans for more when the latest casualty, a Dutch mill, is idled.
"The market volume is down by some 15 percent, so we've taken out our share. The newsprint sector probably needs cuts of 15 to 20 percent compared to 2007, and it remains to be seen how much our competitors are doing," Rynning-Toennesen said.
The long-term outlook for newsprint remain weak in developed economies, while emerging markets such as China and others have growth prospects, Rynning-Toennesen said.
"Western countries are moving from high newspaper consumption to a much lower level than it used to be at -- and also lower than it is today," he said. "This will be a gradual decline over many years," he said.
"China's per-capita newsprint consumption is so low that it's set to rise significantly over time," he said.
Norske Skog has announced that it may sell its remaining Chinese paper mill to reduce its net debt, which currently stands at 12 billion crowns ($2 billion).
"This company still needs to trim its balance sheet somewhat and to raise funds from the sale of assets," Rynning-Toennesen said, but declined to be more specific.
"There are no other facilities that we've confirmed are available for sale. It'll be a balance between the kind of portfolio we want to retain and the opportunities we get to sell at a good price," he said.
