China shares rangebound, trend seen persisting
2009-08-24 01:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares climbed 1.9 percent on Monday tracking strength in overseas markets with refiners and Chinese finance stocks rallying after Sinopec (
China's benchmark stock index rose slightly in rangebound trade, with strong earnings from index heavyweight Sinopec Corp (
Further upside of Hong Kong stocks would track closely how far the China market could go on concern over widely-speculated monetary tightening in China, brokers said.
"Local rally was largely expected when it tracked the overseas," said Alfred Chan, chief dealer at Cheer Pearl Investment. "Strong profit-taking interest at around 20,600 level limited the upside and that also triggered worries about possible capital outflow."
was 1.9 percent higher at 20,589.97 with shares worth HK$33.2 billion changing hands.
), the world's second-largest refiner after Exxon Mobil (
), rose 4.9 percent to an 11-month high of HK$7.26 before steadying at HK$7.00, still up 1.2 percent from the previous close.
Sinopec recorded a net profit for April-June of 22 billion yuan ($3.22 billion), against a 16.1 billion yuan estimate. It forecast results for the first three quarters to be more than 50 percent higher than a year earlier. [ID:nHKG107709]
) rose 2.6 percent after the country's second-largest lender posted a forecast-beating 11.7 percent jump in second-quarter earnings. ICBC (
) gained 1.2 percent, and China Life (
), rose 3.6 percent on hope that the world's No.3 alumina maker will post a smaller quarterly loss paving way to a profit for the second half on rising demand and prices of the metal. It is due to announce its first-half earnings after the market close on Monday.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, was up 2.2 percent at 11,711.51.
Bucking a market rally, Parkson (
) fell 2.9 percent after the department store operator said the road to further recovery was expected to be bumpy because China's loose monetary policy and easy credit environment was expected to be tightened as the economy improved.
rose 0.60 percent to 2,977.876 at midday after U.S. stocks ended last week at 2009 highs on Friday after a surprising rise in home sales and optimistic comments from Federal Reserve chief Ben Bernanke reassured investors about the prospects for an economic recovery.
Analysts said the Shanghai index would continue to trade narrowly possibly for one to two weeks, after it managed a rebound on Friday and Thursday in the wake of a 20 percent slump over a two-week period.
The index should mainly hover in a narrow range between its short-term five-day moving average of 2,906 and its medium-term 60-day moving average of 3,059, analysts said.
China's stock regulator announced late on Friday that it would review an application this week by Metallurgical Corp of China for a Shanghai IPO aiming to raise 16.85 billion yuan ($2.5 billion), while approving a Shanghai IPO by train maker China CNR Corp to raise nearly $1 billion.
Fresh supplies of equity and tightening market liquidity added to stretched valuations as key factors that sparked the share index's recent correction after a 90 percent rally earlier in the year.
"The latest correction has washed out most of the profit-taking pressure and should ensure a relatively stable period in coming weeks," said Wu Haijun, Shanghai principal at Power Pacific Corp of Canada, a foreign investor in Chinese stocks.
"China's economy is still recovering, though not as quickly as the market had implied earlier this year. Liquidity in the system is good but not as ample as many investors had expected."
State media said two thirds of China's 1,600-plus listed companies, which have posted their results for the first half of this year, reported a 2.3 percent drop in their combined net profit from a year earlier. But the companies' net profit in the second quarter was up 23 percent from the first quarter.
Analysts said the earnings were generally stronger than the market had expected, although they added that companies that recorded worse results typically reported at the end of a reporting season. The current season will last until the end of August.
), which debuted on the Shanghai market last week, fell 2.8 percent to 24 yuan. (Editing by Chris Lewis)
