European stocks hit highest close since early Nov
2009-08-21 00:26:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares rose to their highest close since early November as better-than expected U.S. July existing homes sales lifted investor sentiment on Friday, with banking stocks the major gainers.
Jim Wood-Smith, head of research at brokerage Williams de Broe, noted a "cracking set of home sales from the U.S., which were much better than the market had been looking for. They have really cheered up what was already a fairly positive day. It is more fuel on the fire of the bull market.
"This is a market which is really receptive to the good new and pretty resilient to the not so good stuff. It is a good bull market," said Wood-Smith.
Sales of previously owned U.S. homes in July notched their fastest pace in nearly two years, an industry survey showed, the strongest sign yet that housing is pulling out of a three-year slump. [ID:nN21391628]
Banks added the most points to the index, with UBS (
), Banco Santander (
The market was further buoyed after U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said the global economy appeared on the mend after a deep downturn, though the recovery is likely to be sluggish and risks remain. [ID:nWEQ001325]
Utilities were higher. Germany's E.ON (
) gained 5.5 percent after Paolo Scaroni, chief executive of Italy's oil and gas major Eni (
), said on Thursday Italian gas distribution Italgas, owned by Eni's unit Snam Rete Gas (
), was interested in the Italian gas distribution network of E.ON. [ID:nLK28970]
), RWE (
), BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
On the downside, British software firm Sage (
) forecast 2010 earnings will be below analysts' estimates and said it sees tight economic conditions prevailing for at least another year.
dropped 4.3 percent, reaching a two-month closing low, before surging 4.5 percent on Thursday. It rose 1.7 percent on Friday.
"Over the last days, the Asian markets especially China, were the most important impulse generators for the rest of the world," said Roger Peeters, strategist at Close Brothers Seydler.
"Investors should not forget that the economy in China has become more and more important, but the stock markets in this country are still very volatile and sometimes resemble a casino," he added.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was up 2 percent, Germany's DAX
was 2.9 percent higher and France's CAC 40
was up 3.2 percent. (Additional reporting by Christoph Steitz; Editing by David Holmes)
