FTSE rises to highest close since Oct 2008
2009-08-21 00:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's FTSE 100
ended 2 percent higher on Friday, setting its highest close since early October 2008 and completing a fruitful week for the index as stocks extended their rally on the back of strong economic data.
Led by commodity and financial stocks, the FTSE 100 index
closed 94.31 points higher at 4,850.89, its fourth straight day of gains and trading above 4,800 for the first time since Oct. 12, 2008.
The UK benchmark advanced 2.9 percent on the week and is up 9.4 percent this year, after rallying 40 percent since hitting a floor in early March.
Britain traced gains across Europe and in the United States after better-than-expected July existing home sales figures from the United States and bullish comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, who said prospects for a return to growth in the near term appeared good. [ID:nWEQ001325]
Oil producers were firmer as crude prices CLc1 rose towards $74 a barrel, extending a recent strong run after data this week showed a surprise drawdown in U.S. inventories.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), BG Group (
), Lonmin (
), Vedanta Resources (
), Xstrata XTA.L, Rio Tinto (
"The Fed chairman is obviously an important cog in the wheels of the economic world and the positive comments from him have been received really well," said Keith Bowman, analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown.
Bowman said the rally looked set to continue but counselled there are still lingering concerns both in the United States and in China, where there is a potential threat of the Chinese tightening the flow of credit.
Sales of previously owned U.S. homes in July notched their fastest pace in nearly two years, an industry survey showed, the strongest sign yet that housing was pulling out of a three-year slump. [ID:nN21391628]
INSURERS, BANKS HIGH
), Old Mutual (
Banks also rose, with Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Lloyds Banking Group (
Drugmakers, which have lagged behind the broader market rally with only a 25 percent gain since March, were also in demand. GlaxoSmithKline (
), AstraZeneca (
), however, lost 2 percent after U.S. peer Intuit (
) forecast 2010 earnings would be below analysts' estimates and saw tight economic conditions prevailing for at least another year.
"What you are seeing here is confirmation that any time since March, any selling has purely been people taking profit. They will come back to take up the slack and pick up more stocks. There is no return to March 9 lows," said Stephen Pope, chief global market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald.
Yet not all were buying into the rosy scenario. Nick Bullman, managing partner at hedge fund firm Bullman Investment Management, said he had placed bets on falling share prices and believed equities may be 20 percent overpriced.
"The rally has been a 'dash for trash' based on speculation ... stocks that were on their knees have risen to pre-Lehman levels, but the fundamentals haven't changed at all," Bullman said [ID:nLL566842] (Additional reporting by Laurence Fletcher; Editing by David Holmes)
