RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asian shares fall, yen gains on China worries
2009-08-21 03:12:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen surged to a one-month high against the dollar on Friday and jumped against currencies used for bets on global recovery, as fears resurfaced that China might clamp down on lending and sent Asian stocks falling.
opened modestly lower amid growing volatility, trimming the previous session's gains, with resource-related shares expected to be hit by retreating commodity prices as the fickle Chinese market prompts investors to switch out of riskier assets.
Sources told Reuters earlier this month that China's banking regulator, concerned record lending could lead to a spike in bad loans, might tighten banks' capital rules by excluding subordinated bonds they sell to other banks from their capital base. [ID:nSHA168045]
A similar report on Friday re-focused attention on this issue, traders said.
"This is old news and the market has already responded to this once. But investor confidence has been so shaken by the (SHanghai) sell-off earlier this week that every time this news surfaces it's an excuse to sell," said Steven Leung, sales director at UOB Kay Hian.
ended up a provision 1.7 percent after shaking off early losses, adding to a 4.5 percent bounce on Thursday.
But China's leading index has still lost around 15 percent in just two weeks, unnerving global investors who are trying to gauge how China's revival is playing out while wrestling with continued mixed signals on recovery prospects in major Western economies.
A government think-tank said China's gross domestic product would grow about 8.5 percent in the third quarter from a year earlier, picking up pace from the second quarter's 7.9 percent rise. [ID:nPEK242921].
As Shanghai moved higher, the MSCI index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS pared losses but were still down 1 percent by 0700 GMT.
In Australia, the benchmark S&P/ASK 200 .AXJO fell 1.9 percent, with banks leading the decline after a cautious assessment of the outlook for the loan market from Westpac Banking Corp. (
, a key market for international investors playing Chinese stocks, fell 1 percent on the China policy worries despite Shanghai's stronger close.
slid to a three-week low in early afternoon after automakers fell ahead of the end of the U.S. "cash for clunkers" programme on Monday, which has boosted U.S. car sales. But it recovered somewhat to close down 1.4 percent.
Shares in the world's biggest automaker, Toyota Motor Corp (
), shed 2.9 percent.
The yen rose broadly against other major currencies, particularly those leveraged to a global growth recovery, as investors fretted about the potential for further weakness in Chinese shares and looked to less-risky investments. The Japanese currency is often seen as a haven in times of market turmoil.
"Anything that could be negative for growth in China is going to have a negative impact on equity markets and in turn means higher risk aversion and risk currencies sell-off," said Mitul Kotecha, global head of FX strategy at Calyon in Hong Kong.
on trading platform EBS, its lowest in a month, but later edged up to 93.69 yen, down 0.5 percent.
Sentiment towards the Australian dollar was hurt after ratings agency Moody's Investors Service repeated its concerns about the deteriorating financial position of many of Australia's states and said downgrades could not be ruled out. [ID:nWNA1863]
Japanese government bonds advanced, with futures 2JGBv1 hitting a five-month high of 139.36 after gains in U.S. Treasury debt prices in New York and the drop in Tokyo stocks, but closed at 139.20.
U.S. Treasury futures TYv1 climbed in Asia, with Treasury note futures hitting a more than one-month high before edging down. (Editing by Kim Coghill) (Additional reporting by Hong Kong/Shanghai newsrooms and Charlotte Cooper)
