UPDATE 2-Global crude steel output highest for 2009 in July
2009-08-20 11:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Global crude steel production in July reached its highest monthly level so far in 2009 as producers brought back idled capacity to meet improved demand, but output was down 11.1 percent from the same month last year.
Production was 103.9 million tonnes, up from 99.7 million tonnes in June this year, figures from the World Steel Association showed on Thursday.
Crude steel output in China, the world's biggest producer and consumer of the metal, bucked the trend in year-on-year figures and rose by 12.6 percent in July to 50.7 million tonnes.
This was the first time the country has produced more than 50 million tonnes of steel in a single month, accounting for almost half of the world's total production, said the association, whose members represent around 85 percent of the world's steel producers.
"China appears at first glance, however, to have peaked in terms of output," Credit Suisse said in a research note. "China is operating at around 90 percent utilisation so (there is) limited scope for it to ramp up further, short term, and export steel."
In July, almost all the major steel-producing countries, including China, Japan, Germany, the United States, Brazil, Turkey, Russia and Ukraine, reached their highest monthly output this year.
Credit Suisse said the next stage of recovery in steel would focus on the market outside of China, where the rebound could still be substantial. Steel producers across the globe have ramped up output over the past couple of months as traders and stockists came back to the market after depleting their inventories due to an improved outlook for steel demand and the global economy.
Output in Europe and North America dropped by 36 and 40 percent year-on-year respectively in July, but production was up in both regions compared with June.
Production in the Middle East, where demand was buoyant last year due to booming infrastructure spending, edged up by 2.5 percent in July. (Reporting by Humeyra Pamuk, editing by Anthony Barker)
