Dollar, yen slip on Philly Fed data
2009-08-20 16:08:00.0
Dollar, yen slip on Philly Fed data | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Dollar, yen slip on Philly Fed data
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu, Aug 20 2009
Thu  EDT
A report showed manufacturing in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic region expanded in August for the first time in 10 months, boosting optimism about a recovery. A rebound in China's stock market, which had fallen 20 percent over the last two weeks, also lifted spirits.
In recent months, the dollar and yen have tended to fall when markets grow more optimistic and as investors buy higher-yielding and riskier assets and currencies.
"The risk trade -- risk on, risk off -- is still the primary driver of the U.S. dollar," said Sacha Tihanyi, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto.
"It was nice to see (the Philly Fed index) move back into expansionary territory. Improved economic data will likely imply a weaker U.S. dollar for a little bit of time yet to come," he added.
stocks rose, following a 4.5 percent surge in the Shanghai Composite Index
, which shed about the same amount the previous day.
In late New York trading, the euro rose 0.2 percent to $1.4263, near a one-week high of $1.4276 hit earlier in the session, and was up 0.3 percent at 134.25 yen.
"Some reluctance to sell the U.S. dollar on good U.S. data maybe partly reflects a market that was short the U.S. dollar from yesterday, and partly related to a summer lull," said Alan Ruskin, chief international strategist at RBS Securities in Greenwich, Connecticut.
LOONIE LOOKS 'ATTRACTIVE'
"We'll have a recovery but it is going to take a while to gain traction," said Meg Browne, senior currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York. "U.S. interest rates will stay low for a while yet, and so now you're seeing a lot of positioning because there is not a lot to trade on."
The ICE Futures U.S. dollar index .DXY, which tracks the greenback versus a basket of currencies, was down 0.1 percent.
Sterling was down 0.1 percent at $1.6513 after weak data on British public finances underscored concern about the country's fiscal situation.
One of the bigger movers was the Canadian dollar, which rose to its highest in about a week after Goldman Sachs recommended buying the currency against the U.S. dollar.
The firm said U.S. fundamentals "will not improve sufficiently this year," and "genuine and broad dollar strength will 'not yet' materialize. The Canadian dollar looks "particularly attractive given its strong exposure to oil," Goldman wrote in a research note.
In other trading, the Norwegian crown hit its highest against the euro since March after data showed Norway's non-oil economy grew 0.3 percent from April to June.
(Additional reporting by Steven C. Johnson; Editing by James Dalgleish)
