Banks, builders lead Europe stocks to close higher
2009-08-20 00:33:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares closed higher on Thursday with construction stocks gaining after Holcim (
) results pleased investors, while banks and commodity stocks performed well.
) ... as well as the strong rebound in China, which has had quite a setback," said Heino Ruland, strategist at Ruland Research.
surged 4.5 percent, posting their second biggest daily percentage gain of the year, as modest signs of official support for the market helped to trigger technical buying after a 20 percent dive in the two weeks up to Wednesday's close.
), Lafarge (
) was 3.9 percent higher after it reported second-quarter profit above forecasts, as it increased market share and clamped down on costs, convincing investors of its operational strength. [ID:nLK15219]
) rose 4.5 percent after Switzerland sold its stake in the bank, at the top end of its price range, a source said, making a profit from last year's rescue deal. [ID:nLK353972]
), BNP Paribas (
), BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
Miners gained, with Rio Tinto (
), Antofagasta (
), BHP Billiton (
), Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation (
Some strategists remained cautious, with stocks paring gains earlier after the number of U.S. workers filing new claims for jobless benefits unexpectedly rose last week as companies continued to cut payrolls amid uncertainty over the economic outlook. [ID:nN19383506]
Initial claims for state unemployment insurance benefits rose 15,000 to a seasonally adjusted 576,000 in the week ended Aug. 15 from 561,000 the prior week, the U.S. Labor Department said.
"Chart analysts would say global equity indexes are looking very overbought," said Jeremy Batstone-Carr, strategist at Charles Stanley. "The breadth of the rally is encouraging the optimists to believe this is the real thing.
"I would argue that equity markets' performance is in line with a V-shaped recovery, but the economic recovery has been muted at best. Earnings have beaten forecast, but the top line has been disappointing. How long can companies pull off this trick of increasing earnings by cutting costs?"
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was up 1.4 percent, Germany's DAX
was 1.5 percent higher and France's CAC 40
(Additional reporting by Brian Gorman; editing by John Stonestreet)
