UPDATE 2-Grindrod sees lower H2 as shipping unit struggles
2009-08-20 08:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Africa's biggest shipping company Grindrod (
Grindrod, which derives more than 80 percent of its profit from shipping resources such as iron ore, coal and fuel, said while drybulk volumes show signs of improvement, the delivery of a large number of new ships would push freight rates lower.
"We've seen some improvement in volumes of dry cargo in July and August ... we don't know if is sustainable or a result of destocking in China," Alan Olivier chief executive officer of Grindrod said. "And demand from the East has not taken up the slack from the West."
The 99-year old Durban-based company said on Thursday headline earnings per share for the six months to end-June fell 56 percent to 105.7 cents, in line with its own forecast for a 50-60 percent fall.
The company said its earnings were hit by recession, lower trade volumes, declining commodity prices and continued lack of credit.
Poor global appetite for raw material has taken its toll on freight rates and the Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI, which tracks the cost of shipping dry commodities, is nearly 80 percent lower than a record 11,793 points hit last year.
Grindrod, whose other activities are commodity trading, financial services and freight logistics, reduced its ship fleet to 49 from 55 to match demand and could cut it further if trading conditions deteriorate.
Olivier said the company would put 77 percent of this fleet on fixed contracts in the second half, cutting exposure to the lower spot shipping market.
Grindrod, which has warned of a "horrible" shipping market during this fiscal year, said it wanted to take advantage of cheap asset prices to make acquisitions.
"We've got a good balance sheet, we're in a good position to look for acquisitions... weak markets present opportunities," said Olivier.
The company said it expects earnings growth from its trading, freight services and financial services business for the full year.
Shares in the company were down 0.49 percent to 16.20 rand by 1201 GMT, underperforming a 1.17 percent gain in the All-share index
. (Additional reporting by Gugu Lourie; Editing by Hans Peters)
