UPDATE 2-China's ICBC Q2 profit flat, margin pressure easing
2009-08-20 07:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Shrinking margins held back second-quarter profit at Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd (ICBC) (
), despite a surge in lending, but the world's biggest bank by market value beat expectations and said the deterioration in loan margins was easing.
), in which Goldman Sachs (
), Allianz Group (
) hold stakes, said it ramped up lending in response to the loose fiscal and monetary policies implemented by Beijing to prop up the world's third-largest economy.
At the end of June, loans and advances totalled 5.44 trillion yuan ($796.4 billion), up 19 percent from the end of 2008, ICBC said in a filing to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
But net interest income fell 11.9 percent to 116 billion yuan in the first half as the bank's net interest margin narrowed to 2.25 percent from 2.95 percent at the end of 2008.
After a period of decline, net interest margins began recovering in the second quarter and are expected to keep rising in the second half of the year, Chairman Jiang Jianqing said in a teleconference, according to an analyst on the call.
"These are great numbers," said Victor Wang, an analyst with UBS Securities in Hong Kong, adding that ICBC managed to post profits on the basis of prudent expansion. "The bank has made progress in net profit, meanwhile, it faces much lower risks than others," said Wang, who holds a "Buy" on ICBC.
ICBC, with a market value of roughly $400 billion, reported April-June earnings of 31.27 billion yuan, down slightly from 31.4 billion a year earlier, but beating a forecast of 29.35 billion yuan, based on seven analysts polled by Reuters.
For the first half of the year, ICBC recorded a profit of 66.42 billion yuan, compared with a forecast of 64.5 billion yuan.
The bank's net fee and commission income rose 13 percent to 27.7 billion yuan. (For the full Hong Kong stock exchange report click:
The net interest margin is the main source of profits for Chinese banks. The central bank imposes a cap on deposit rates and a floor on lending rates, providing banks with a built-in interest margin of nearly 3 percentage points.
Margins, which trended lower in the second quarter as lending boomed, have stabilised recently as officials, worried about the potential for a jump in problem loans, started to curb credit growth and banks began to charge more for loans.
Like ICBC, China's Bank of Communications (
), China's No. 5 bank, said on Wednesday it saw its net interest margins start to improve in the second quarter, and expects the trend of interest income to strengthen. [ID:nPEK43488]
ICBC is not expected to benefit as much as some of its peers from a rising rate cycle, Macquarie said in a report dated Aug 4.
"However, in a modest tightening environment where rate increases are unlikely to be as aggressive as the last tightening cycle, we do not expect this to be a significant drag for ICBC," Macquarie's analysts Nick Lord and Sarah Wu said.
On Wednesday, Bank of Communications (
Ahead of the results, ICBC's Hong Kong shares closed unchanged in a broader market that was up 1.88 percent.
Both ICBC's Hong Kong- and Shanghai-listed shares have risen around 30 percent so far this year, underperforming a 41 percent rise in the benchmark Hang Seng Index
Like ICBC, Bank of Communications also posted flat first-half earnings on Wednesday as a surge in lending was offset by narrower margins. ($1=6.831 Yuan) (Reporting by Michael Wei; Editing by Doug Young, Muralikumar Anantharaman and Chris Lewis; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
