HIGHLIGHTS 4-BOJ's Mizuno warns of fragile global growth
2009-08-20 03:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of Japan board member Atsushi Mizuno warned the country's export recovery may slow from autumn as global growth remained fragile.
He also said the central bank had no effective means with which to quickly counter the current bout of deflation, which is largely due to a weak economy.
Following are key quotes from Mizuno's speech delivered to business executives and at a news conference that followed:
"Given that there is a negative output gap in Japan and it's likely to narrow only moderately, the pace of falls (in Japanese prices) is expected to be slow through fiscal 2010/11 and fiscal 2011/12.
"In a longer-term perspective, we need to take into account Japan's potential growth rate and companies' growth expectations. I'm also focusing on the sharp fall in wages. With the global economic outlook uncertain, companies need to cut costs and may be doing so by keeping wages low.
"I hope that's just for the near term. But if, in a globalised economy, companies feel they need to lower the labour distribution rate even further, wages will fall for a prolonged period ... that undoubtedly would mean that any improvement in services prices will be delayed ...
"With interest rates very low at 0.1 percent, there is very little monetary policy can do to create demand ... We don't have any tools with which to push up prices or stimulate the economy short term. We need to fight this with a long-term perspective, given severe conditions after the global financial crisis."
"The risk of domestic private demand falling further is not small, and rebounds in output and exports could slow from autumn onwards...
"In my personal view, the Japanese economy's potential growth rate may have fallen from around 1 percent that was given in our outlook report in April.
"This is something that can't be avoided given a drop in the potential growth rate for the world economy, the decline in output capacity and a rise in the structural jobless rate."
"Global financial and economic conditions remain fragile and can't achieve a sustained recovery without support from governments and central banks."
"I'm more optimistic about China's economy than in April, when the BOJ issued its twice-yearly economic outlook report. That's because Chinese authorities, despite the country's strong growth in the second quarter, continue to recognise the need for further stimulus measures."
"Many countries are considering departing from economic stimulus measures and financial stabilisation steps, but are not about to do so. But for each country, exit strategies are indispensable for achieving a sustainable economic recovery in the long term...
"No central bank has lowered policy rates to zero percent due to the common understanding, based on Japan's past experience, that a complete zero percent rate would damage the functions of the short-term money market and would hamper (the process of) exiting unconventional policies...
"It is important for central banks to thoroughly explain their exit strategies as soon as they can, for if they hold off making explanations until just before unconventional policies are unwound, this would confuse financial markets and would hamper smooth departures...
"We must communicate that there is a distinction between an exit strategy for unconventional, temporary measures and that for very low interest rates ...
"If there was an increasing possibility of the economic and price outlook undershooting forecasts, one option for a central bank would be to announce its commitment to maintaining very low interest rates."
"As for Japan, even if the BOJ does not clearly make such a commitment, markets themselves may factor in such expectations in the future. As for U.S. and European countries, long-term interest rates may destabilise if central banks there do not make a clearer commitment (to low rates).
"I didn't make the comment (during the speech) with a specific image in mind in terms of future policy."
"When a central bank buys long-term government debt as part of quantitative easing, it is important to keep this separate from government debt-management policy and to make clear that the purpose is not to finance government spending. Financial markets likely understand this point. However, the view that a central bank must be aware that long-term rates could rise as a result of economic stimulus is also strong.
"That is why it is important for a central bank to repeatedly explain that its buying of government bonds isn't intended to monetise debt." (Reporting by Leika Kihara)
