GLOBAL MARKETS-China jump lifts global stocks, yen slips
2009-08-20 07:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese stocks rebounded sharply on Thursday, giving a fillip to global equities and fostering demand on foreign exchanges for higher-yielding currencies.
Wall Street looked set to open higher, following gains overnight that managed to shake off fears of a Chinese stock collapse after a surprising drop in crude oil stockpiles suggested an improving demand outlook.
World stocks as measured by MSCI .MIWD00000PUS were up 0.7 percent with more than 1 percent gains in emerging markets .MSCIEF, Europe and Japan.
"Markets are often dictated by state of mind, and one can't help but sense the growing feeling of optimism," said Brian Myers analyst at ODL Securities.
"Whilst economic data suggests that we are not out of the woods just yet, we are certainly walking with a bit more of a spring in our steps."
China has been a big worry in volume-thin August for investors, registering large losses that have seen the Shanghai Composite Index
swing wildly and even drop into bear market territory, 20 percent below its recent peak.
The rebound nudged the index just above the closely watched five-day moving average, now at 2,905 points. Analysts said a convincing move above that level could indicate the index had stabilised after the recent sell-off.
The more immediate impact, along with Wall Street's gains, was to spread some comfort across other bourses.
Japan's Nikkei average
Japan's yen slipped, while higher-yielding currencies crept up as the recovery in global shares prices stoked some risk appetite in thin trade.
"We had a comeback in equities in Asia overnight ... that has eased some of the tensions that have seen the yen in particular do well," said Chris Gothard, currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman in London.
Euro zone government bond prices were flat. The two-year yield EU2YT=RR was 1.294 percent and the 10-year EU10YT=RR to 3.256 percent. (Additional reporting by Atul Prakash and Naomi Tajitsu, editing by Mike Peacock) (To read Reuters Global Investing Blog click
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
