RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Shanghai stocks rebound, drive Asia gains
2009-08-20 03:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese shares clawed higher on Thursday after a two-week sell-off, giving a boost to Asian stock indexes and commodities even as many investors remained worried that the Shanghai slide may have more room to run.
European shares were set to build on the gains in Asia, with futures on the Dow Jones Eurostoxx 50 STXEc1 up 1.4 percent, while U.S. stock futures SPc1 rose 0.5 percent.
jumped more than 4 percent, helped by reports that the stock regulator had approved new mutual funds this week to help underpin the market that has slid nearly 20 percent since hitting a 14-month high earlier in the month. [.HK]
Japan's Nikkei average
ended 1.8 percent higher, while the MSCI benchmark of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS gained 1.4 percent. Metals also got a lift, with copper prices recovering from a two-week low.
Shanghai's impact on global markets has surprised analysts because it is largely closed to foreign investors and its moves are sometimes due to murky local factors having little to do with corporate or economic fundamentals.
The Shanghai index is still up more than 50 percent so far this year, despite falling some 20 percent in just two weeks.
"The more aggressively minded or cowboys were steering those funds into the market. Now that the more concrete projects are happening, we are starting to see that money rotate out...," said Michael Kurtz, chief China representative and head of China research at Macquarie Securities in Shanghai.
Jerry Lou, China equity strategist at Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong, said that Chinese authorities have also cracked down on the bank lending that had been funnelled into stock market speculation.
"That's what the government wants. They don't want an asset bubble to burst too early in the recovery and then they're out of cards," Lou said. "We're not seeing the start of a bear market. The fundamentals are too sound."
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
In a sign that heavy share selling by short-term speculators -- or "hot money" -- may be calming down, the Hong Kong dollar
Patrick Bennett, Asia FX and rates strategist at Societe Generale, said the fact that Chinese shares were having such a big influence on other markets felt like "intellectual piracy", but showed how edgy investors are on the global outlook.
despite the broad rise in stocks after having taken a hit from the sharp drop in Shanghai shares earlier this week. Against the low-yielding yen AUDJPY=R, the Aussie was up 0.5 percent.
The U.S. dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six major currencies, was flat at 78.475 .DXY.
Oil prices rose 27 cents a barrel to $72.69 CLc1 after having surged more than 4 percent on Wednesday on data showing a sharp plunge in U.S. crude stockpiles, a jump that spilled over into shares of energy companies and helped push up the S&P 500
