Brazil stocks reverse losses, gain on risk-taking
2009-08-19 16:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's benchmark stock index rose on Wednesday, reversing earlier declines, as shares of state-controlled oil giant Petrobras rose with world oil prices.
rose 0.73 percent to 56,156.28 points. The Bovespa, which has gained almost 50 percent this year, opened at its lowest since late July.
"The market lacks a defined trend and might remain this way until the dust settles," said Renato Tavares, a stock trader with Sao Paulo-based Intrader.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, also advanced after earlier declines. The real edged up 0.05 percent to 1.846 reais per U.S. dollar, the unit's second gain in three sessions.
Local equities have traded on a stronger note in recent weeks amid growing optimism that Brazil's economy may have emerged from recession faster than most of its peers.
Company executives are betting on a gradual turnaround in activity, with steelmakers expecting lower inventory this quarter and retailers pointing to stronger sales of home appliances as interest rates fall to record lows.
That has helped the local market avert concerns over slowing growth in China, the world's largest emerging market economy.
Stocks in China entered a bear market after plunging 20 percent over the past two weeks, weighing on investor confidence about the strength of the rebound.
"If the Chinese sell-off continues, Brazilian stocks may suffer, but for now, strong corporate balance sheets and recovery prospects are providing a buffer," said Marcio Roberto Correia, who helps manage $1.5 billion in assets for JGP.
Preferred shares of Petrobras, also Brazil's biggest company by market value, rose 1.5 percent to 32.80 reais.
), the holding company that manages Brazil's stock and derivatives exchange, jumped 2.12 percent to 12.05 reais.
Limiting gains, preferred shares of Vale (
), the world's biggest iron ore producer, slipped 0.16 percent to 32.15 reais. Demand for raw materials will slow in China, hampering the growth in revenue and sales for companies like Vale, Correia said.
), Brazil's state-controlled power utility, tumbled 2.2 percent to 24.06 reais after reporting a bigger-than-expected loss in the second quarter.
Yields on Brazilian interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:> finished mostly lower. The yields often reflect investors' expectations over the future level of the benchmark Selic interest rate, which currently stands at a record-low 8.75 percent.
