Shanghai selloff eyed by wary U.S. investors
2009-08-19 17:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Aug 13 2009
An investor walks past electronic screens showing stock information at a brokerage house in Wuhan, Hubei province August 19, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Wed  EDT
Stocks in China have risen steadily through much of 2009, the SSE Composite index
up 91 percent on the year at one point, as other markets struggled with fallout from the global credit crisis and recession.
But Chinese shares have encountered aggressive profit taking, losing more than 20 percent in two weeks to fall to a two-month low. This decline looms large among those that fear the U.S. market's five-month ascent of nearly 50 percent has little room left to run and that the China selloff could reverberate globally.
It remains to be seen if China's pullback is a sign of underlying economic weakness in that country -- where so many have pinned their hopes for a revival in global demand -- or nothing more than a reaction to an overheated market.
"China was supposed to lead us out of our recession and make up for a lack of consumer involvement as far as the U.S. economy," said Alan Lancz, president of Alan B. Lancz & Associates Inc. in Toledo, Ohio. "If they don't grow in a V-shaped recovery like investors were discounting over the majority of the summer, it could create a selloff in stocks and a decline in valuations, even into 2010 and beyond."
Wednesday's 4.3 percent decline was the second steepest drop in the Shanghai bourse this week. The market has come into the spotlight over worries of a change in the government's relatively loose monetary policy, though analysts said that was not to blame for the slide.
Of course, the U.S. and Chinese markets are not the same. The Shanghai Composite Index
is volatile, and the drop still leaves it with a 53 percent gain in 2009.
By comparison, the S&P 500 index
gained as much as 50 percent after hitting 12-year lows in early March, but is up just 10 percent on the year.
Even in the midst of a strong rally, stocks have not seen the same buying fervor in the United States as in China and some analysts say gauging the impact on U.S. markets is not an easy comparison.
"It is a retail, highly speculative market that should not really have a huge impact on U.S. investors," said Robert Lutts, president and chief investment officer at Cabot Money Management in Salem, Massachusetts, of the Shanghai market.
"Sentiment-wise I think (the recent decline) will cause people to be a little bit more cautious and a little concerned about China's overall growth," he said.
Investors have looked to the country's large population and growing wealth as a new source of consumers who could pick up the slack for the United States, where shoppers remain reluctant to spend.
Consumer spending accounts for about two-thirds of the U.S. economy, so their health is crucial to recovery.
"Is the behavior of the stock market in China suggesting that the Chinese economy is now going to slow down significantly in the next year?" asked Paul Kasriel, director of economic research at Northern Trust in Chicago.
"If that is the case, then one of the catalysts for global growth is waning and that is going to reverberate throughout the global economy."
Still, others say the strength of U.S. markets will depend more on a stabilization of its own economy than on global growth, and the market selloff is nothing more than unsurprising profit taking.
"The reality is that the U.S. market is reacting much more to U.S. news than to Chinese news," said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at economic and forecasting company Global Insight in Lexington, Massachusetts.
(Additional reporting by Rachel Chang and Rodrigo Campos, editing by Andrew Hay)
