Nikkei up 1.8 pct helped by China rebound, resources
2009-08-20 03:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average climbed 1.8 percent on Thursday to bounce back from a three-week closing low, with investors encouraged by a rebound in Chinese shares and gains in resource shares after crude oil surged.
Truckmakers' shares climbed after a brokerage upgrade, with Isuzu Motors (
) adding 5.4 percent, and trading houses gained on strong metals prices.
Despite Thursday's bounce, however, analysts said the market is ripe for a correction after the Nikkei's gains of more than 40 percent from its March lows, with some saying investors had likely used the drop in Chinese stocks as an excuse to lock in profits.
"Sentiment is still fragile as both Japanese and U.S. stocks are in a natural corrective phase," said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
"Investors also lack trading factors to push the market much higher after having factored in the outlook for an economic recovery, and that's why they tend to focus on anything that can be seen as a selling signal."
In moderate trade, the benchmark Nikkei rose 179.41 points to 10,383.41, while the broader Topix
Most in the market said they felt Japan's dip this week was probably still within the range of a natural fluctuation, with support set to hold around 10,100 -- roughly where the 25-day moving average comes in.
"Investors in Chinese stocks are also taking profits partly due to concerns about a tighter policy after they had rallied sharply already," Akino said.
Along with Chinese stocks, Japan's general election on Aug. 30 is another big focus, market players said.
Opinion polls show the opposition Democratic Party well ahead of the conservative ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in the Aug. 30 race for the lower house of parliament, raising the prospect that the business-friendly LDP will lose power for only the second time in its 54-year history. [ID:nT44020]
The Asahi newspaper said on Thursday that the Democrats could win about 300 of the 480 seats, though things could shift in the final days of the race. [ID:nT155745]
"Until Japan's election is over, stocks may find it hard to move. The market just wants a decision fast, but if the LDP won it'd be quite a surprise and stocks would probably tumble," said Koichi Ogawa, chief fund manager at Daiwa SB Investments.
ENERGY, AUTOMAKERS JUMP
Energy shares powered higher after oil's surge on Wednesday when U.S. government data showed a steep drop in crude imports and inventories, though crude steadied on Thursday. CLc1 [O/R]
The surprising drop in stockpiles lifted Wall Street on views it could suggest an improving demand outlook and economy, but analysts said higher prices were a two-edged sword.
) gained 2.9 percent to 721,000 yen, while distributor Nippon Oil 5001.T rose 1.9 percent to 531 yen.
Trading houses rose on both the oil gains and a recovery in metals prices, with Marubeni (
) shot up after Nikko Citigroup upgraded them to "hold" from "sell", saying truckmakers' earnings could turn around in the second half of the business year on better overseas demand than the companies had originally foreseen. Isuzu climbed to 197 yen and Hino Motors advanced 5.1 percent to 391 yen.
) soared 15.4 percent to 748 yen after Daiwa Institute of Research lifted its rating to "Neutral" from "Bearish", saying the likelihood of returning to the black in the financial year to March 2010 has increased partly due to deeper cost cuts.
), the top Asian manufacturer of diapers and sanitary goods, climbed 3.4 percent to 8,180 yen after the Nikkei business daily reported the company would enter the U.S. diaper market through a joint venture with Swedish peer Svenska Cellulosa AB (
Some 2.1 billion shares changed hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, roughly in line with last week's daily average.
Advancing stocks outnumbered declining ones by nearly 5 to 1. (Additional reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Michael Watson)
