Naphtha tanker burns, leaks fuel off Malaysia
2009-08-19 10:20:00.0
(Reuters) - A tanker carrying 58,000 tonnes of naphtha was still burning on Wednesday, nearly 24 hours after a collision with a cargo ship in the Strait of Malacca, and had started to leak fuel, Malaysian officials said.
Officials feared the possibility of a spill of naphtha, saying firemen were cooling the ship's storage tank to prevent an explosion.
The search continued for nine of the tanker's 25-member crew. The others have been rescued.
Oil traders said the Cargill-chartered tanker, Formosaproduct Brick, was shipping the cargo of naphtha, a petrochemical feedstock, from the United Arab Emirates to Daesan and Yosu in South Korea.
The origin of the naphtha was probably the Abu Dhabi National Oil Co (ADNOC), with which U.S. trader Cargill has a term contract to lift around 100,000 tonnes for an unspecified period, traders added.
"Our biggest concern now is the possibility that the cargo could spill," said Mazlan Othman.
A spokeswoman from the Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency (MMEA) said the vessel was drifting and still ablaze, nearly 24 hours after the collision with the Ostede Max, a British- registered bulk carrier.
"The shipping lanes are not affected now because we pulled the tanker away," she told Reuters. "There is still no word about the nine crew members."
Traders said the naphtha was destined to be supplied to South Korean end users -- Honam Petrochemical, LG Chem and Yeochun Naphtha Cracking Centre (YNCC).
"The barrels were meant to arrive in South Korea in second-half August, but I doubt there will be any major impact. Inventory is not that low (in South Korea)," said a Northeast Asian trader. "Additionally, there are still some September cargoes that traders had not sold."
Market sentiment was edgy following the collision, sending crack spreads -- premiums or losses from refining Brent crude oil into naphtha -- up by $10.67 to $108.40 a barrel on Wednesday.
But this was still lower than Aug. 11, when cracks hit a near six-month high at $114.85 a tonne, as unexpected spot exports from Saudi Arabia and China helped to plug most of the void left by a fall exports from Europe.
Most petrochemical feedstock buyers have completed their September purchases, and are looking to replenish first-half October stocks.
"As far as we know, Cargill has not indicated what they will do next," another trader said.
The collision occurred at 10:00 p.m. (1400 GMT) in international waters in the Malacca Straits bordering Malaysia and Indonesia, another MMEA official said, adding that the tanker was towed 33 km offshore from Port Dickson.
The MMEA spokeswoman earlier said the cargo ship was empty when it sailed from Port Dickson for Singapore at the time of the collision and the slightly damaged bulk carrier had been directed to return to the west coast Malaysian port for investigations. (Reporting by Razak Ahmad, Yoong Chee Weng and Niluksi Koswanage; Additional reporting by Seng Li Peng and Yaw Yan Chong in Singapore; Editing by Anthony Barker)
