Treasuries stay course as riskier assets flag
2009-08-19 10:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Wed  EDT
After 2008's humbling market meltdown, trigger-happy investors are ready to hunker down in bonds at the least sign of trouble, despite seemingly modest returns. Many do not see stock turbulence as temporary, and expect it to bolster Treasuries for months or years to come.
With systemically important parts of the banking system backstopped by the government, investors are prepared to take on a bit more risk when they flee stocks.
Instead of running to shorter-term Treasury bills, which yield a paltry 0.2 percent, they are prepared to bet that government note and bond yields compensate for the risk of inflation.
For the past three months, the 10-year yield, which moves inversely to its price, has shuttled between about 3.25 percent and 4 percent. That 4 percent level seems to serve as a magic number for benchmark notes, judging by buying patterns in the market over the past two months.
Since inflation pressures are muted or nonexistent amid the most severe U.S. recession in decades, "you are getting real yield in Treasuries north of 3 percent," said Haag Sherman, co-founder and managing director of Salient Partners, a Houston based investment firm.
That scenario is creating a broad range for the 10-year note between 3.25 percent and 4 percent, which may become a central feature of bond markets through year-end and perhaps well into 2010, analysts said.
As it becomes clearer any U.S. economic recovery beyond the end of this year will be sluggish, "you will see a significant degree of risk aversion and the Treasury market will benefit from it," Sherman said.
"People are starting to take note that although the recession may have ended, the recovery will be anemic at first," said Carl Kaufman, portfolio manager for fixed income at Osterweis Capital Management in San Francisco.
"Stocks have come a long way pretty quickly," and are "still in a pretty tenuous situation," said Kaufman.
The rally in stocks of financial institutions looks shaky, with banks still burdened by bad loans from the battered housing and commercial real estate markets, he added.
High profile market figures, including Mohamed El-Erian, chief executive of bond fund management company Pacific Investment Management Co. (PIMCO), reckon stocks have hit a ceiling. El-Erian told Reuters this week valuations had shot up too quickly in relation to economic fundamentals.
MORE PRESSURE FOR STOCKS?
The stock market should come under more pressure in September and October on a sell off in lower quality stocks that have rebounded sharply from troughs, Sherman said.
"People will rotate aggressively out of risk, high yield (corporate bond yield) spreads will blow out and Treasuries will benefit," said Sherman.
That area, which is the top of the 10-year's range, has sparked buying from long term domestic investors and foreign central banks, said Michael Pond, Treasury and inflation-linked strategist at Barclays Capital in New York.
U.S. Treasury data on Tuesday showed China a net seller of Treasuries in June. Selling was concentrated in sales of bills, while that nation continued to buy long-term debt.
Still, Treasuries may tire further down the track.
Fears of massive selling from foreigners worried about U.S. debt-driven inflation has not yet materialized, as the primary worry is slack economic growth. Still, though Sherman and many other bond market participants expect U.S. economic growth to be muted in 2010, over the longer term they warn that inflation could jolt yields well above their current ranges.
And the ongoing surge of U.S. government bond issuance to pay for financial rescues -- expected to tally some $2 trillion this year alone -- could trigger market expectations of inflation well before the fact and before any sustained economic recovery, even if that is years away.
(Reporting by John Parry; Editing by Andrew Hay)
