Gold turns higher as dollar pares gains
2009-08-19 10:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold prices turned higher in Europe on Wednesday, reversing earlier losses as the dollar pared gains against a basket of currencies, though fears about underlying demand for the precious metal capped the upside.
Spot gold was bid at $939.00 an ounce at 1349 GMT (9:49 a.m. EDT), against $937.30 an ounce late in New York on Tuesday. U.S. gold futures for December delivery on the COMEX division of the New York Mercantile Exchange rose $1.20 to $940.40 an ounce.
The dollar rose on Wednesday after a sharp drop in Chinese shares and sliding oil prices prompted investors to shy away from currencies seen as higher risk, but later retreated from its early highs as stocks pared losses.
"For the rest of the month gold will be trading on sentiment (and on) the dollar," said VTB Capital analyst Andrey Kryuchenkov.
"I expect prices to recover well when we have full blown inflation, as (gold is) an inflation hedge... but right now we are still far off, we are still pretty much in deflation."
European shares fell in early trade after a sharp fall in China's stock market. U.S. stocks declined at the open, though they later lifted from lows.
Crude prices turned higher after falling more than 1 percent in earlier trade, lifting initial pressure on gold, which often benefits from strength in oil as a precursor to inflation.
Elsewhere the World Gold Council said gold demand fell 9 percent in the second quarter on persistent weakness in jewelry buying, as the recession weighed on consumer sentiment and high prices put off purchasers.
But prices holding firm above $900 an ounce suggested areas of demand not identified in the report -- from investors in the COMEX futures market, for example -- firmly underpinned the market, analysts said.
"The strong correlation between the gold price and the U.S. dollar is pointing to these investors making up most of unidentifiable demand," said Commerzbank analyst Eugen Weinberg.
Weinberg said while in the longer run he believed inflation and dollar weakness would support gold buying, in the short term he felt prices were vulnerable to a correction.
Fears over the economic outlook weighed on the more industrial precious metals -- platinum, palladium and silver -- as well as the base metals market, where copper and aluminum both fell more than 3 percent.
Silver, which is widely used in electronics manufacturing, slid more than 2 percent to a near three-week low of $13.48 an ounce as base metals fell, pressured by losses in Asia. It later recovered to $13.79 an ounce against $13.96 as gold firmed.
Silver's correlation with copper reached 0.98 this week -- with a correlation of 1 meaning prices have moved up precisely together - while its correlation with gold is at 0.93, according to Reuters data.
"Silver has had good selling since yesterday, as support for the metal failed to materialize," said Standard Bank in a note. "Copper has not made substantial gains since Monday, and this has been putting downward pressure on silver."
Latin American silver producer Hochschild Mining said its production rose to a record 13.9 ounces in the first half of the year, and said it sees silver prices at $13-15 an ounce for the rest of the year.
Platinum was at $1,233.50 an ounce against $1,228, while palladium was at $269 against $271.
(Reporting by Jan Harvey; Editing by Peter Blackburn)
