Brazil stocks fall on China-led equity sell-off
2009-08-19 10:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's benchmark stock index dropped for a third day in four on Wednesday as a sell-off in Chinese shares reignited concerns among investors over the strength of the global economic recovery.
fell 0.4 percent to 55,539.69, led by Petrobras (
) -- the index's largest stocks. The Bovespa, which gained 47 percent this year, opened at its lowest since late July.
"Although the contagion effect from China's sell-off should be limited in Brazil, valuations here are quite high," said Marcio Roberto Correia, who helps manage $1.5 billion in assets for JGP in Rio de Janeiro.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, fell 0.3 percent to 1.853 reais to the dollar, the second drop in three sessions.
Stocks in China, long seen as the main engine behind the global economic recovery, entered a bear market after plunging 20 percent over the past two weeks, weighing on investors' confidence about the strength of the rebound. Profit-taking may set the tone in coming days as signaled by index futures in major stock markets, according to IDEAglobal, a New York-based economic research firm.
Stocks in China, as measured by the Shanghai Composite Index
, closed on Wednesday down 4.3 percent--their lowest in two months. Skittish investors shunned recently-listed stocks mainly as worries persisted the slide in equities the past two weeks might deepen.
"Should prices continue to fall at this rapid pace we are likely to see some attempt by Beijing to stabilize markets," Royal Bank of Canada strategists led by Nick Chamie wrote in a note to clients.
Preferred shares of Vale, the world's biggest iron-ore producer, shed 1.1 percent to 32.09 reais, their lowest level since July 22 on concern that demand for raw materials will slow in China, hampering the growth in revenue and sales for companies like Vale, JGP's Correia said.
Petrobras, Brazil's state-controlled oil company, fell 1.2 percent to 31.83 reais in response to movement in crude oil futures, which had fallen CLc1 1 percent in international markets, although prices have retraced earlier losses, trading up 0.6 percent at $69.60.
), the largest steelmaker in the Americas, dropped 0.7 percent to 21.82 reais.
Adding to the gloom, billionaire investor Warren Buffett, ranked the world's second-richest man by magazine Forbes, said in a New York Times op-ed piece that public debt in the United States is in "uncharted territory" and growth in the fiscal deficit is turning unsustainable.[ID:nN19371542]
Buffett also said that, although the world's No. 1 economy is on the mend, government measures aimed at stimulating it are nothing but "monetary medicine".
Limiting declines in the Bovespa, Gol Linhas Aereas (
), the nation's second largest airline, rose 5.7 percent to 21.16 reais after Banco Santander recommended buying shares of the company.
Yields on Brazilian interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:> fell, with the rate on the contract due in January 2010 DIJF0 down 1 basis point, or 0.01 percentage point, to 8.58 percent. The yield on the Jan. 2011 contract DIJF1 fell 5 basis points to 9.54 percent.
The yields often reflect investors' expectations over the future level of the benchmark Selic interest rate, which currently stands at a record-low 8.75 percent. (Editing by Theodore d'Afflisio)
