UPDATE 2-Japan July crude steel output down 25 pct yr/yr
2009-08-19 06:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's crude steel output dropped by a quarter in July from a year earlier to mark the 10th straight month of decline, but ticked up from the previous month in a sign the industry is gradually recovering from its worst downturn since World War Two.
Global steelmakers were hit hard by a sharp drop in demand last year from the automotive and construction sectors, and have just recently started to increase production amid tentative signs the economy has bottomed out.
) and other Japanese steelmakers was 7.66 million tonnes in July, down 24.9 percent from a year earlier but up 11.3 percent from June for the third straight month-on-month gain, the Japan Iron and Steel Federation said on Wednesday.
The month-to-month improvement could continue for a few months as manufacturers restock inventories that had been cut to very low levels and as China's $585 billion stimulus drives spending on infrastructure projects that need steel.
But a full-fledged recovery for the industry is far from assured, analysts said.
"My concern is that demand is primarily being pushed by the restocking of inventory. If real demand does not emerge, demand could fall back again," said Atsushi Yamaguchi, steel analyst at UBS in Tokyo.
Government stimulus has also helped bolster conditions in Japan. The world's second-largest economy returned to growth in the second quarter, pulling out of its longest recession since WW2. [ID:nT212505]
For a graphic on Japan's steel output, click:
Shares of Nippon Steel, the world's No. 2 steelmaker, closed down 1.1 percent, while smaller Japanese rival JFE Holdings Inc (
Last month, Nippon Steel reported its second consecutive quarterly loss amid weak demand and inventory write-offs and widened its first-half loss forecast. JFE, which is less reliant on the struggling construction sector in Japan, also expects a first half loss but a profit for the full year. [ID:nT184210]
Japanese steelmakers have been helped by the recent increase in output by automakers. Domestic output of cars rose 26 percent in June from May, partly spurred on by tax incentives on fuel-efficient cars. (Reporting by Yumi Otagaki; Editing by Hugh Lawson)
