FOREX-Dollar, yen gain as equities, oil slide
2009-08-19 08:02:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar and the yen rose broadly on Wednesday as sharp falls in equities and oil prices prompted investors to shun riskier assets, denting perceived higher risk and commodity-linked currencies.
, with investors disappointed authorities did not take steps to support the market which has fallen 20 percent in two weeks [ID:nBJD001076].
The falls added to doubts about the extent of the global economy recovery and concerns that a recent rally in riskier assets had been overdone, helping push European shares down 0.8 percent
Amid a dearth of major economic news, traders said the currency market was taking its cue from stock market moves.
"There is a notion that G7 equities may have got too far ahead of fundamental dynamics and this is hurting higher risk currencies," CMC Markets analyst Ashraf Laidi said.
"Because there are no major figures in the U.S. there is very little that could alter this negative tone in risk appetite," he added.
At 1140 GMT, the dollar index, which tracks the performance of the greenback versus a basket of six other major currencies, was up 0.2 percent at 79.060 .DXY.
A more positive outlook for the dollar would emerge if the index were to break above 79.60, which is around the 55-day moving average, traders said.
, having earlier fallen as low as $1.4086.
The yen, which along with the dollar typically gains when equities fall, rose broadly, with the euro down 0.5 percent at 133.22 yen EURJPY=R and the dollar down 0.4 percent at 94.28 yen
"Confidence in the outlook may not be so readily found amongst investors as was so clearly the case in the first half," said Neil Mellor, currency strategist at Bank of New York Mellon.
fell sharply, underperforming other major currencies after a surprise split vote in the Bank of England's decision earlier in the month showing governor Mervyn King and a few others calling for an even bigger 75-billion-pound increase to its quantitative easing programme. [ID:nBOE002011]
Meeting minutes showed a split 6-3 vote, with Tim Besley and David Miles joining King's dissent. They were outvoted by a decision to expand the programme by 50 billion pounds.
Meanwhile, higher-risk commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars also slid, with the Aussie dollar easing 0.5 percent to $0.8215
The Aussie had hit an 11-month high on Friday while the kiwi reached a 2009 peak, before both retreated as a sell-off in risky assets gathered pace since late last week.
(Additional reporting by Tamawa Desai in London; Editing by Andy Bruce)
