GLOBAL MARKETS-Stocks rebound, oil surges on U.S. energy data
2009-08-19 13:24:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. stocks rebounded and oil jumped to almost $72 a barrel on Wednesday after data suggested a recovery in U.S. oil demand, a surprise for investors who had been fretting over a sharp slide in Chinese equities.
A U.S. government inventory report showed a huge drop in crude supplies last week, which boosted oil futures more than 4 percent at one point and lifted Wall Street sentiment that had turned dour after a 4.3 percent a drop in the Shanghai Composite Index
The drop took losses on the key Chinese index to 20 percent over the past two weeks, a plunge hard for investors to ignore considering China's role in any global recovery.
Copper fell to its lowest level in just over two weeks, and government debt prices in Europe and the United States rose as investors sought havens in less risky assets.
But oil reversed early losses after the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) said crude stocks fell by 8.4 million barrels last week, confounding analyst expectations for a rise of 1.3 million barrels. [EIA/S]
"I think these (demand) changes are reflective of an improving economy, but one must be cautious because these changes are versus year-ago weak numbers," said API chief economist John Felmy.
The news lifted U.S. stocks that had been down about 1 percent. The S&P Energy index .GSPE gained almost 2 percent, making it the top sector performer. Exxon Mobil (
"Oil is helping us," said Rick Meckler, president of LibertyView Capital Management in New York. "It's a big part of the index and energy companies have helped turn this market before."
After 1 p.m., the Dow Jones industrial average
rose 71.34 points, or 0.8 percent, to 9,289.28. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
added 7.78 points, or 0.8 percent, to 997.45. The Nasdaq Composite Index
gained 13.12 points, or 0.7 percent, to 1,969.50.
European equities ended lower after a choppy session, with weaker financial and automobile stocks outpacing a rise in oil and gas shares. But oil producers helped Britain's leading share index to end slightly higher.
The dollar fell against the yen after China's stock market slide raised concerns about the strength of a global recovery while boosting the Japanese currency's safe-haven appeal.
But the recovery in U.S. equities helped higher risk currencies recover losses, and the euro pushed above $1.42 and was on track for its biggest daily rise against the dollar in more than two weeks.
The spike in oil prices also helped higher-risk assets and currencies recover losses sparked by China's stock market.
"Negative sentiment hasn't disappeared but it has abated, with both the S&P
paring losses," said Matthew Strauss, senior currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets in Toronto. "That gave the market a chance to push the euro higher."
. The euro was unchanged at 133.83 yen EURJPY=, well above a one-month low of 132.16.
The benchmark 10-year U.S. note US10YT=RR, meanwhile, recently traded 9/32 higher in price to yield 3.49 percent.
The MSCI index .MIAPJ0000PUS of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan slipped 0.3 percent, while Japan's Nikkei share average
finished 0.8 percent lower. (Reporting by Stephen C. Johnson, Chris Reese in New York; David Sheppard, Dominic Lau, Atul Prakash, George Matlock and Jan Harvey in London; writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Leslie Adler)
