Banks, autos pull European shares to lower close
2009-08-19 00:43:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities ended lower on Wednesday, with banks and autos leading the fall, as investors scaled back their trading positions after heavy losses in Asia and on concerns about the pace of the global economic recovery.
"We are expected to experience a short period of consolidation after such a significant surge in the market -- an increase of about 20 percent in equity markets in three to four weeks," said Romain Boscher, head of equity management at Groupama Asset Management.
"We are convinced that in September, people will reallocate money in favour of risky assets."
Financial stocks were among top decliners, with Standard Chartered (
), HSBC (
), Barclays (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), BNP Paribas (
A survey by accountants KPMG found that Britain's banks are likely to see their battered retail arms slide to a loss in the second half of 2009, as the cost of bad loans, tough competition and wholesale funding continues to weigh. [ID:nLJ614089]
) fell 1 percent on news the Swiss government will hand over details of about 4,450 bank accounts to U.S. authorities as part of a deal struck with Washington over UBS.[ID:nLJ718259]
), which slipped 14 percent after a German magazine said Qatar paid Porsche (
Both Porsche, which gained 3.7 percent, and VW declined to comment. Qatar could not immediately be reached for comment.
), Peugeot (
slid 4 percent to a two-month closing low on disappointment that authorities were not taking steps to support the market amid heavy losses. It has fallen 20 percent in two weeks, rattling global markets.
"The markets were looking overbought and in need of a correction," said Mike Lenhoff, a strategist at Brewin Dolphin.
However, energy stocks ended in a positive territory, tracking higher crude prices CLc1, which jumped 3.5 percent following the American Petroleum Institute's report of a surprising draw in crude oil inventories last week.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), BG Group (
), Tullow Oil (
), Repsol (
) rose 5 percent after it kept its outlook for this year's core earnings along with second-quarter results in-line with analyst forecasts, defying market expectations of a profit warning. [ID:nLI246704]
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100 index
rose 0.1 percent, Germany's DAX
fell 0.4 percent and France's CAC 40
ended flat. (Additional reporting by Joanne Frearson; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
