UPDATE 2-China's BoCom H1 net profit flat, loans surge
2009-08-19 07:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of Communications (BoCom) (
), China's fifth-biggest lender, posted flat first-half earnings on Wednesday, as shrinking interest margins offset a surge in lending.
Total new loans by Chinese banks exploded to a record 7.37 trillion yuan ($1.08 trillion) in the first half as the government kicked off a $585 billion infrastructure-focused stimulus package, fuelling concern of a surge in bad debts in the longer term.
"Chinese manufacturers are suffering from weak exports. Infrastructure projects, in contrast, generate stable cash flows, but are less profitable," Vice President Qian Wenhui told a news conference in Shanghai.
At the end of June, Shanghai-based BoCom's total outstanding loans had jumped 30.15 percent from the end of December to 1.73 trillion yuan, with more than half of the new lending flowing into infrastructure projects.
BoCom, in which HSBC Holdings (
) holds a 19 percent stake, earned 15.56 billion yuan in the first six months of 2009, better than an average forecast of 15.3 billion yuan from six analysts polled by Reuters and compared with 15.5 billion yuan a year earlier.
The bank's net interest income from lending operations fell 9.7 percent to 29.79 billion yuan in the period.
Its net interest margin narrowed to 2.21 percent in the first half from 3.02 percent at the end of last year, due to a sharp drop in benchmark interest rates, the bank said in a statement.
"Net interest income recovered (in the second quarter) after falling for two quarters since the fourth quarter in 2008," BoCom said. "The upward trend of net interest income is expected to strengthen."
In the April-June quarter, BoCom made a net profit of 7.6 billion yuan, on par with the previous quarter, based on a filing to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
The bank's Hong Kong-traded shares have surged more than 60 percent so far this year, compared with about a 40 percent rise in the benchmark Hang Seng Index
"China's loan growth in the first half was the fastest on record. In the second half, we expect growth to return to normal," Chairman Hu Huaibang told reporters on Wednesday. He said a normal rate would be 1.5 to 2 times China's economic growth rate.
BoCom shares closed down 1.2 percent in Hong Kong on Wednesday before the earnings announcement, compared with a 1.73 percent decline in the benchmark. (Additional reporting by Samuel Shen in Shanghai; Editing by Edmund Klamann/Will Waterman) ($1=6.833 Yuan)
