Taiwan's Chinatrust may drop bid for AIG's Nan Shan
2009-08-19 10:24:00.0
Taiwan's Chinatrust may drop bid for AIG's Nan Shan | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Taiwan's Chinatrust may drop bid for AIG's Nan Shan
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
A man walks past a logo of Nan Shan Life Insurance, a local subsidiary of American International Group Inc (AIG), in Taipei February 27, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Nicky Loh
Wed  EDT
), Taiwan's top credit card issuer, will likely pull out of a bid for AIG's (
) Taiwan insurance unit as its partner, Bain Capital, wants to pull of the race, a source close to the company said on Wednesday.
Meanwhile, the Taiwan regulator said that the Nan Shan Life unit must settle a pension dispute with its employees before a new owner can be allowed in, potentially disrupting the deal worth an estimated $2 billion for the Taiwan unit.
"Bain Capital has expressed their views that they would not pursue this bid further," said the source, who asked not be identified. "That would affect Chinatrust's willingness to go for the bid," he said, declining to elaborate further.
The move means AIG, once of the world's biggest insurers until the U.S. government had to bail it out last year, would not be able to sell the unit at a price it desired, some sources close to the situation said.
Chinatrust and private equity firm Bain Capital are among the four buyer groups that made it to the final bidding round for the AIG unit, Nan Shan Life, set in late August.
A too-rich asking price could once again sink AIG's plan to sell Nan Shan after an attempt at a sale met a similar fate earlier this year, sources in Taipei and Hong Kong have said.
) to bid for the unit, Primus Financial is teaming up with China Strategic (
), while Cathay Financial (
), Taiwan's biggest financial holding firm, is bidding on its own.
"Our take on this matter is that AIG has to deal with the issue with its employees," said Huang Tien-mu, director general of the insurance bureau at Taiwan's Financial Supervisory Commission.
Nan Shan's union has been placing front-page advertisements in local newspapers, calling on AIG to settle its pension obligations before finalizing any sale.
"The company's now agreed to allow us to jointly manage the fund, but we want the money to be returned to us. It's our money after all," said Grace Feng, a spokeswoman for the agents' union.
Feng said some 38,000 insurance agents at Nan Shan supported the move to ask for their money to be returned.
Nan Shan Life said in a statement released late on Thursday it had agreed to allow the union and the firm to jointly manage the pension fund, but it would need approval from AIG to return the money to its agents.
On its part, AIG said it has hired consultants to look into the issue.
(Writing by Lee Chyen Yee; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
