UPDATE 1-Tokyo Steel eyes over 1 mln tonnes output at Tahara
2009-08-19 03:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Tokyo Steel Manufacturing Co (
), Japan's biggest maker of construction girders, said output at its new $1.6 billion Tahara plant will likely reach 1.2 to 1.4 million tonnes in the financial year starting in April 2010 aided by strong exports.
Tokyo Steel, one of the most cash-rich steel firms in the world, said it aimed to start operations at the end of November at Tahara, its first new major production facility in 14 years, located in central Japan next to a Toyota Motor Corp (
Naoto Ohori, Tokyo Steel's managing director, said he expects strong demand in Asia to help it operate the plant at full capacity of an annual 2.8 million tonnes in two to three years.
"We think the recent price correction in China a temporary phenomenon," Ohori told Reuters in an interview.
Tokyo Steel, an electric furnace steel maker, plans output of 1.2 million tonnes in the October-March second-half of the current financial year.
) on supplying steel for car parts for the "Insight" hybrid, among others.
Tokyo Steel, which controls more than a third of Japan's domestic market for H-beam steel, plans to increase output of high-end products and steel sheet at the plant and aims to win supply contracts from Japanese auto and consumer electronics makers.
) have already checked and approved the quality of Tokyo Steel's products, Ohori said.
It has yet to start talks with Toyota, he said.
The duration of contracts is the toughest hurdle for winning supply contracts from carmakers, Ohori said.
He said the company aims for quarterly supply contracts as it buys steel scrap, its major input, in the volatile spot market.
) and other blast furnace steelmakers, who buy their raw materials like iron ore and coal based on a benchmark annual contract system, are using annual contracts to sell to carmakers.
Many analysts believe Tokyo Steel's push into new markets could take market share away from traditional suppliers to the auto and electronics industries such as Nippon Steel and JFE Holdings Inc (
Tokyo Steel announced an across-the-board price rise on Tuesday for September contracts to pass rising materials costs onto buyers, its first such rise since June 2008.
The company plans to resume exports of steel in September, the first shipment in eight months, due to recovery in prices.
Shares in Tokyo Steel Manufacturing closed up 1.3 percent at 1,114 yen on Wednesday, while the iron and steel sector sub-index .ISTEL.T fell 1 percent. ($1=94.70 Yen) (Editing by Michael Watson)
