Detained Rio Chinese staff healthy, calm, lawyers say
2009-08-19 05:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Three detained Chinese employees of Anglo-Australian miner Rio Tinto appeared healthy and calm, their lawyers said on Wednesday after visiting them earlier this week -- the first such meetings since their detentions.
"He was calm and appeared normal," said Tao Wuping, the defense lawyer of Liu Caikui, one Rio's four Shanghai-based sales staff detained one month ago.
"He told me about his role in the case and what the police inquired of him after I explained to him the legal procedures and the charges as he requested," Tao told Reuters via telephone, declining to disclose further details.
The three Chinese employees of Rio were arrested along with the company's sales manager in China Stern Hu, an Australian citizen. They face charges of stealing commercial secrets.
But visiting Australian Minister for Resources and Energy Martin Ferguson said he and Chinese officials discussed the case of Rio's sales manager in China, Stern Hu.
Ferguson stressed that the discussion focused on procedural points, not the substance of the charges.
Hu and his three colleagues were detained in early July, shortly after a deadline passed without agreement in iron ore price negotiations between the Chinese steel industry and miners Rio Tinto, BHP Billiton and Vale.
The Australian government has pressed for more information on the case, while Rio Tinto maintains its employees are innocent. The four were formally arrested last week.
"I think there was a constructive discussion...going into the consular aspects of the case and our desire just to see it handled as expeditiously as possible under Chinese law," Ferguson told Reuters before heading back to Australia.
Charges against the four were downgraded to allegations of illegally obtaining commercial secrets and bribery from suspicion of stealing state secrets, which can carry the death penalty in the most serious cases.
The commercial secrets charge can bring jail terms of up to three years, or seven years in "especially serious" cases.
"The authorities changed the charges during the investigation and the move benefits my clients," said Tao, who also defended Shanghai property developer Zhou Zhengyi in a high-profile corruption case.
Tao said he had not read any documents about the case, as it had just been transferred from the state security agency to the public security agency and was still under investigation.
(Reporting by Alfred Cang and Edmund Klamann in Shanghai and Chris Buckley in Beijing; Editing by Bill Tarrant)
