With Shanghai shares down, is China set to stumble?
2009-08-19 07:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China's stock market crashed before the economy's steep slowdown last year, and it soared before the strong recovery earlier this year -- so does the current sell-off presage fresh economic troubles?
China's benchmark share index
fell 4.3 percent on Wednesday and is now down 20 percent from two weeks ago, sending tremors through equity markets worldwide.
The collapse in share prices came at the same time as analysts from Goldman Sachs to Citibank were upgrading their already bullish forecasts for China's GDP growth.
The trigger for the market sell-off was fears of monetary tightening, not a no-confidence vote in the economy. But as the downward spiral intensifies, it risks knocking the broader economy off kilter and hemming in government policy.
One view is that China's stock market got too far ahead of itself in its world-beating 80 percent rally in the first seven months of the year, and that it is now unduly bearish.
"It would have been a mistake to extrapolate from the near doubling that was going on before August that growth was going to accelerate that rapidly," said Tim Condon, head of Asian research with ING in Singapore.
"Now in this current correction I think it's a mistake to extrapolate that we're looking at a really sharp slowdown."
Certainly, China's macroeconomic fundamentals still look strong -- extremely strong compared with most other countries.
Factory output in July grew 10.8 percent compared with a year earlier, the fastest pace in nine months. Capital spending in the first seven months of the year rose 32.9 percent.
But the Chinese stock market, variously dismissed as a casino or sideshow, could have a far greater impact on the broader economy than is commonly assumed.
For starters, the Shanghai A-share benchmark index has served as something of a leading indicator for quarterly GDP growth over the past three years.
(For a graphic showing the relationship between Chinese stocks and growth, see:
FROM STOCKS TO PROPERTY?
With the country's export sector down and out because of the financial crisis, the government cranked up its spending in the first half to power the economy.
There are still plenty more infrastructure projects in the pipeline, but Beijing was counting on private sector investment, especially in housing, to become a growth engine in its own right and ease the burden on public finances.
"Money has been rushing into the property market and the stock market based on the belief that asset prices are rising," said Paul Cavey, an economist with Macquarie in Hong Kong.
"The risk is, at the moment that this perception has begun to change, and that is leading to the fall-off not just in the A-share market, but will lead to a fall-off in the property market as well."
The trigger for the pull-back in Chinese stocks was fear that liquidity was being squeezed. After 7.37 trillion yuan ($1.1 trillion) in new loans in the first half, a record surge, lending dropped sharply in July and the central bank said it would begin "fine-tuning" monetary policy.
"We think that the recent stock market tumble mainly reflects mounting concern about tightening liquidity," said Zhang Zhuo, an analyst at Galaxy Securities in Beijing.
They would do well to keep in mind, however, that lending tends to trail off in the second half of the year in any case, with new credit growth typically accounting for just 30-40 percent of the total for the year.
Many analysts expect full-year new lending to be about 10 trillion yuan, meaning banks will have to lend out about 438 billion yuan in new loans each month for the rest of the year.
"Anything in that ballpark will probably be swallowed okay," Condon said.
Ironically, China's real liquidity problem is probably an overabundance, not a squeeze. The central bank's fine-tuning talk was about how to craft an exit strategy to rein in money growth once the economy was firing on all cylinders.
The stock market's near cardiac arrest at the mere whiff of less credit might make Beijing loath to engage in serious monetary tightening.
"Given that policy in China is extremely loose, this makes it quite tricky for the government going forward," Cavey said.
"Things have got a little bit frothy. That doesn't mean we're in for a bear market," said Ajay Kapur, head of global strategy and economics at Mirae Asset Securities in Hong Kong. "It's like Usain Bolt: even the man needs to take a break between the 100 meters and 200 meters." (Additional reporting by Aileen Wang and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
