UPDATE 3-ENRC upbeat as Chinese metal demand spurs recovery
2009-08-19 07:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Eurasian Natural Resources Corp (ENRC) (
), the world's largest ferrochrome producer, said market conditions were improving and demand from China should drive a continued recovery, lifting its shares on Wednesday.
The upbeat outlook accompanied better-than-expected interim results from the Kazakh-focused miner and a sharp rise in second-quarter production of ferrochrome and iron ore, key ingredients in steelmaking, from the first three months of 2009.
"The group was positioned effectively to capture the upturn, and particularly the opportunity offered by China, and this has allowed a rapid recovery in production levels," ENRC Chief Executive Johannes Sittard said in a statement on Wednesday.
"Into the second-half we believe that the recovery will be sustained," he said, adding that the company would pursue opportunities for capital investment and acquisitions.
ENRC shares were up 7.6 percent at 836 pence by 1110 GMT, making it the top performer on the FTSE 100 and outperforming a 0.7 percent decline in the UK mining index .FTNMX1770.
As well as demand from China, the world's top consumer of many industrial metals, Sittard told a conference call that he is also seeing an increase in European stainless steel orders, particularly from Germany in June.
"There are signs of stabilisation or even some growth emerging in the United States and Europe, whilst the outlook for Russia, fuelled by the higher oil price, appears to be turning," he said in a statement.
ENRC's upbeat comments match those made by rival iron ore producer Ferrexpo (
), although BHP Billiton Ltd/Plc (
), the world's largest miner, gave a guarded outlook for demand. [ID:nL5528906][ID:nSYD491189]
ENRC said first-half earnings per share slumped 59 percent from a year earlier to 43 cents, but comfortably beat a consensus forecast of 34.43 cents compiled by the company from 13 analysts.
Revenue slid 51 percent to $1.695 billion on lower production and prices, but it, too, was ahead of the $1.549 billion expected by analysts.
In a sign of recovery, second-quarter ferrochrome production jumped 35.8 percent from the first three months of the year and iron ore pellet output surged 63.5 percent quarter-on-quarter.
However, volumes for both products were still down on the year-earlier after the group cut capacity at the end of last year as the global financial crisis slashed demand for steel.
"ENRC has brought back production quicker than expected giving rise to better volumes, revenue and EBITDA," said Liberum Capital in a note.
On a conference call, Sittard said the group's capacity utilisation at its ferroalloy division reached 95 percent in July and 100 percent at its iron ore operations.
On the acquisition front, the group said it is looking at opportunities in industrial metals, in addition to ferrochrome and iron ore, and in precious metals and energy.
Sittard will become chairman of the group on Thursday as part of a previously announced board reshuffle. He said he doesn't see a major shift in the company's focus.
(Additional reporting by Paul Hoskins; Editing by Lorraine Turner, Hans Peters and Simon Jessop)
