UPDATE 2-Cargill profit down 69 pct, financial segment hurt
2009-08-18 11:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Giant U.S. agribusiness and trading company Cargill Inc [CARG.UL] said on Tuesday its quarterly profit fell 69 percent as a weak economy hurt its risk management and financial services sector.
Minneapolis-based Cargill, one of the world's largest private corporations, earned $327 million for the fiscal fourth quarter that ended May 31, down from $1.05 billion for the same period a year earlier.
Full-year earnings decreased 16 percent to $3.33 billion, from a record $3.95 billion in the prior year.
"The year was a tale of two halves," Cargill Chief Executive Greg Page said in a statement.
"Cargill posted record results through November. In the second half, earnings slowed considerably as the world economy contracted for the first time in six decades. In the end, the net effect was the second-best year in our company's history."
Cargill, which operates in 68 countries, is a leading U.S. grain exporter, a major producer of ethanol, and a top energy trader, among many other businesses.
Cargill cut expenses, reduced debt and working capital.
Fourth-quarter earnings were led by agricultural services and food ingredients and applications, while earnings in its other three business segments were down from a year ago.
Cargill's risk management and financial segment incurred a loss related to financial markets activities.
Earnings in its operations that buy and process farm commodities were down from a year before. The industrial segment, which includes Cargill's majority investment in Mosaic Co (
), were down significantly from a year earlier.
Cargill holds a 64 percent stake in Mosaic, a top global producer of fertilizers.
"The path to economic recovery may well be uneven, but Cargill remains optimistic," Page said.
Over the past year, Cargill opened or expanded major processing facilities for canola, cocoa, palm, soy and biofuels in the United States, Brazil, Canada, China, France and Ghana. (Reporting by Christine Stebbins, editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Maureen Bavdek)
