UPDATE 2-London Capital H1 profit falls, optimistic about H2
2009-08-18 04:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Financial services firm London Capital Group Holdings Plc (
) posted its first decline in profit since it went public in 2005, due to lower interest income, higher costs and adverse trading conditions in the second quarter.
The company, which offers online spread betting, foreign exchange and broking services, is optimistic about the second half and will focus on growth through the development and promotion of its international trading platform, Chief Executive Frank Chapman told Reuters.
"Although the first half of the year has been disappointing for us, we have recently seen signs of increased activity with less range bound trading which is favourable to the Group and accordingly we are more optimistic about the second half of the year," Chapman said in a statement.
The international trading platform, Contract for Differences (CFD), was developed by software developer Chaucer Digital, which was acquired by LCG in May.
The CFD platform will be offered to its retail clients by the first quarter of 2010, Chief Financial Officer Simon Denham said.
"This will enable LCG to operate in regulatory environments that do not allow spread betting, spread trading namely most of the far east and so we believe this new product should open up international markets much more readily for the company," Denham said.
The company expects the new platform to boost revenue considerably as it plans to expand in Australia, Japan, Singapore and Hong Kong, and might even enter China if it gets regulatory approvals, Denham said.
The running costs for the platform will be minimal, he said.
LCG, which kept its interim dividend of 2.5 pence per share, said it planned to at least maintain full-year dividend for 2009.
LCG, whose brands include Capital Spreads, said it was debt free with cash of 8.2 million pounds.
For the six months ended June 30, adjusted pretax profit fell 37 percent to 3.8 million pounds ($6.2 million) from a year ago, while revenue rose 4 percent to 13 million pounds.
