MONEY MARKETS-Aussie futures up, Philippines rates fall
2009-08-18 02:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian bill and interbank futures extended a week-long rally on Tuesday, driven this time by the central bank's assertion it is no hurry to raise rates and by the wider sell off in equity markets.
Most Asian stock markets were weaker on Tuesday, prolonging a sell-off triggered by concerns China will intervene to stifle its surging stock market. Shares were also under pressure from a string of data including U.S. consumer confidence and Chinese foreign direct investment showing markets may have priced in exaggerated estimated of future growth.
In the Philippines, bonds have rallied despite expectations that the central bank will leave policy rates steady when it meets on Thursday. In South Korea, the rally has led to a paring of positions in swaps which were primed for an early end to loose monetary settings.
Two-year Philippine bond yields continued with a slow grind downward, heading into Thursday's meeting, with the accompanying decline in equity markets making it difficult for investors to isolate policy expectations from the broader correction.
Two-year yields, now at 5.03 percent, have dropped 4 basis points this week and 24 bps since early August. The majority of the market however believes the Philippines has come to the close of its monetary easing and does not expect any change in the central bank's 4 percent borrowing rate this week.
"Though rates have been going down over the past couple of days, the short end of the curve remains anchored above the policy rate despite strong liquidity," said Khalil Belhimeur, a strategist with Standard Chartered Bank. "That indicates that the market sees no rate cut."
"Also, the flush liquidity in the system and the sell-off make it hard to gauge whether the recent rally in yields is driven solely by BSP meeting."
AUSSIE, KOREA RATES
Minutes of the Reserve Bank of Australia's August policy meeting showed policy makers agreed rates will have to rise eventually but a premature tightening could hurt consumers.
Even though markets still expect Australia to be among the first major economies to tighten policy, expectations now are for 163 bps of tightening within the next 12 months CSSY, 20 bps lower than expectations last week.
"The sentence mentioning the 'not hike too early' obviously had some impact. Bill futures rallied," said an Australian rates trader.
In South Korea meanwhile, the benchmark certificate of deposit (CD) rate extended a steady rise, still playing catch-up to the sharp run higher in other money market yields.
The 3-month CD rate KRCD=KQ rose a further 1 basis point to 2.49 percent, creeping higher after being steady at 2.41 percent from April through July. That halted the receiving in the swaps market where participants had been trimming some of the pricing for future rate rises.
The one-year interest rate swap KRWIRS was steady at 3.36 percent, after a 5 bps fall on Monday in step with the moves elsewhere in Asian rates markets. (Additional reporting by Jongwoo Cheon; Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
