FOREX-Yen slips as risk currencies win respite
2009-08-18 01:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen fell on Tuesday, retreating from its highest levels this month against the dollar and euro and losing ground against commodity-linked currencies, although twitchy Asian share markets made trade choppy.
Eyes were on stocks after Monday's volatile session in which shares in Shanghai
lost 5.8 percent and currencies associated with risk-trades, such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, shed more than 1 percent.
The euro and the Aussie and kiwi dollars all rose about half a percent against the Japanese currency and clawed back some lost ground against the dollar as investors covered short positions built in the sell-off the previous day, dealers said.
"Gains in yen crosses today were a recovery from excessive losses the previous day, rather than investors being actively engaged in risk trading," said Ayako Sera, a market strategist at Sumitomo Trust & Banking.
Analysts said volumes appeared to be thin, making trading choppy. The dollar rose 0.3 percent from late U.S. trade to 94.84
, after dipping to its lowest in nearly three weeks on Monday at 94.19 yen.
Against the yen, it advanced 0.6 percent to 78.05 yen AUDJPY=R after losing nearly 2 percent on Monday.
It dipped briefly after minutes from the Australian central bank's latest board meeting showed policy-makers were concerned that the strength of household demand could prove temporary, particularly if it tightened too early. [ID:nSYC000233]
Markets have been watching China closely to gauge how far it can help economies emerge from recession while the turnaround in the United States takes time, and the closedly watched Shanghai Composite index
was volatile, edging up later.
"Everyone knows it's no wonder Chinese shares need a correction as they have risen sharply," said Kosuke Hanao, head of treasury products sales at HSBC.
"The market needs to examine whether hopes that China will support the global economy will remain intact from now on. There are some positive signs from data in industrialised nations, and we need to see if they become more substantial," Sera at Sumitomo Trust & Banking said.
For Tuesday, the German ZEW index of analyst and investor confidence at 0900 GMT is the main data out of Europe.
The U.S. will release housing starts and permits for July and the producer price index for July, both at 1230 GMT. [USBPE=ECI] [USPPIA=ECI] (Additional reporting by Anirban Nag in Sydney; Editing by Michael Watson)
