UPDATE 4-Vestas says pick-up in H2 to secure 2009 targets
2009-08-18 11:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Denmark's Vestas (
) reassured investors on Tuesday that a better second half would help the world's biggest wind turbine maker meet its 2009 earnings goals after second-quarter profits missed expectations.
Earnings before interest and taxes in the three months to end-June dropped to 78 million euros ($110.3 million) from 92 million in the same quarter last year, a third less than the average forecast from 19 analysts in a Reuters poll.
"We are not saying it will be easy (to meet guidance) ... But it is definitely possible," Chief Executive Ditlev Engel said in a conference call. He said that after a very slow 2009 credit markets were easing up.
"We are seeing now that the activity level is again moving upwards, and that the effect of many of the stimulus packages that have been announced in the earlier parts of this year are starting to kick in," Engel said.
Vestas shares were down 3.9 percent at 38 crowns by 1530 GMT after an earlier surge, valuing the company at $14.6 billion. The stock underperformed a 0.8 percent drop on the Copenhagen bourse blue chip index
Renewable energy companies have enjoyed a boom for almost a decade as countries try to cut carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels, but projects have been dropped or delayed since the credit crisis made financing tight.
Vestas said it was little affected by project cancellations, saying that so far "no customer has withdrawn from a firm and unconditional order".
"This illustrates that the activity level in the industry is probably much higher than people are aware of when looking at Vestas' backlog, which is significantly down," Engel said.
He said that when an order is in the contract review board Vestas is "pretty well advanced in the discussions," adding that Vestas' principles for when to announce orders and consider them to be firm and unconditional "probably are a little more conservative than other players in the industry."
"The forecast hinges on many things we don't know, such as the order flow, the end of the recession or an economic pickup," said Credit Suisse analyst Mark Freshney.
"When I look at the order backlog and how big a part of the orders that will be delivered in 2009, I still cannot see Vestas reach (sales of) 7.2 billion euros in 2009," Sydbank analyst Jacob Pedersen said.
) said in July it would meet its 2009 targets despite a dip in first-half sales, but said it already had over four fifths of its sales target for the year in the bag. [nLT46508]
German renewable energy peer Solon SOOG.DE was less forthcoming about its earnings expectations on Tuesday, saying it still could not give a profit outlook for 2009 after posting a wider-than-expected operating loss for the second quarter. [nLH511028]
(Writing by Peter Dinkloh in Frankfurt and Teis Jensen in Copenhagen; Editing by Will Waterman and Jon Loades-Carter)
((teis.jensen@reuters.com; +45 33 96 96 53; Reuters Messaging: teis.jensen.reuters.com@reuters.net)) Keywords: VESTAS/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nLI571376
