China Everbright Sec up 32 percent in Shanghai debut
2009-08-18 01:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Tue, Aug 18 2009
Mon, Aug 17 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Fri, Aug 14 2009
Tue  EDT
) rose by nearly a third on its Shanghai debut on Tuesday after a $1.6 billion IPO, in a sign that investor demand may be cooling after previous soaraway debuts fueled concerns about possible asset price bubbles.
The price rise for shares in China's 10th-largest brokerage was in line with expectations given a recent stalling in China's strong stock market rally, and analysts said they did not expect a major slowdown in IPO approvals.
"The opening price was within our expectations," said Wei Tao, an analyst with CITIC China Securities Co. "Regulators will continue to approve new listings, but will be cautious on heavyweights."
Local-currency A shares in Everbright Securities began trading at 30 yuan, up 42 percent from their 21.08 yuan IPO price, but drifted by midday to 27.91 yuan -- in line with a 25-30 yuan range forecast by analysts for the official China Securities Journal.
Chen Gang, strategist at Xiangcai Securities, doubted the relatively muted performance would have a long-term impact on IPO approvals, especially as a decline in bank lending since last month increases the importance of other forms of fund-raising.
"I don't think the regulator will slow down the pace of approving new IPOs, although the offering did put some pressure on the market."
Last month, shares in China State Construction Engineering Corp (
Those sharp gains prompted concerns about unbridled speculation, although both stocks have steadily retreated since then, while holding above their IPO prices.
Monday's 5.8 percent slide was the index's biggest one-day drop in nine months and the index was down another 1 percent on Tuesday amid worries about stretched valuations compounded by signs of a slowdown in the economic recovery, a clampdown in bank lending and new supplies of equity.
Everbright Securities' offer of 520 million shares, or 15 percent of its expanded capital, valued the company at 72 billion yuan, or nearly 60 times its 2008 earnings. The proceeds will be used to fund expansion.
), China's largest listed brokerage and the only other securities house to list on the mainland via an IPO. Several others have listed through reverse takeovers of listed firms or other means.
Analysts say Everbright's earnings are expected to get a bigger boost from the market's rally this year than its bigger rival, due to its heavier reliance on the brokerage business.
Chinese brokerages' earnings have been bolstered by a 60 percent rally in Chinese stocks in January-June, boosting their commission income and investment returns. CITIC Securities posted a 3.6 percent rise in second-quarter profit.
Everbright Securities, which hired Orient Securities to arrange its IPO, is controlled by China's second-biggest financial conglomerate, Everbright Group.
(Additional reporting by Rujun Shen and Alfred Cang; Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
