Asia looks for signs of life in poll-bound Japan
2009-08-18 12:52:00.0
(Reuters) - To some, Japan is not so much the sick man of Asia as the region's economic Lazarus, its vital signs long ago shut down by poor policymaking, an inability to change with the times and simply awful demographics.
For these skeptics, Japan is yesterday's story, doomed to relative decline notwithstanding the inventiveness of its big firms and, in the short term, Monday's confirmation of its emergence from recession with 0.9 percent growth last quarter.
Hobbled by the weakest productivity growth among the Group of Seven industrial powers, Japan has been supplanted by China as the region's economic dynamo.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that Japan's annual gross domestic product, expressed in dollars at current prices, will not get back to its 1995 level until 2014.
Over the same period, China's output will multiply more than 11-fold and it will overtake Japan as early as 2010 to become the world's second-largest economy after the United States, according to the IMF's April World Economic Outlook.
But, ironically, some of the very reasons behind Japan's years of stagnation have a good chance of raising its profile in Asia once more, especially if the Liberal Democratic Party loses its long grip on power in this month's general election.
Faced with a mature home market and an aging population, Japanese firms are increasingly likely to respond by shifting ever more production overseas both to meet local demand and to make goods for 'reimport' back to Japan.
As rich countries tighten their belts, it makes sense for Japan Inc to eye fast-growing developing economies, said Simon Wong, an economist with Standard Chartered Bank on Hong Kong.
"Japan can be a positive force in pushing through technological upgrades in some of these emerging markets," Wong said.
Japan is already pursuing this strategy. While Japan's total foreign direct investment in developed countries rose 70 percent between 2003 and 2008, it jumped 150 percent in Asia, led by leaps of 526 percent in India and 220 percent in China, Wong said.
Andrew Smithers, head of an eponymous consultancy in London, said corporate behavior in consensus-bound Japan changes slowly; when it eventually does, it is thus all the more significant.
"We perceive such a shift today, as companies address the issues posed by a falling population and saturated domestic markets. The result will be a fall in domestic corporate investment, allowing for a rise in domestic consumption and welfare, and a rise in corporate investment abroad," he said in a report.
In what Smithers and others see as a precursor of that trend, Japanese brewer Suntory Holdings Ltd is considering a merger with rival Kirin Holdings Co so they can increase market share at home and accelerate expansion abroad.
Japanese portfolio investors, discouraged by low returns and dim economic prospects at home, are also increasingly turning their sights abroad, said Paul Smith, chief executive of Triple A Partners, an Asian and emerging markets alternative fund company.
"When they look at how they're going to sustain their standard of living, they're going to have to be much more of a service-orientated economy that relies on overseas earnings substantially," he said. "The Japanese are well aware of that."
Smith expects Asia to be a growing beneficiary of Japan's investment outflows. "We certainly see they are more active in looking to develop Asia-specific products than they have been before," he said.
A greater emphasis on doing business in Asia would dovetail with the embryonic foreign economic policy of Yukio Hatoyama's Democratic Party of Japan, hot favorite to defeat the LDP in the August 30 election.
Hatoyama has spoken of improving ties with neighbors such as China and South Korea, integrating Japan in an East Asian Community and even, one day, forming a regional currency union.
"The weight of external economic policy positioning would be toward a strengthening of East Asian arrangements," said Peter Drysdale, an economics professor at Australian National University in Canberra.
Under the LDP, which has been in power for all but 10 months since its founding in 1955, Japan has been wary of China's rise.
Scarred by the legacy of Japan's wartime occupation of China, two-way ties have been characterized by competition as much as cooperation, which has hobbled Asia's economic integration.
But the DPJ has worked hard at forging relations with China, and Hatoyama has defused one major source of tension by saying he would not visit the Yasakuni shrine in Tokyo while convicted Japanese war criminals are honored there.
"All this suggests that there are a lot more open channels for communication between the DPJ and China, so there should be a lot less controversy," said Wong, the Standard Chartered analyst.
All well and good, but Jean-Pierre Lehmann, a professor of international political economy at IMD business school in Lausanne, Switzerland, still says Japan faces sustained decline and has yet to find its place in the 21st century economic order.
"As things stand, Japan is adrift, anchored neither in East nor West and scoring badly on virtually all globalization criteria," he said. "Japan has been a mainly mute global player."
Drysdale, the ANU professor, said a decisive DPJ victory would be good for Japan's confidence. Asked, in investment parlance, whether he would be long or short Japan, he laughed.
"I'm long Japan, but I don't expect an immediate return on my investment," Drysdale said. "There'll be a bit of confusion, but by and large this change will be good for Japan."
