FTSE falls 1.5 pct; miners, banks, oil weigh
2009-08-17 00:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index fell 1.5 percent by the close on Monday with heavyweight mining, oil and banking stocks leading the losers, as global markets retracted amid concerns over the pace of global recovery.
The FTSE 100 closed 68.96 points lower at 4,645.01, extending losses from Friday when the index shed 0.9 percent and marking its biggest one day percentage loss since July 2.
"The markets have been overdue a correction. They have run away with themselves, ignoring the basis of what was really going on," said Howard Wheeldon, strategist and BGC Partners.
"Recessions do not end in a day, a week or a few weeks, they take years and the process hasn't run its full course yet."
U.S. stocks followed the trend set by their European and Asian peers earlier in the day, trading lower after weaker-than-expected Japan GDP figures came on the back of unexpectedly weak U.S. consumer confidence data on Friday.
Miners fell as traders banked profits on the sector which has been at the forefront of the index's recovery, as falling metals prices, due by worries over economic recovery, added to the sector's woes.
), Antofagasta (
However, Australia's largest miner Rio Tinto (
), which is due to report its half-year figures on Thursday, said it does not see a price pact between Fortescue Metals and China's largest steelmaker Baosteel as establishing an industry-wide price. Rio was down 4.7 percent.
) and Xstrata XTA.L were the top blue chip fallers, down 5.6 and 5.5 percent respectively, after Xstrata was reported to have redoubled its attempt to win over the investors of its rival and merger-target Anglo American, the Guardian newspaper said on Monday.
) shed 0.3 percent after the world's largest primary silver producer posted a 14 percent decline in first-half profit due to lower silver prices, but remained positive for the full year.
), Lloyds Banking Group (
), Barclays (
) shed 2.7 percent after the lender said Britain's financial regulator has launched a supervisory review of the Scottish bank's takeover of ABN Amro.
Oils dropped as crude headed south toward $65 a barrel, with Cairn Energy (
), BG Group (
), BP (
), up 2.2 percent, and GlaxoSmithKline (
), up 0.8 percent, attracted investors shying away from riskier issues.
) added 1.6 and 2 percent respectively, with the former benefitting after HSBC upgraded the insurer to "neutral" from "underweight" and raised its price target.
Later in the day, the United States NAHB housing market index data for August will be released, with economists expecting a reading of 18, up from 17 in July.
"The way the market has behaved today tells me that this is not a flash in the pan. No matter what happens tomorrow we will continue heading down," said Wheeldon. (Editing by Rupert Winchester)
