Mexico peso, stocks sink on global recovery doubts
2009-08-17 16:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico's peso sank on Monday and stocks fell by the most in eight weeks as signs of weakness in Asia stoked worries that this year's rally in emerging markets has outpaced real growth prospects.
MEX01 weakened 1.19 percent to 13.00 per U.S. dollar, its biggest one-day slide since July 7, while the IPC stock index
sank 2 percent to 27,299.58, its biggest single-session drop since June 22.
Growth data in Japan showed the world's No. 2 economy had climbed out of recession as exporters rebuilt inventories, but officials there cited weakness in capital spending and doubts about how long a rise in consumer spending will last. For more see [ID:nT212505]
"The data from Japan, the apparent problems in China and the doubts whether the recovery is sustainable are all elements to justify taking profits," said Juan Jose Resendiz, head of analysis at Arka brokerage in Mexico City.
Resendiz said profit taking would likely continue this week but the IPC would find support at around 26,800 points.
Investors were still fretting about data from Friday that showed U.S. consumer confidence fell in early August. The United States is Mexico's top trading partner and the local recovery from a deep recession depends on a rebound in U.S. consumer demand.
"Investors are every day assigning more importance to indicators on the spending side and these -- at least at the beginning of the third quarter -- have been disappointing," wrote Salvador Moreno, an economist at ING in Mexico City, in a note to clients.
After lagging gains of other emerging markets for most of the summer, Mexico's peso has outperformed its peers in recent weeks on bets it will benefit the most from the U.S. recovery.
Some analysts expect a further sell-off of riskier assets to weigh on the peso. ING's Moreno said the peso will head to as weak as 13.30 per U.S. dollar by the end of August.
In stock trading, shares in top retailer Wal-Mart de Mexico (
) rose 2.53 percent to 14.21 pesos after the world's No. 3 cement maker said it had until next June to raise $1 billion in equity as part of a $15 billion debt restructuring that has allayed fears of default. [ID:nN17392868] (Reporting by Michael O'Boyle)
