CITIC Pac sells 12.5 percent Cathay stake to Air China
2009-08-17 09:49:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon  EDT
), reeling from nearly $2 billion in foreign exchange-related losses suffered last year, said it was selling the bulk of its holdings in Hong Kong's flagship Cathay Pacific Airways (
) for HK$6.3 billion ($808 million), the companies said in a joint statement to the Hong Kong exchange.
Separately, Cathay's parent Swire Pacific (
) will also buy a 2 percent stake in the Hong Kong carrier for HK$1.01 billion, bringing its total holdings in Cathay to 41.97 percent, according to the statement.
In October of last year, CITIC Pacific revealed that it had endured steep losses from bets on derivative contracts known as "accumulators." At the time, the company admitted that mark-to-market losses incurred from the unauthorized foreign exchange contracts could reach $1.9 billion.
In a press conference following Monday's announcement, Christopher Pratt, chairman of Swire and Cathay, confirmed that CITIC Pacific had initiated the discussions that led to the sale of the Cathay shares.
Both Swire and Air China will pay HK$12.88 per share, which represents a 10.8 percent premium to Friday's closing price.
"Most people don't believe CITIC had added value to Cathay. Air China could probably create better synergy with Cathay Pacific in terms of expanding and strengthening their routes," said Jim Wong, head of transport research with Nomura Securities.
In their remarks to reporters, Swire executives also stressed the benefits of increased collaboration.
Today, the two airlines' collaboration extends to code-sharing, frequent flyer programs and joint staff training. The airlines are also negotiating a cargo joint venture.
"We welcome this as a strengthening of our strategic partnership with Air China," said Pratt.
Cathay shares last traded down 1.9 percent at HK$11.62 on Aug 14, but the stock was up over 33 percent so far this year.
Swire, whose shares were not suspended, on Monday closed 2.4 percent lower at HK$81.95, outperforming a 3.6 percent fall by the broader Hong Kong market
(Additional reporting by Don Durfee; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
