UPDATE 2-Golden Ocean says China demand key after weak Q2
2009-08-17 06:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Shipper Golden Ocean (
) said China's appetite for imports is lifting dry bulk shipping markets and forecast a stable third quarter after its second quarter operating results fell sharply as expected.
Shares in Oslo-listed Golden Ocean were off 3.8 percent to 6.88 crowns ($1.25) at 1030 GMT, with analysts concerned about China's ability to continue to push dry bulk shipping demand and about a large number of new vessels due to come to the market.
"A lot of new tonnage is coming into the market," said analyst Petter Narvestad in Fondsfinans. "We believe the market balance will weaken, and expect a falling freight market and that its shares will also fall."
Narvestad said Golden Ocean's outlook was "uncertain".
Bermuda-registered Golden Ocean said influx of new vessels has continued to pull down the freight forwards curve but also voiced positive signals, stemming largely from Chinese demand.
"We believe we may see positive signs in the autumn of 2009," Chief Executive Herman Billung told a news conference.
"China has more or less been the sole contributor to the positive development experienced in the demand for dry bulk transportation," Golden Ocean said.
Golden Ocean said ordered but not-yet-built vessels represented 70 percent of the existing global dry bulk fleet, with a particularly large number of Capesize bulk carriers due to hit the market.
Golden Ocean said most of its spot exposure was in the Panamamax segment, which "should contribute to a positive cash flow even in a more difficult market environment."
The shipper expected a strong influx of new vessels in the second half of 2009 as well as in 2010 and 2011, although Billung said not all orders would be realised because banks were hesitant about increasing their exposure to shipping.
"It will be a big challenge with financing. All the banks feel they have enough shipping sector exposure," he said.
Golden Ocean said the prices of steel, alumina and iron ore "started to rebound in May and the positive development has continued into the third quarter", helping a rebound on shipping markets that were pummelled by the global economic crisis.
Golden Ocean is controlled by shipping magnate John Fredriksen, whose other ventures include oilfield services company SeaDrill (
Its net profit amounted to $101 million in the second quarter, against forecasts at $106 million, boosted by gains from bond buy-backs during the quarter.
(Additional reporting by Wojciech Moskwa and Tejre Solsvik; editing by Mariam Karouny)
