Brazil stocks down on global caution, real dips
2009-08-17 11:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's commodity-heavy stock market tumbled early on Monday as crude prices skidded and investors worried recent stock gains may have outpaced global economic recovery.
Brazil's benchmark Bovespa index
at one point dropped 3 percent, then pulled back to a 2.82 percent loss to 55,040.83 in morning trading. The index hit its lowest point since Aug. 3, as news from China and Japan prompted caution on riskier emerging market assets.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 1.29 percent against the U.S. dollar, considered a safe haven currency in difficult economic times. The real traded at 1.88 per dollar in the morning.
) sank 1.85 percent to 31.75 reais. That paralleled a 2.86 percent dip in crude CLc1, which in the morning hits its lowest point yet in August on worries about energy demand.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, shed 3.56 percent to 32.55 reais. Petrobras and Vale have the heaviest weighting in the Bovespa index.
"The perception is that the market went up too much with regard to fundamentals," said Adriano Moreno, a strategist with Futura Investimentos. "This has been expected. We've been waiting for everyone to go into a round of profit-taking."
But, he added, the day's adjustment didn't change an optimistic outlook for Brazilian stocks in the medium- to long-term, around 9 to 12 months out.
The Brazilian market tracked losses in Asia after Japanese data showed the world's second largest economy had officially returned to growth.[ID:nHKG128193] But the pace of expansion did little to reassure, underscoring the tenuousness of any rebound in the global economy. [ID:nT212505]
Brazil's stock index has risen about 51 percent in 2009, as investors looked to higher-yield emerging market assets as confidence in the global economy returned.
Discouraging retail sales and consumer confidence data from the United States last week emphasized that a global financial rebound might not come as fast or as hard as hoped. As the United States is the world's largest economy, indicators there often sway investors in markets across the globe.
"We've suggested stepping back from commodities... because of uncertainty in the world economy," Moreno said. Futura prefers stocks tied to Brazil's domestic demand, which analysts consider key to the recovery of Latin America's largest economy.
), the largest steelmaker in the Americas, dropped 4.09 percent to 22.07 reais. Usiminas (
), Brazil's second-biggest steelmaker, declined 3.15 percent to 47.08 reais. CSN (
(Reporting by Luciana Lopez; Editing by Andrew Hay)
