PREVIEW-Chinese bank profits seen slimming, NPLs eyed
2009-08-17 03:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese banks, barely dented by the global financial crisis, are set to report lower first-half earnings on compressed interest margins, and investors will watch for any signs of growing problem loans from Beijing's ultra-loose economic stimulus policies.
Chinese banks boosted their lending at a record pace in the first half of the year, raising eyebrows but no alarm bells just yet among industry watchers.
), the country's fifth-biggest lender, will kick off the earnings season on Wednesday. It will be followed by the world's two biggest banks by market value: Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
), the country's top foreign exchange lender, will report its first-half figures next week.
"Industry-wide, earnings in the first half will be marginally lower than a year earlier, as net interest margin was much lower than that a year earlier," said Liu Yinghua, an analyst with Ping An Securities.
Net interest margins are the main source of profits for banks. The government enforces a cap on deposit rates and a floor on lending rates, providing banks with a built-in interest margin of nearly 3 percent.
But that cushion has narrowed because China's loose monetary policy since last year is eating into banks' profits.
Net interest margins in the Chinese banking sector continued their downward trend in the second quarter during the country's lending boom, but they have stabilized recently as officials, worried about the potential for a jump in problem loans, started to rein in credit growth.
"Margins are likely to be the key upside surprise in 2010 forecasts," Macquarie analysts Nick Lord and Sarah Wu said in a report. "If history is of any guide, bank margins should benefit from monetary tightening," they said.
Chinese banks granted 7.37 trillion yuan ($1.08 trillion) in loans to businesses and individuals in the first six months of this year. Some analysts worry that this surge of lending could cause a rise in banks' bad debts.
But non-performing loans (NPL) should not become a major worry this year as long as growth in the world's third-biggest economy keeps accelerating, analysts said.
"Sound economic fundamentals and ample liquidity should prevent NPLs from surging in the near term," said Sheng Nan, an analyst with UOB Kay Hian.
However, Sheng said the impact of aggressive lending might be felt on banks' balance sheets in 2010 or 2011.
China's banking watchdog has asked banks to increase their provisioning against bad loans to guard against a rebound in NPLs. Most Chinese banks have set aside adequate funds to meet these guidelines and the extra provisions should already be reflected in their balance sheets, Sheng said.
Below is a table of earnings per share forecasts (in yuan), based on analysts polled by Reuters Estimates.
