Nikkei hits 2-wk closing low after as-expected GDP
2009-08-17 02:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average fell 3.1 percent on Monday in its biggest one-day fall in nearly five months, as investors locked in profits after gross domestic product data failed to produce a positive surprise. Resource-linked shares such as Inpex Corp (
) retreated due to a slide in oil prices, while exporters came under pressure as the dollar edged lower against the yen.
Data showing that Japan's economy grew 0.9 percent in April-June from the previous quarter, broadly in line with a median market forecast for 1.0 percent growth, prompted investors to lock in profits, market players said. [JPGD1=ECI]
While Japan's GDP posted its first expansion in five quarters, the data was a disappointment for some investors who had expected even stronger numbers, market players said.
In addition, falls in Chinese shares and oil prices have stirred worries about possible changes in the behaviour of short-term risk takers, said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
"The Nikkei has gained a lift from rises in overseas equities and an expansion in investors' risk tolerance. But there is a sense that this is approaching a limit," Akino said.
"That's why profit-taking is predominant," he said, adding that GDP was one factor behind such selling because some investors had been hoping the numbers would be stronger.
The Nikkei slid 328.72 points to 10,268.61
, its lowest closing level in about two weeks, and down from a 10-month closing high of 10,597.33 on Friday. The Nikkei's 3.1 percent slide was its biggest one-day percentage fall since late March.
The fall in Tokyo shares occurred in relatively thin volume, with 1.97 billion shares changing hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, just slightly above last week's daily average of 1.94 billion, which was the lowest daily average since 1.78 billion shares in the week of Feb. 16-19.
Oil and gas developer Inpex slid 4.8 percent to 708,000 yen, as oil prices fell below $67 a barrel CLc1 on Monday, extending the previous session's 4.3 percent decline. (Reporting by Masayuki Kitano;; Editing by Joseph Radford)
