Chavez says Obama lost in space on Latin America
2009-08-16 17:28:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. President Barack Obama is "lost in the Andromeda" galaxy on Latin American policy, his chief critic in the region, Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez, said on Sunday, while demanding the closure of U.S. military bases.
Last week Obama said critics of U.S. involvement in Latin America who are now asking Washington to do more to restore the ousted president of Honduras "can't have it both ways."
"We are not asking you to intervene in Honduras, Obama. On the contrary, we are asking that "the empire" get its hands off Honduras and get its claws out of Latin America," Chavez said in a rambling weekly television and radio show.
"President Obama is lost in the Andromeda Nebula, he has lost his bearings, he doesn't get it," he said.
Despite Chavez's frequent tirades against U.S. imperialism, the United States remains the main client for Venezuelan oil, though the OPEC country is gradually increasing sales to other countries, especially China.
Chavez, who expelled the U.S. ambassador to Venezuela at the end of the Bush administration but allowed him back when Obama took office, said he still believes Obama has good intentions.
Obama has promised to improve U.S. relations with Latin America. U.S. officials say his administration will put more effort into ties with the region to counter Chavez's growing influence.
The leftist Venezuelan leader is furious, however, at a U.S. security agreement with Colombia that will give the Pentagon access to seven Colombian military bases. Chavez has cut trade with his neighbor as a reprisal.
Venezuela is planning to beef up its army by buying tanks and other weapons from Russia, Chavez said, adding that his country needs to be prepared for an attack.
Chavez claims the United States wants to control Venezuela's huge oil reserves as well as the Amazon region.
"This is just the start of an imperial military expansion," Chavez said of the U.S.-Colombian security arrangement.
"Until when? Get with it, Obama -- get with it, brother," Chavez said.
(Reporting by Patricia Rondon; Writing by Frank Jack Daniel; Editing by Anthony Boadle)
