Amcor seen near $2 billion deal for Rio packaging unit
2009-08-17 02:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Aug 17 2009
Mon, Aug 17 2009
Mon, Aug 17 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
Employees walk out of the Rio Tinto Limited Shanghai Representative Office in Shanghai August 12, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Aly Song
Mon  EDT
) is set to raise about A$1.6 billion ($1.3 billion) in equity to help fund a purchase of Rio Tinto's (
) Alcan packaging unit, sources said on Monday.
Amcor halted trading in its shares on Monday, saying it would make an announcement concerning the outcome of talks on an acquisition, but gave no more details.
Amcor, which has been widely tipped as a buyer of the packaging unit, will pay a total of A$2.4 billion, raising a further A$800 million in debt, Australian media reported.
The deal is a key leg in Rio's efforts to pay down its hefty debt burden. The world's second-largest miner two years ago targeted $15 billion in asset sales to help cut debt after buying the Alcan aluminum business at the height of the commodities market boom.
However, the global financial crisis has seen Rio struggle to make sales at acceptable prices, and in June it announced a $15.2 billion rights issue after ditching a $19.5 billion tie up with Chinese firm Chinalco.
"It's positive for Rio," said Steven Robinson, senior investment manager at Alleron Investment Management, who also owns Rio stocks. "It is part of their strategy to reduce debt."
He said Alcan's packaging units were not part of their core assets over the long term.
), UBS (
), Deutsche Bank DBKG.DE, Commsec (
) were joint lead managers to the share sale, according to one of the sources.
RBS said in a report last week that an acquisition of the Alcan packaging assets would be positive for Amcor's share price.
The company is due to report annual results this week, with analysts expecting a net profit before one-offs of A$361 million for the full year, down from A$369.1 million a year ago.
(Reporting by Denny Thomas and Saeed Azhar; Editing by James Thornhill and Lincoln Feast)
