Webb meets junta, leaves Myanmar with American
2009-08-16 17:09:00.0
Webb meets junta, leaves Myanmar with American | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Webb meets junta, leaves Myanmar with American
Sat, Aug 15 2009
Fri, Aug 14 2009
Fri, Aug 14 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Sun, Aug 16 2009
U.S. Senator Jim Webb gestures during a news conference at a hotel in Bangkok August 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Phichaiyong Mayerku
Sun  EDT
The Democratic senator landed in Bangkok, capital of neighboring Thailand, with John Yettaw, whose swim to Suu Kyi's home in May led to her renewed detention after authorities said his uninvited stay had breached the terms of her house arrest.
Suu Kyi was sentenced last week to another 18 months under house arrest, and Yettaw's action is widely seen as having given the junta a pretext to keep Suu Kyi out of politics until after an election due next year. Webb said he had raised the issue.
"I'm hopeful as the months move forward they will take a look," he said.
"With the scrutiny of the outside world judging their government very largely through how they are treating Aung San Suu Kyi, it's to their advantage that she's allowed to participate in the political process."
Yettaw was not at the news conference. He went immediately to hospital after landing in Bangkok, where he walked from the plane to a waiting vehicle with a steadying hand from officials. He spent several days in hospital this month in Yangon.
Yettaw had been sentenced to seven years' hard labor on three charges, including immigration offences.
"I believe what happened was regrettable," Webb said. "He was trying to help. He's not a mean-spirited human being."
Webb was allowed by the military authorities to speak with Suu Kyi for about 45 minutes Saturday, after meeting members of her National League for Democracy (NLD) and other political parties who had been invited to Naypyidaw by the government.
"The most tangible outcome of his visit is the release of John Yettaw, who caused the mess," said Thakhin Chan Tun, a former ambassador to North Korea.
"However, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who is completely innocent in this incident, is still under house arrest."
In May, Obama extended a ban on U.S. investment in Myanmar imposed in 1997 because of political repression. He has also renewed sanctions on imports from Myanmar.
Before Suu Kyi's trial ended, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton held out the prospect of better relations but made that conditional, among other things, on the release of Suu Kyi and other political prisoners.
Webb, chairman of a Senate subcommittee on East Asia and the Pacific, is the first member of Congress to travel in an official capacity to Myanmar in more than a decade and the first senior American politician to meet junta leader Than Shwe.
A former Navy Secretary and a Vietnam War veteran who speaks Vietnamese, Webb favors a policy of engagement with the junta.
The United States has for years backed sanctions to persuade the generals to release political prisoners, to little effect.
Many Asian countries, including the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) of which Myanmar is a member, argue it is better to talk and trade with the resource-rich country, which occupies a strategic position between China and India.
(Writing by Alan Raybould; Editing by Kevin Liffey)
