Charging Yang books Hazeltine tee time with Woods
2009-08-15 20:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Three years after holding off Tiger Woods to win the Champions title in China, Yang Yong-Eun will play alongside the world number one for the first time in Sunday's final round of the U.S. PGA Championship.
South Korean Yang matched the best score of the week by firing a superb five-under-par 67 at a windy Hazeltine National Saturday, climbing into a tie for second place two strokes behind the pacesetting Woods.
"I will be nervous (tomorrow) but I've been looking forward to it," the 37-year-old Korean told reporters, speaking through an interpreter.
"I've thought a lot about this, playing with Tiger, and it has come true so fast. If I can concentrate and keep in my flow ... just keep playing the game, I think I'll be fine.
In November 2006, Yang won the biggest title of his career, holding off some of the game's biggest names to seal a two-stroke victory over Woods at the $5 million Champions tournament in Shanghai.
"I didn't really have much confidence in winning over those big names so I just went for broke and somehow I won the tournament," the Korean recalled of his triumph.
At Hazeltine, Yang will again be playing in high-profile company. He trails 14-times major winner Woods by two strokes and shares second place at six-under 210 with defending champion Padraig Harrington of Ireland.
"It's a privilege to be listed on top with those great names and great players that I admire and respect," he said.
"With Woods, he's won 70 times (on the PGA Tour) now. I've only won once so it's sort of 70-to-1 odds. Yeah, I might as well go for broke again."
Although he missed three cuts in his next six starts, he finally regained form this month, finishing fifth at the Buick Open and tying for 19th at last week's WGC-Bridgestone Invitational.
"Like anybody else, I got a bit excited after my first win and that probably took a toll on my focus," he said. "I pushed myself a bit too hard, probably was a bit too aggressive.
"Now recently I've sort of mellowed down a little bit and been able to regain my focus again."
