PRESS DIGEST - British business - Aug 16
2009-08-15 22:27:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sat  EDT
) will attempt to cut its 1.3 billion pound debt with a 500 million pound rights issue in the autumn. Finance director David Thomas is believed to have appointed an advisory team and approached major investors following recent recovery signs in the equity markets. The departure of Mark Pain, who left his post as finance director in June, has helped the company win support for the new plans among major shareholders, which include Legal & General (
), Polaris Capital and Phoenix Asset Management, as he was reluctant to launch a share issue.
Wellpict has collapsed under the weight of its debts following a poorly timed foray into commercial property. Fruit farmers will be hit by the central buying group's collapse, with administrators BDO Stoy Hayward expected to be appointed this week. BDO would not comment on the speculation, but a spokesman for Asda, which is supplied by Wellpict, said, "We have two other fresh fruit suppliers so we will rely more heavily on the other two. Customers shouldn't notice a thing. We've got contingencies that we put in place and in the long term we plan to continue to deal with the same farmers so they will hopefully not be affected either."
) is expected to reveal its underlying half-year profits fell from 3.3 billion pounds to 1.6 billion pounds on Thursday, although analysts will be more interested in how it is reducing its debt mountain. Rio rejected a 12.3 billion pound cash injection from Chinalco in June, favouring a 9.4 billion pound rights issue and an iron ore joint venture with BHP Billiton (
). Tom Albanese, chief executive of Rio Tinto, is expected to reveal group debt at the Anglo-Australian mining giant has fallen from 23 billion pounds to 14 billion pounds, with very little needing to be paid down.
) has ended with the appointment of Richard Burrows, a former governor of the Bank of Ireland. Burrows will replace Jan du Plessis, who announced his resignation in April to become chairman of Rio. Despite doubts over his role at Bank of Ireland, which was badly affected by the financial crisis and was forced to rely on state aid, Burrows is acknowledged as an experienced boardroom operator.
) will be settled by legal action. Glaxo first registered patents for vaccines that prevent a variety of childhood illnesses, including bacterial meningitis, in 1981, and claim that a patent lodged by Novartis for a technique used in the production of its own vaccines two decades later is "weak" and should be revoked. Novartis has launched an action in the High Court in response, which not only resists the move but accuses the British company of infringing its intellectual property.
