Water conservation key to combat shortage
2009-08-14 00:29:00.0
(Reuters) - The world can only feed an extra 2.3 billion people through 2050 by conserving water and lifting food yields, the head of the Sri Lanka-based International Water Management Institute said on Friday.
A challenge to feeding bigger populations with more western-style diets and growing biofuel demand is compounded by a threat to farm water supplies from climate change and more competition with cities, said Colin Chartres.
"If you look at current trends we'll need a lot more water and we don't have it," Chartres told Reuters in London, ahead of the launch of IWMI's "Revitalizing Asia's Irrigation" report at next week's World Water Week conference in Stockholm.
"You'll need about twice as much food and feed and about twice as much water as now in 2050. Many countries use 70-90 percent of their water in agriculture. My guess is that will become 60-70 percent because of competition from other uses, such as urbanization."
"By 2030 demand will exceed supply of water in India by 20-40 percent. At the moment demand is a little bit less than supply," he added.
India's monsoon rains were 56 percent below normal over the past week, government data showed on Thursday, painting an increasingly grim picture for the farm sector and fuelling talk of a full-blown drought.
Since the start of the summer monsoon season on June 1 rains are 29 percent below normal, the worst in at least five years.
Long-term solutions to higher food and water demand included better water conservation for example to repair aging, leaking irrigation canals, instead of expensive infrastructure projects, said Chartres.
"You have to look at irrigation again, revitalize it. Often schemes are poorly maintained, 50 to 80 years old."
To grab more control of their water supplies millions of Indian farmers had installed private pumps which threatened to exhaust ground water supplies. "(We must) re-charge the ground water by pumping back into aquifers," said Chartres.
Increasingly western-style, dairy-based diets were inflating water demand. Chartres cited an estimate that a vegetarian diet requires about 2,000 liters of water per day compared with a meat-based diet's 5,000 liters.
"Climate change is a bit of a specter, we don't know yet the extent of its severity," he added.
(Reporting by Gerard Wynn, Editing by Jon Boyle)
