U.S. senator meets Suu Kyi, Myanmar junta leader
2009-08-15 08:57:00.0
U.S. senator meets Suu Kyi, Myanmar junta leader | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
U.S. senator meets Suu Kyi, Myanmar junta leader
Fri, Aug 14 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Sat  EDT
Webb met Than Shwe at the country's remote new capital of Naypyidaw on the second day of his visit and later talked with Suu Kyi for about 45 minutes at a guesthouse arranged by government officials in Yangon.
A witness told Reuters the 64-year-old Nobel peace laureate was taken by car from her lakeside home, where she was put under another 18 months of house arrest this week, to a guesthouse to meet the senator.
Webb, chairman of a Senate subcommittee on East Asia and Pacific, is the first member of Congress to travel in an official capacity to Myanmar in more than a decade. He has been described as the first senior American official ever to meet Than Shwe.
Webb's visit comes in the wake of world anger over the conviction of Suu Kyi, a symbol of the movement for democracy in Myanmar, and some Myanmar dissident groups expressed unhappiness about the timing of his visit.
Webb may press for the release of John Yettaw, who swam uninvited to Suu Kyi's home in May. He was sentenced to seven years' hard labor in a parallel trial on Tuesday on three charges, including immigration offences and "swimming in a non-swimming area."
The Obama administration, which had earlier indicated it was reviewing its policy toward Myanmar, has denounced Suu Kyi's conviction.
Webb supports a pro-engagement policy with the junta. Webb's office said on August 6 that he would travel to five countries in Southeast Asia on a two-week mission "to explore opportunities to advance U.S. interests in Burma (Myanmar) and the region."
Earlier on Saturday, the U.S. senator also met three representatives of Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy party in Naypyidaw. He was due to end his three-day visit on Sunday.
(Reporting by Aung Hla Tun; Writing by Vithoon Amorn; Editing by Bill Tarrant)
