Fujifilm to beat annual digital camera target
2009-08-14 09:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Fujifilm Holdings Corp (
) is aiming for digital camera sales of 120 billion yen in the current year, 20 percent higher than its original target, thanks to robust demand in emerging markets such as China.
The maker of FinePix brand cameras said its digital camera operations may turn profitable at the operating level in the year to March 2010, compared with its original estimate of an operating loss, helped by cost cuts and strong sales.
"The biggest contributing factor is our hit models developed for emerging markets. Production is barely catching up with demand," Fujifilm Corp Senior Vice President Takeshi Higuchi told Reuters in an interview. Fujifilm Corp is a Fujifilm Holdings unit that handles cameras, photographic film, medical equipment and electronic components.
Fujifilm, the world's eighth-largest digital camera maker competing with industry leader Canon Inc (
), last month started shipping entry models that sell for $100 or less, targeting growing demand in Brazil, Russia, India and China.
Higuchi said he is confident that unit sales of Fujifilm's digital cameras will reach well over 9 million units in the year to March, up from its official forecast of 8.3 million units.
"We are striving to bring that number to as many as 10 million, although our sales side is saying they cannot yet make firm commitment to that number," Higuchi said.
Demand for most consumer electronics including digital cameras tend to peak in the year-end shopping season, making it difficult to come up with a precise annual sales projection early in the year.
Fujifilm makes core components of digital cameras such as lenses and image sensor chips in-house, and that helps the company offer low-priced but functionally competitive products, Higuchi said.
Fujifilm, which sold 8.2 million digital cameras in the year ended March 2009, aims to boost its unit sales to 12 to 13 million units in the business year that ends in March 2011, and to 15 million units in the year ending March 2013, Higuchi said.
"That would make us one of the top 3 digital camera makers in terms of unit sales ... and help our digital camera revenues easily exceed 150 billion yen," Higuchi said.
Prior to his comments, shares in Fujifilm, which also vies with Canon and Ricoh Co Ltd (
) in copiers and printers, closed down 1.4 percent at 2,825 yen, underperforming the benchmark Nikkei average's
(Reporting by Kiyoshi Takenaka; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
((kiyoshi.takenaka@thomsonreuters.com; +81 3 6441 1810; Reuters Messaging: kiyoshi.takenaka.reuters.com@reuters.net))
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com)) Keywords: FUJIFILM/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nT249638
