China defense chief says military buildup no threat to the world
2012-11-27 08:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China's military buildup poses no threat to the world, Defense Minister Liang Guanglie said on Tuesday, in an effort to allay fears among Asian neighbors amid long-running maritime disputes.
The United States, Japan and many other Southeast Asian states have frequently expressed worries about China's double-digit defense spending increases and expanding naval reach, saying Beijing's plans lack transparency.
"There is absolutely no need for that," Liang told Reuters, when asked about neighbors' concerns.
"The Chinese military must develop, but there's no 'worry' or 'fear' as the outside world says," he said before a meeting with visiting U.S. Navy Secretary Ray Mabus. "That's not what China is about."
China's growing military influence has coincided with a more assertive diplomatic tone, evident in rows with Japan and Southeast Asia over disputed islands. China has also told the United States, with President Barack Obama's "pivot" to Asia, not to get involved.
Liang, speaking at China's Defense Ministry, stressed the need for cooperation between Beijing and Washington, which has called on China to share more about its military ambitions.
"We should develop the ties between us, between our two militaries, touch on some of our differences, resolve conflicting views," Liang said before meeting Mabus.
"We should push forward the development of our two powers, and push forward the development of a new China-U.S. military relationship," he said. "Our two countries' ties are very important."
The modernization of China's army in particular has raised concern in the region. China's People's Liberation Army, which encompasses all branches of the military, has launched a new wave of technology and hardware this year.
It has test-flown its first two stealth fighters, and launched its first aircraft carrier, which it bought from Ukraine and refurbished. This month, it unveiled a new attack helicopter.
China has also been raising its profile in the South and East China Seas this year, reasserting its sovereignty over islands or waters also claimed by the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Japan and others.
China ushered in a new generation of leaders this month at the 18th Communist Party Congress in Beijing, with outgoing President Hu Jintao making a pointed reference to strengthening China's naval forces, protecting maritime interests and the need to "win local war".
China, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan all claim territory in the sea, which covers important shipping routes and is thought to hold untapped oil and gas reserves.
China's claim is by far the largest, forming a vast U-shape over most of the sea's 648,000 square miles (1.7 million square km), including the Spratly and Paracel archipelagos.
Sino-Japanese relations are also under strain after the Japanese government bought disputed islands, triggering violent protests and calls for boycotts of Japanese products across China.
(Reporting by Terril Yue Jones, Editing by Sui-Lee Wee and Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Some of the most deceptive words from this criminal state for a few days. Pretty big build up for just chasing Filipino and Vietnamese fisherman, while brandishing nationalism to create a new conflict with Japan. China, you are the biggest threat to world peace since Adolf Hitler walked into a beer hall and started talking. *CUE* Chinese Nationalist Retorts.
Nov 27, 20123:16am EST--
¡°Since at least the early 1970s, the Communist party of China has been poised to create a spectacular but controlled ¡°democratization¡± at any appropriate time. The party had by then spent two decades consolidating its power, building a network of informants and agents that permeate every aspect of Chinese life, both in the cities and in the countryside. Government control is now so complete that it will not be seriously disturbed by free speech and democratic elections; power can now be exerted through the all-pervasive but largely invisible infrastructure of control. A transition to an apparently new system, using dialectical tactics, is now starting to occur.¡± ¡ª Playing the China Card (The New American, Jan. 1, 1991). All actions of the Chinese Communist Party and government must be analyzed through the prism of the ¡°Long-Range Policy¡±, the ¡°new¡± more subtle strategy all Communist nations signed onto in 1960 as the only credible means to defeat the West with, as first revealed to the West by KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn, the only Soviet-era defector to still be under protective custody, proving (1) the collapses of the USSR/East Bloc were strategic ruses; and (2) that all other Soviet-era defectors who followed Golitsyn were still loyal to their respective Communist intelligence agencies, since all of them provided incorrect intelligence on the future of the USSR/East Bloc. When the Communist government in Beijing ¡°collapses¡±, Taiwan will be stymied from not joining the mainland. The ¡°dissident¡± movement in China (as in the USSR) is a creation of Beijing, its existence intended to instill in Western minds that the Communist government/party has competing factions, with one faction being the ¡°reformist¡± faction that allows for ¡°dissidents¡± being known to the West. With hundreds of thousands government agents that infest every aspect of Chinese life, from urban centers to rural villages, nothing happens in China that isn¡¯t cleared by Beijing. ¡°Behind the impressive smokescreen of pseudo-democracy, pseudo-capitalism and pseudo-reform, this Russian-Chinese ¡®cooperation-blackmail¡¯ strategy is irreconcilably hostile to the West. Again, this is no mere presumption. It was explicitly confirmed in May 1994 to Clark Bowers, a member of an official US Republican delegation to Peking, by Mr Mo Xiusong, Vice Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, who is believed to be the highest-ranking Chinese Communist official ever to have answered questions put to him by a knowledgeable Western expert on Communism: BOWERS: Is the long-term aim of the Chinese Communist Party still world Communism? Mo XIUSONG: Yes, of course. That is the reason we exist.¡± ¨C The Perestroika Deception (1995), by KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn.
Nov 27, 20125:11am EST--
1. Can¡¯t trust the Chinese, take a look at their business practices!
2. I believe the worst thing that happen to our freedom (in the U.S.) was the fall of the Soviet Union. This promulgated its erosion because the Federal Government had nothing to do so it set its Spy Apparatus on the average citizen and passed a host of intrusive laws, not the least is the since founded CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY LAWS.
Now, hopefully China will take the Soviets place and occupy Washington¡¯s thinking, leaving us to prosper.
Nov 27, 20125:42am EST--
