China Money: Oft-ignored SHIBOR gets more respect as rates rise
2009-08-14 05:35:00.0
(Reuters) - A rarely heeded Chinese benchmark, the Shanghai Interbank Offered Rate, is enjoying a burst of popularity amid a shifting interest rate outlook and easing regulatory barriers.
Signs of monetary tightening are on the horizon as the economy recovers and inflation looks set to return by year-end, boosting demand for floating rate notes (FRNs) and interest rates swaps (IRS) using SHIBOR.
And the steady, if gradual, opening of the market to foreigners -- with Citigroup Inc (
) approved just this week as a market maker in China's interbank bond market -- will expand the role of players with expertise and interest in using SHIBOR.
China has been keen to develop the benchmark, which was launched in 2007. SHIBOR
Modelled after London's LIBOR as a commonly accepted money market interest rate curve, it aims to replace heavily regulated deposit and lending rates as a benchmark and will be vital to China's plan to make Shanghai a global financial centre by 2020.
But aside from a few flurries of interest spurred mostly by central bank prodding, SHIBOR has largely been collecting dust.
Money market traders long shunned it, complaining that contributors of the quotes -- mostly cash-rich Chinese banks overwhelmingly on the offering side of transactions -- tended to manipulate fixings to keep rates high and maximise their profits.
Those banks were finally compelled to start lowering rates to more realistic levels last summer -- ironically during a round of monetary tightening, which forced them to do more transactions on the borrowing side of the market.
With little liquidity in SHIBOR-based trade, IRS have overwhelming favoured the seven-day repo for the floating portion of transactions, although the repo can be highly volatile due to supply-demand factors such as funding squeezes during big IPOs.
And FRN issuance, once based mainly on one-year deposit rates but now shifting to SHIBOR, was rare in China until recently.
First is a shift in market expectations towards future monetary tightening, after economic recovery spurred the central bank to nudge up bill yields in open market operations in July.
A resumption in equity IPOs in June, spurred by the rallying share market, also triggered funding squeezes in the money market and caused temporary hikes in short-term rates.
One result was a pickup in issuance of FRNs, popular with investors when expectations rise for higher longer-term rates.
Trade has also intensified in IRS, used for hedging or targeted for speculation when interest rates become volatile.
The volume of three-month SHIBOR-based IRS business was its third-highest on record in July, while the share of IRS transactions based on SHIBOR has been above 20 percent for the past five months, the longest period above that proportion since the market was launched, data from the China Foreign Exchange Trade System & National Interbank Funding Center shows.
"IRS trade in SHIBOR expanded recently because SHIBOR has embarked on an upward channel, raising the need to hedge risk there, and as banks are eager to diversify their investment products," said Lu Yun, an IRS trader at Bank of Communications.
SHIBOR's transparency has also given it a lift.
"Our customers now access publicly available SHIBOR rates and use them in discussions with our relationship managers to find out about interest rate trends for financing purposes," said Raymond Hui, head of treasury at Societe Generale Shanghai.
Traders expect SHIBOR use to get a further lift from Citigroup's approval as an interbank bond market maker, joining 19 Chinese banks and JPMorgan Chase (
Analysts said the approval paves the way for Citi to apply for a licence in non-proprietary trading of IRS, now held only by Chinese banks, which would open up massive potential for customer business to hedge interest rate risks.
"That licence would be very valuable, giving Citi a level playing field with its Chinese counterparts in the huge customer flow to sell IRS," said an IRS trader at a European bank in Shanghai. He expected at least two more foreign banks to obtain bond market-maker approvals next year.
He said foreign banks were keener than domestic banks to hedge risk using IRS, given their global experience in such trades, and Citi is a pioneer in derivatives trades using SHIBOR.
In 2007, Citi completed the first offshore yuan forward rate agreement using SHIBOR, and also conducted the first onshore IRS transaction using the rate. (Editing by Edmund Klamann)
