EMC sees Asia corporate IT spending returning
2009-08-14 03:35:00.0
(Reuters) - EMC Corp (
), the world's top data storage equipment maker, expects corporate technology spending in Asia to rise by a double-digit percentage next year as companies step up buying.
"What we're seeing is this transition under way -- that contraction is substantially slowing or turning positive," Steve Leonard, president of EMC Asia Pacific and Japan, told Reuters in an interview.
"Whereas companies were contracting or spending less, they're back to a reasonable level of spending ... I see Asia going back to a double-digit growth rate in the year ahead in terms of spending on technology," he said.
In July, EMC reported stronger-than-expected quarterly results and issued a full-year forecast for the first time this year, after breaking with tradition and failing to provide such guidance earlier in the year because firms had not provided clear indications about corporate spending plans. [nN22348173]
), which indicated the worst of the recession was behind them.
Asia has accounted for a growing portion of EMC's sales, as the region posts strong growth led by China and India. Asia contributed 13 percent of EMC's $3.26 billion in second quarter sales, up from about 10 percent just two or three years ago.
EMC's Asia revenue grew 9 percent in the second quarter from the first, triple the 3 percent growth rate for its global sales.
One of its biggest growth markets in the region has been China, where EMC has been steadily building its presence.
EMC announced an initiative to spend $500 million in the country three years ago, and now has about 800-900 people working at product development labs in Shanghai and Beijing.
"These teams develop products and technology for customers around the world," Leonard said, adding the China R&D accounts for more than a quarter of the 3,000 product development personnel EMC employs in Asia.
"It's a big deal for us," he said. "It's proximity to the customer, and it's also a green issue."
(Reporting by Doug Young; Editing by Ken Wills)
((doug.young@thomsonreuters.com; +886 2 2508-0815; Reuters Messaging: doug.young.reuters.com@reuters.net))
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com)) Keywords: EMC/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nHKG367711
