Clijsters wins again as Williams sisters go out
2009-08-13 18:28:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Kim Clijsters of Belgium returns a volley to Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia during their third round match of the 2009 Cincinnati Women's Open tennis tournament August 13, 2009. Credit: Reuters/John Sommers II
Thu  EDT
Second seed Serena, struggling with a virus, lost 7-5 6-4 to Austria's Sybille Bammer while in-form Italian Flavia Pennetta ended the hopes of third seed Venus with a 7-6 6-4 victory.
Former world number one Clijsters, in her first tournament after a two-year break during which she had her first child, won an enthralling two-hour encounter with Kuznetsova.
"Physically I've been training harder than ever," the Belgian told reporters. "I didn't doubt myself (in the third set).
"I have to say I feel really good. I don't feel tired or drained or anything. Just a few little aches and pains from getting back into playing matches."
Retrieving everything, Clijsters broke in the second game of the match and though Kuznetsova leveled at 4-4, she snatched the set when the sixth-seeded Russian netted a backhand.
Trading heavy groundstrokes, Kuznetsova saved a break point in the fourth game of the decider before Clijsters stepped up another level and broke twice to seal victory.
"I'm really happy," Pennetta said. "After winning last week in Los Angeles I took a lot of confidence and it showed on the court today."
Pennetta, who has now won 14 consecutive matches, constantly made Williams play one more shot than she wanted and unleashed a series of stunning passing strokes herself.
"I have to give her credit for playing well and keeping the ball in play," Williams said. "I just made too many errors.
"After a while it was obvious that she was just keeping the ball in play and waiting for me to self-destruct. I kept pressing that red button today and it didn't work out."
Later on Thursday, top seed Dinara Safina meets Peng Shuai of China for the right to play Clijsters.
