UPDATE 2-Tomkins says cost-cutting on track, shares rise
2009-08-13 08:33:00.0
(Reuters) - British engineering group Tomkins TOMK.L reported better-than-expected first-half adjusted operating profit and said deep cost cuts should help it through an uncertain business climate, boosting its shares.
The company said it would cut another 1,600 jobs by year-end after 3,900 cuts in the first half, and was on track to produce yearly savings of $150 million by the end of 2011.
Shares in Tomkins, which has suffered from its exposure to the slumping North American auto and housing markets, were up 7.7 percent at 190.9 pence 1230 GMT.
"Who knows if there will be a real recovery, but we are rightsized now, we've got good operational gearing, and we're continuing with our growth initiatives," Chief Executive James Nicol told Reuters in an interview on Thursday.
He was referring partly to the acquisition of Hydrolink, a hydrolic services business for the oil and gas industry which produces around $40 million per year in revenue.
Nicol added that he expected a windfall from fuel reduction technology like tyre pressure monitoring systems, as euro zone legislation would require new cars to carry them by 2012.
However, the company still faced an uncertain trading environment as much of its business continued to suffer from reduced sales volumes, a lack of new construction and anaemic industrial production in some regions.
Adjusted operating profit, excluding the cost of restructuring and impairments, was $82.3 million in the first half compared to $242.7 million last time, beating a company consensus estimate of $76 million.
Including the one-off costs, the company posted a first-half pretax loss of $114.9 million, compared with a profit of $61.3 million last time, and cut its interim dividend to 3.5 cents per share from 11.02 cents.
Trading in Europe and North America was seen flat in the second half, while China and India were likely to show moderate growth, partly thanks to government stimulus packages.
"We saw some month-to-month improvement in June and July but it's too early to say if it's the start of a recovery," Nicol said, adding that construction and industrial production in the United States remained deeply depressed. (Reporting by Nicholas Vinocur; Editing by Hans Peters)
