Asia Steel-China prices firm; construction steel sags
2009-08-13 03:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices rose 6.5 percent this week to a 10-month high as major mills continued to raise their offer prices, but the momentum is losing some steam, with strong output growth starting to pull down construction steel prices.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil rose to around 4,317.5 yuan ($631.7) a tonne, the highest level since early October last year and up 6.5 percent from 4,052.5 last week in south and east China, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphics on China's steel prices, click:
), China's largest steel mill, to raise September prices for its major products by a higher-than-expected 15 percent, the third straight monthly rise and its biggest increase this year. [ID:nSHA32815]
"This indicates management's outlook for flat steel is positive," said Goldman Sachs analysts this week.
"The key is still the sustainability of downstream real demand. Baosteel's large price hikes, given its significant exposure of direct sales to end users, indicates robust end demand as well as ongoing restocking at end users."
Robust steel production growth, however, is threatening to weaken the price rally, and is already pulling down prices of long products used in construction.
September rebar futures for September delivery SRBU9 on the Shanghai Futures Exchange fell 5.5 percent to 4,723 yuan from record highs hit just last week.
In Shanghai, spot rebar prices are quoted at around 4,070 yuan a tonne, down 5 percent from a week ago, and traders said prices could fall further to the 3,500-3,800 yuan range in coming weeks due to increasing inventory.
"With prices rising so rapidly and mills running at almost full capacity, people now think this might be a top and prices could go down again as they fear the market would be flooded with imports and massive inventory buildup," said a Chinese steel trader in Seoul.
China said on Tuesday that monthly steel production rose 12.6 percent from a year ago, the fastest pace in almost two years, to a record high of 50.68 million tonnes in July, as stimulus-induced demand allowed mills to run at almost full capacity and pass on rising ore costs. [ID:nPEK32574]
On a daily basis the production rate was 1.63 million tonnes, far higher than the government wanted for this year.
"Recent data points suggest a trend change may be at hand...Distributor inventories have begun to rise, and steel traders say that weekly spot pricing in Shanghai has dropped for the first time since May," said Morgan Stanley analyst Charles Spencer.
"Distributors' inventories have been rising for four weeks in a row, suggesting that the run rate for demand is slower than that for production." ($1=6.833 Yuan) (Editing by Michael Urquhart)
