Enthusiastic China embraces WTO despite rulings
2009-08-13 07:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu  EDT
After China entered the WTO in 2001, it was usually on the defensive as other countries sought to dismantle the many barriers to entering the world's fastest growing major economy.
"Our understanding of the rules has evolved. We've learned that opening is good for competitiveness," said a Chinese government trade official.
China's Ministry of Commerce -- which said it may appeal Wednesday's WTO ruling on Beijing's import and distribution regime for books and films -- enthusiastically champions export industries that are threatened by anti-dumping actions in Europe and the United States.
"I believe the WTO is very important in stabilizing the global economy," said Fu Donghui, managing partner of Allbright Law Offices in Beijing.
"Without it, we might revert to 1930s-style trade wars," added Fu, who represents Chinese fastener exporters in a European dispute.
In July it brought a WTO complaint against European duties on Chinese steel fasteners, which exempted two European invested manufacturers based in China. The next "hot spot" of China-Europe trade tensions is likely to be leather footwear, as Europe seeks to stem the tide of cheap Chinese-made shoes.
Beijing is also fighting U.S. duties on steel products. If the Obama administration grants more duties on other products, including tires and cars, those could also be taken to the WTO.
China agonized for years over the terms of its entry to the WTO, which took effect in 2001.
Beijing sought in negotiations with foreign officials to retain as much control as possible over its industries, while domestically, pro-trade reformers battled to convince a skeptical old guard that membership would not gut China's uncompetitive sectors or throw millions of workers out on the streets.
The Ministry of Commerce was the original supporter for WTO entry, cajoling other ministries that were unwilling to give up control or special privileges.
"It ended up being a good thing for the whole economy, although not necessarily for some interests within the economy," said Anne Stevenson-Yang, director of Asian research for Wedge MKI, a specialist equity analysis firm.
Part of China's new willingness to resolve disputes through the WTO is a shift in how it views the organization, and international bodies generally.
"Before, people viewed a WTO case as a political move, but actually since the WTO is rule-based, it allows us to keep from politicizing," Fu said.
Because the WTO is so useful, China is likely to ultimately implement the panel ruling that import and distribution monopolies on books, films, games and CDs do not meet its WTO commitments.
Opening the distribution channels would be a boon for private distributors and retailers, although they would still have to fight competition from cheap copies.
But China could still censor -- and frustrate outsiders who want to access the market -- by setting up an approval process for imported materials, which it previously did not have.
