UPDATE 2-Novozymes keeps 2009 outlook after Q2 profit rise
2009-08-13 06:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Danish enzymes maker Novozymes (
) reported a second-quarter operating profit at the low end of expectations on Thursday, up 5.8 percent on a year ago, but said lower costs enabled it to maintain its full-year profit forecast.
Operating profit in the three months rose to 399 million Danish crowns ($76 million) in the three months to end-June, just below the average forecast of 406 million given in a Reuters poll of 10 analysts but within the range of estimates of 385-444 million crowns.
The share price was down 0.2 percent at 451 crowns by 1000 GMT, underperforming a 1.4 percent rise in the Copenhagen bourse bluechip index
But it lowered its sales forecast in crowns to growth of above 2 percent from a previous forecast of above 4 percent, reflecting less favourable exchange rates.
"We have been even better than we expected after the first quarter at increasing productivity and holding back costs so that we can maintain both our EBIT expectations and our net profit expectations," Chief Executive Steen Riisgaard told Reuters.
Slower sales growth than expected before the global economic crisis also reduces the need for investments in additional production facilities, the company said.
"Our volume is expected to rise only slightly this year and that means the addition to our production facilities in especially China and the U.S. (in Nebraska) can be postponed a little bit, but they are not stopped," Riisgaard said.
Novozymes raised its 2009 outlook for free cash flow to 300-400 million crowns from an earlier forecast of 100-300 million, due to lower investment.
Enzymes for bioethanol account for about a sixth of group revenue but Novozymes, the world's leading industrial enzymes producer, has pinned big hopes on this business.
"We will look for an explanation for reduced investments particularly on the plant in Nebraska as a reduction in size could reflect weaker future expectations for the U.S. bioethanol market," Standard & Poor's analyst Jacob Thrane said in a research note.
Sales of technical enzymes, including those for ethanol production, were up by 6 percent to 624 million crowns.
Sales of enzymes to the bioethanol industry were below expectations due to North American plant closures, Chief Financial Officer Benny Loft said.
"We can see that some of the plants that have been closed -- for example Verasun's plants -- have begun to produce again later than we expected," Loft said.
"But it means that the bioethanol industry does not deliver the results in the second quarter that we expected," Loft said.
Riisgaard added that some ethanol producers that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection or been sold were 100 percent Novozymes' customers. "So we have lost some market share in the first six months of 2009," he said.
Novozymes total second-quarter sales were flat at 2.04 billion crowns, below a forecast for 2.11 billion. Sales were helped by 4 percent growth in detergent enzymes, which are the company's biggest business, but food enzyme sales slipped. ($1 = 5.271 Danish crowns)
