China regrets WTO ruling, says may appeal
2009-08-13 12:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China, defending its controls on imported films and books, said on Thursday it may appeal a World Trade Organization ruling against its restrictions, continuing its sparring with Washington over trade access.
The Ministry of Commerce said China "felt regret" the WTO had upheld a U.S. complaint about its restrictions, which Washington says hurts publishers, Hollywood and entertainment multinationals.
"China will conscientiously assess the ruling report of the expert panel and does not exclude the possibility of appealing on China's points of concern," said the statement in Chinese issued on the Ministry's website (www.mofcom.gov.cn).
"The channels for foreign publications, films and audio-visual products entering the Chinese market are extremely open," the statement said.
China's ruling Communist Party maintains a sprawling apparatus of propaganda and censorship to control television, publishing, entertainment and the Internet. While the country's mass media have become increasingly commercial, the state keeps a wary, if sometimes unsteady, grip.
The WTO disputes panel said China could not use its censorship goals to justify trade barriers that violate WTO rules, U.S. officials said.
"That's not going to go down at all well in these precincts," David Wolf, a Beijing-based business consultant who advises media and communications companies, said of the WTO ruling.
"China has always been adamant that trade in goods with cultural or political significance should be treated differently ... To them, it's ideological trade."
If China appeals against the ruling, it will add to the trade disputes pitting Beijing against Washington.
The U.S. trade deficit with China totaled $103 billion in the first half of 2009, down 13 percent from last year but still a source of tension between the two.
The WTO panel said on Wednesday China's import and distribution regime for books and films breaks international trade rules, as well as the terms of China's entry to the WTO in 2001, and should be revised.
It was the third time a WTO panel had ruled against China, which is also increasingly assertive in pressing trade complaints at the trade body.
The ruling did not reject the import quota of 20 foreign films per year that goes through China Film, a state company, and it accepted China's right to keep out foreign films and publications if it finds them objectionable.
But it said that "China Film can no longer be the monopoly importer, which would create other possible film import channels into China, a U.S. official said.
"The United States film industry won a major victory in its years-long battle to open the Chinese movie market today," Dan Glickman, the chairman of the Motion Picture Association of America, said in a statement issued on Wednesday.
"The WTO struck down China's film import monopoly as well as the barriers that keep U.S. companies from importing and distributing DVDs in China," he said.
The case, dating to 2007, also involved products such as books and newspapers, audio and video products including CDs, DVDs and video games, and music download services.
Either side can appeal the ruling within 60 days, and the case would be heard by a higher appellate body, which can uphold or reverse all or part of the ruling.
Wolf, the Beijing-based consultant, said that whatever eventually emerges from the WTO process, Beijing was unlikely to really ease its controls on products it fears could corrode ideological control.
"Here there's considerable wiggle room to ostensibly open the market while applying restrictions at any number of points," he said.
(Additional reporting by Lucy Hornby in Beijing, Jonathan Lynn in Geneva, and Doug Palmer in Washington; Editing by Ken Wills and Bill Tarrant)
