GLOBAL MARKETS-U.S. stocks rally, all eyes on Fed's FOMC
2009-08-12 13:10:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. stocks were higher on Wednesday while the dollar and government debt eased ahead of the conclusion of a Federal Reserve meeting that could shed light on the state of the U.S. economy.
up 1.43 percent, The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
up 1.37 percent, and The Nasdaq Composite Index
The Fed finishes a two-day policy meeting later on Wednesday, with expectations it will leave benchmark interest rates near zero and let a $300 billion quantitative easing program to buy Treasury securities expire in September as economic gloom lifts.
"When the Federal Open Market Committee releases its report this afternoon, Fed watchers will zero in on changes in the wording of the release, looking for any suggestion the committee has changed its view on recovery," Gerald O'Driscoll, senior fellow at the Cato Institute said in a note.
But after a report showing U.S. firms continue to cut inventories as they lack confidence in the economy, analysts expect the Fed will try to dampen speculation about higher interest rates while still supporting hopes that the makings of a recovery are at hand. Its statement is due at about 2:15 p.m. EDT (1815 GMT).
"Disinflationary forces are still at work in the economy, and Chairman Bernanke has indicated he is disinclined to raise rates so long as these forces are at work. Given this stance, the FOMC will not change its target range for overnight interest rates," O'Driscoll added.
The focus on the Fed overshadowed a U.S. Commerce Department report that indicated the U.S. trade deficit widened in June to $27.0 billion, as goods imports increased for the first time in 11 months on higher oil prices. [ID:nN11326860].
U.S. Treasury debt prices fell as the rally in U.S. stocks curtailed demand for safe-have bonds, while traders made room for a record $23 billion in 10-year government note supply to be auctioned in the afternoon.
The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note US10YT=RR was down 20/32, with the yield at 3.749 percent.
. Against the Japanese yen, the dollar
after The Bank of England said inflation will be well below a 2 percent target in two years if interest rates rise in the first quarter, suggesting markets have been pricing in rate increases too early. [ID:nLC556026]
In China, Shanghai's bourse
dropped 4.7 percent. A similar tumble occurred at the end of July and while Chinese stocks are notoriously volatile, investors were nonetheless jittery about the market.
index of top shares rose 1.06 percent on good earnings reports from Germany's E.ON (
), the world's largest power generator, France's EDF (
) and Spain's Iberdrola (
Earlier, Japan's Nikkei
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
(Additional reporting by Jeremy Gaunt in London, Nick Olivari and Richard Leong in New York, editing by Andrew Hay)
