PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - Aug 13
2009-08-12 16:49:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Tue, Jul 28 2009
Wed  EDT
A tax review led by Treasury secretary Ken Henry is proposing a user-pays approach to charging transport around Australia. Motorists would be charged higher if they drove further, and trucks would also be charged more due to the increased road damage they caused. The proposals to be released today are set out in a consultant's report, which states that the changes in the transport sector could decrease pollution, improve protection on roads, and reduce the cost of congested roads for businesses and motorists. Page 1.
The governments of Queensland and West Australia (WA) hit back at New South Wales (NSW) Treasurer Eric Roozendaal yesterday over his claims that the planned amendments to redistribute GST revenue would leave NSW with a deficit in its budget of A$500 million a year. Both Queensland Treasurer Andrew Fraser and WA Treasurer Troy Buswell believe that their states are entitled to a greater share of money, due to the fact they have driven the Australian economy over the last 10 years. Page 3.
There is a significant improvement in consumer confidence over the past 12 months, with the Westpac-Melbourne Institute consumer sentiment index reaching an almost two-year high of 113.4 points this month. The large increase suggests that consumers no longer a fear that a recession is imminent, and are optimistic that the economy is rebounding. Treasurer Wayne Swan reports that the stimulus package provided by the Federal Government assisted in the recovery of the Australian economy. Page 3.
The difficulties surrounding Aboriginal housing in the Northern Territory are spreading to Western Australia, with the Barnett government advising that the Federal Government's A$496 million handout will not be enough to mend the problem. Issues frustrating the process include native title, unsustainable communities, Aboriginals barring public servants, and the significant cost of providing services to remote areas. WA Treasurer and Housing Minister Troy Buswell stated that the challenge was daunting. Page 1.
Jenny Moala, the 26-year-old woman believed to be in control of the Airlines Papua New Guinea flight that crashed into a mountain near Kokada, had fewer than six months experience flying twin-engine aircraft. The crash killed 13 people which included nine Australians. Prime Minister of Australia Kevin Rudd advised the Federal Parliament that "no one had survived the horrible tragedy of the plane flying into a jungle-covered peak in treacherous conditions on Tuesday." Page 1.
Almost a week after the police raid of an alleged Somali and Lebanese extremists cell, Attorney-General Robert McClelland has softened aspects of Australia's counter-terrorism laws. Analysts report that the changes announced yesterday set out that the length of time police can hold terror suspects will be capped at a maximum of nine days. However, the police have gained the ability to search premises without a warrant where they suspect that there are substances that threaten public health. Page 1.
Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull has vowed that he will negotiate with the Rudd government on its Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme later this year after the Opposition votes against it today. There continues to be division in the Coalition however, with several Liberal senators expressing doubt or uncertainty over whether humans are the cause of climate change. Mr Turnbull advised that he would draft amendments based on the greener, cheaper, smarter hybrid emissions trading scheme. Page 2.
) executive Stern Hu, accusing him now of commercial espionage and taking bribes instead of the initial charge of stealing state secrets. This has provided some relief in the political tension between Australia and China and the profitable iron ore trade, but places Mr Hu in a new dilemma. If the new charges are proved, Mr Hu would be in conflict with Australian Law and Rio Tinto, with the result being that he would be let go by the company. Page 3.
The proposed A$8.3 billion West Metro train between the city of Sydney and Parramatta will affect two popular sporting locations in Sydney. Analysts report that construction of the metro would require digging up playing fields at Lambert Park in Leichhardt and Algie Park in Haberfield. Tony Raciti, the president of Sydney football club Apia, advised that thousands of soccer players practise and play at these fields and the construction would displace 1,147 registered players and up to 5,000 family members and supporters. Page 3.
THE AGE (www.theage.com.au) According to a plan in the Federal Government's Henry review of tax policy, retirees with small superannuation lump sums could use the option of handing their nest egg to the government in return for guaranteed income indexed to the age pension. Federal Treasury secretary Ken Henry and the review panel have not made any decision on the plan but it has received the backing of members such as the Australian Council of Trade Unions and superannuation funds. The plan reflects government concerns about longevity risks in the retirement incomes system. Page 1.
An Afghan policeman has been shot dead, and a second policeman was wounded by Australian troops after ignoring requests to stop at a checkpoint north of Tarin Kowt, Afghanistan. The two men were travelling on a motorcycle and did not respond to the requests of the troops. The Australians were trying to secure an area in preparation for upcoming national elections. A statement from the Australian Defence Force said that the troops were shot upon after the incident, but it was not clear who was behind the shooting. Page 2.
According to Athletics Victoria (AV), the State Government has kept the sporting body in the dark about its decision to relocate the Victorian Institute of Sport (VIS) from Olympic Park to Albert Park. According to documents the State Government had several secret meetings with the Collingwood Football Club before making the decision to relocate both the AV and VIS. In April 2008, Premier John Brumby announced the decision to invest A$50 million relocate both sporting bodies. The AV believes that A$50 million is not enough to help it relocate. Page 3.
The National Gallery of Victoria (NGV) released its Winter Masterpiece exhibition for 2010 yesterday. Analysts report that the "blockbuster" is titled European Masters: Stadel Collection 19th-20th Centuries from Stadel Musem in Frankfurt. It includes works by French Impressionists Monet, Renoir, Cezanne and Degas, Pablo Picasso, Van Gogh, Much, Rodin, Klee and Rousseaul. NGV director Dr Gerard Vaughan advised yesterday that the collection would make a huge impact. Page 3.
