Rio arrests test diplomats' skills: John Kemp
2009-08-12 00:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China's decision to approve the arrest of four Rio Tinto employees held last month is part of the complex diplomatic choreography being played out between China and Australia. The two countries are seeking to protect a strategically vital commercial relationship while saving face and trying to establish a new playing field for relations.
After holding the Rio team for the maximum 37 days permitted by law, the Supreme People's Procuratorate has authorised their formal arrest and continued detention. While no formal charges have been brought, the employees have been arrested on suspicion of illegally obtaining commercial secrets and bribing non-state officials.
Australia's foreign minister has pointed out that the accusations have been downgraded from stealing state secrets. But while that is true, and represents a concession, China has also sharpened the issue by specifying exactly what it believes the employees have done wrong.
Beijing has clearly been stung by criticism that it is using vague catch-all state secrecy laws to criminalize normal commercial dealings, and that it has failed to provide sufficient detail about what the four are alleged to have done wrong. Its specific accusations would be offences in most western jurisdictions.
Some observers have tried to portray the investigation as the work of an isolated agency (NAPSS) at the behest of iron ore negotiators piqued at failing to secure target price reduction during the annual benchmark negotiations. The foreign ministry's rapid disavowal of the NAPSS article contributed to the appearance of a divided government response that was backing off from earlier claims.
But the procuracy's endorsement of the investigation indicates the action has been approved at the highest levels of the government in Beijing.
The decision to make formal arrests does not foreclose a negotiated solution. It does, though, suggest China will drive a hard bargain and not back down without securing some admission of wrongdoing or other concessions -- whether from the employees, Rio or the Australian government.
Despite the bitter rhetoric by partisans on both sides, China and Australia need each other. Both are keen to prevent the Rio dispute poisoning the wider commercial relationship.
As if to emphasize the dependence, China's Yanzhou Coal yesterday announced an agreement to buy Australian coal-miner Felix Resources Limited FLX.AX in $3.3 billion deal. At the same time, China Investment Corp, China's sovereign wealth fund, was reported in advanced talks to invest $1 billion-plus in Fortescue Metals Group Ltd (
China cannot afford to allow the Rio case to block its access to Australia's mining sector. But it needs to ensure Chinese investments are treated fairly by Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) in exactly the same way as investment by a western company would be received and not subject to some hidden "political acceptability test".
Prominent Australian media commentators have complained that China's behavior in the Rio case shows a lack of respect, and demanded that Kevin Rudd's government stand up to bullying tactics.
But the same complaint could be leveled at the harsh anti-China rhetoric from Australian politicians and brokers which accompanied Chinalco's unsuccessful bid to up its stake in Rio earlier this year.
From China's perspective, Rio shareholders got a free put option during the worst of the global downturn, while the FIRB strung out the review process long enough for commodity prices to recover and Rio to put together an alternative deal.
China needs to ensure calls for fair treatment of western business negotiators are matched by fair treatment for its investments and commercial interests abroad. One of the implied conditions for resolving the Rio affair is likely to be more straightforward and less overtly political review for future Chinese investments in Australia's resources sector.
China's government has already achieved its twin objectives: warning staff of local enterprises to be more careful with confidential information when dealing with wealthy foreign corporations, and tightening the boundaries on what is acceptable behavior for foreign enterprises. The government's aim now is to pocket the gains and limit the wider fallout.
For diplomats on both sides, the ultimate goal is to get the four employees returned to Australia (with or without a conviction, an acquittal, or an agreement to agree to disagree about what they were doing) while resetting the bilateral relationship to emphasize areas of commercial agreement rather than zero-sum nationalistic competition over resource pricing.
Diplomats are paid to think creatively. Papering over differences, reaching unwritten understandings and generating enough confusion to lose particular details in a fog of generalities is the heart of the job. In this case they still have a long way to go.
