UPDATE 1-Exit strategies must await recovery, Canada says
2009-08-12 04:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Global policymakers must secure a rock-solid economic recovery before they turn their attention to exit strategies from stimulus policies or to discussion of exchange rates, Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty said on Wednesday.
Speaking to reporters after three days of meetings in Beijing, Flaherty described recent economic signs as encouraging but tentative.
Canadian and Chinese leaders agreed that discussions about international currency issues should take a back-seat until the global economy was firmly back on its feet, he added.
Flaherty stirred financial markets last week by raising the possibility of currency market intervention if the Canadian dollar's sharp rise put the country's fragile recovery at risk.
"Monetary policy, the value of the dollar, the currency is the responsibility, primarily, of the governor of the Bank of Canada," he said. "Having said that, we have always expressed concerns with respect to rapid fluctuation with respect to the dollar, which is the concern that I expressed last week."
The dollar has since moved lower against the greenback as a drop in commodity prices and an unexpectedly weak domestic housing report have dented investors' risk appetite -- and underscored Flaherty's cautious economic outlook.
"What positive signs we have seen are encouraging, but they are tentative," he said.
He pointed to car sales, consumer confidence and housing as sources of optimism, balancing those against continued worries about global financial institutions and weakness in the United States, which is by far Canada's biggest trading partner.
Flaherty said that he and Chinese officials had touched on currencies, including both the Canadian dollar and the yuan, in the course of their meetings.
"The consensus was, quite frankly, that we have to make sure that we have a firmly established global economic recovery before there are further discussions about international currencies," he said.
WELCOME, CHINA
"We know that in the future it will be necessary to have exit strategies so that the degree of involvement of public funds in stimulus programmes and so on can become more balanced. But that depends on how the economies do in the next while," he said.
The question of how to wind down stimulus programmes would likely come up next month in London at a meeting of finance ministers from the G20 grouping of rich and emerging economies, he added.
Flaherty's visit to China, alongside Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney and a parade of Canadian business executives, was intended to strengthen and expand economic ties with Canada.
To that end, Flaherty said he welcomed Chinese direct investment in Canada. He said the baseline requirement was that foreign investors have commercial goals and transparent governance.
China Investment Corp, the country's $300 billion sovereign wealth fund, agreed last month to acquire a 17.2 percent equity stake in Canadian miner Teck Resources (
Asked if he knew whether CIC was looking to make any other investments in Canada, Flaherty said: "Not that I was made aware of this week." (Reporting by Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Alan Wheatley and Ken Wills)
