AIG to sell HK consumer finance, India IT units
2009-08-12 10:55:00.0
AIG to sell HK consumer finance, India IT units | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
AIG to sell HK consumer finance, India IT units
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
A couple tours inside the Bank of China Tower opposite to AIA Central building in Hong Kong August 12, 2009. American International Group, seeking to raise cash to repay bail-out loans, has agreed to sell its Hong Kong consumer finance business to China Construction Bank, the country's second-biggest lender. AIG failed to sell a large stake in American International Assurance Co Ltd (AIA), its Asia life insurance unit earlier this year. The company, once the world's biggest life insurer, has also been seeking buyers for its Taiwan unit Nan Shan Life. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Wed  EDT
) has struck deals to sell its Hong Kong consumer finance and India-based IT services units, taking two small steps in its bid to raise cash to repay more than $80 billion in bailout loans.
), the country's second-biggest lender, will buy 100 percent of AIG Finance (Hong Kong) Ltd for $70 million in cash. The deal also includes repayment of intragroup indebtedness and deposits of about $557 million, the two companies said on Wednesday.
AIG, once the world's largest insurer, is winding down some units and selling others to cut risky investments to gain stability and pay down its debt after being rescued by the U.S. government during the height of the credit crisis last year.
The company reported its first net profit in seven quarters last week, and its shares have doubled in value this month. The stock rose nearly 5 percent on Wednesday.
New York-based AIG said on Tuesday that its financial products unit had completed the sale of its energy and infrastructure investment assets, for net proceeds of about $1.9 billion.
While a help, sales to date have made only a small dent in AIG's federal debt, raising concerns that it will still be a long time before taxpayers are made whole.
On Friday, AIG said that during the first six months of the year, it had sold assets for net proceeds of about $2.6 billion that it can use to repay its federal loans.
To help spur bigger sales, AIG has tweaked its divestiture plans for some of its larger businesses. In recent months it stepped up plans to list its Asian insurance unit, American International Assurance Co Ltd (AIA), in Hong Kong after failing to find a buyer for a large stake in it earlier this year.
It is pursuing a similar path for its global property-casualty division. The company is still seeking buyers for its Taiwan unit, Nan Shan Life.
Buying AIG Finance would help CCB to expand in Hong Kong by significantly increasing the customer base as well as market share in the consumer banking market, the Chinese lender said.
AIG Finance, which sells credit cards and operates as a restricted license bank, has more than 500,000 customers and employs about 350 people.
Chinese banks including CCB, China Merchants Bank (
Separately, AIG will sell its Indian IT services arm to local outsourcing company MphasiS Ltd (
AIG Systems Solutions Ltd, which provides IT services to AIG firms globally, has more than 800 staff at its facilities in Indian cities of Chennai and Kolkata, said MphasiS, which is owned by Hewlett-Packard's (
Indian outsourcing companies have been buying local IT services units of the global financial giants, which are reeling under the impact of the financial meltdown, to expand their offerings and acquire new customers.
In December, Wipro Ltd (
), India's third-ranked IT services firm, announced the acquisition of Citi Technology Services Ltd for $127 million, as the embattled Citigroup (
Shares of AIG were up 4.8 percent at $26.11 in morning New York Stock Exchange trading. CCB fell 1.7 percent in a weak Hong Kong market, while MphasiS gained 0.3 percent in Mumbai.
(Additional reporting by Jacqueline Wong and Lilla Zuill in New York; Editing by Lincoln Feast and Lisa Von Ahn)
