Chinese sell off weighs on global stocks
2009-08-12 07:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Uncertainty about the Federal Reserve's view on the U.S. economy and another sharp fall in Chinese stocks weighed on global equities on Wednesday although Europe managed mild gains
The Fed finishes a two-day policy meeting later on Wednesday, with expectations that it will leave benchmark interest rates near zero and let a $300 billion quantitative easing program to buy Treasury securities expire on schedule in September as economic gloom lifts.
But after a report showing U.S. firms continue to cut inventories as they lack confidence in the economy, analysts expect the Fed will try to dampen speculation about higher interest rates while still supporting hopes that the makings of a recovery are at hand. Its statement is due at about 1815 GMT (2:15 p.m. EDT).
The Bank of England, meanwhile, said inflation will be well below the 2 percent target in two years if interest rates rise in the first quarter, suggesting markets have been pricing in rate increases too early.
"World share markets have been moving in tandem for a while and there's growing concern that many have been overbought, which may lead to a bit of adjustment after all the gains," said Masayoshi Okamoto, head of dealing at Jujiya Securities in Tokyo.
One area of concern was China, where Shanghai's bourse
dropped 4.7 percent. A similar tumble occurred at the end of July and while Chinese stocks are notoriously volatile, investors are nonetheless jittery about the market.
), the world's largest power generator, reported earnings that beat market expectations, following strong results from major European peers such as France's EDF (
index of top shares was up 0.2 percent. Earlier, Japan's Nikkei
The dollar steadied slipped against other major currencies before the Fed's verdict.
"Unless the Fed delivers a markedly upbeat statement that can bring forward tightening expectations, or starts to detail exit strategy tools, it looks as though the dollar will struggle to build on recent gains," said Chris Turner, head of FX strategy at ING.
Euro zone government bonds were higher. Two-year yields were 4 basis points lower at 1.448 percent, with 10-year yields off 3 basis points at 3.449 percent.
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
