FOREX-Yen rises as China shares fall, eyes on Fed
2009-08-12 01:43:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen rose against the dollar on Wednesday as Chinese shares tumbled and prompted investors to further liquidate yen short positions ahead of a policy statement from the U.S. Federal Reserve later in the day.
Uncertainty about the overall market reaction to the Fed's policy decision later on Wednesday also made investors cautious about keeping big positions, traders said.
"The currency reaction after the Fed is hard to predict. But one thing that is certain is that long positions that had been stretched are now looking vulnerable to liquidation," said Shuichi Kanehira, head of FX spot trading at Mizuho Corporate Bank.
There was some talk of dollar-selling by Japanese investors repatriating funds related to $27 billion in coupon payments on U.S. Treasuries due on Aug. 15. In addition, $61 billion in coupon securities will mature on the same day.
Traders also said the dollar's jump to an eight-week high near 98 yen late last week following better-than-expected U.S. employment data was overdone, and investors were now cutting dollar long positions versus the yen.
"The recovery story has been pushed hard, very hard, and it makes sense to see this momentum unwind a little," said Adam Carr, senior economist at ICAP, Sydney.
"Particularly when there are plenty of equity analysts running around arguing strong moves to date don't reflect fundamentals."
, while the euro was steady at $1.4151
The Fed will conclude its two-day policy meeting and release a statement around 1815 GMT, with investors looking to its assessment of the economy and whether it unwinds some of the unconventional easing measures currently in place.
Any downside surprise, like from the Bank of England last week, could negatively affect the greenback.
But if the Fed states clearly that it will not expand or extend its $300 billion Treasury buying programme, due to expire in September, the dollar seems likely to rise against the euro and sterling, said Yuichi Hojo, director of FX distribution at UBS AG's Tokyo branch.
"If the supply of ample money is tightened, that would lead to a higher currency. It could lead to an outlook for interest rates to be raised," Hojo said.
"Since there has been quite a build up in dollar-selling and euro-buying, sterling-buying positions, there could be some correction of that," he said.
A trader for a European bank, however, said he was sceptical the Fed would state that it will end its buying of Treasuries, adding that he thought the Fed would continue such buying in some form.
"That would put a strong focus on the exit strategy," the trader said, adding that such a decision could send market interest rates soaring and be negative for equities. (Additional reporting by Masayuki Kitano in TOKYO and Anirban Nag in SYDNEY; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
