RPT-China steel body under fire, govt support seen waning
2009-08-12 04:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China's embattled steel industry association came under direct fire in a state-owned newspaper on Wednesday, suggesting diminished government support for its recalcitrant stance in marathon iron ore negotiations.
The China Iron and Steel Association, which is leading annual iron ore price talks, has sought this year to impose its will on an industry it accuses of undermining its demand for a bigger price cut. Its calls for more control over import pricing and licensing are so far unheeded by Beijing.
"Pricing and purchasing are part of enterprises' business freedom. If a firm can buy iron ore at a price lower than the 'national unified price', why should CISA or the NDRC not allow it to buy?" it said.
The more critical tone is a change from earlier reports on the negotiations, as well as the detention of Rio Tinto (
) iron ore traders, when most Chinese media portrayed CISA as protecting the national interest.
As CISA continues to haggle for a better price than 33 percent price reduction agreed with other Asian mills back in May, there are growing signs that its belligerent stance in the talks have made enemies in government as well as industry.
Analysts with the Eurasia Group said last week that China's powerful National Development and Reform Commission has already rejected CISA's proposal to shut down the iron ore spot market and impose a "unified" price. [ID:nSP491631]
The National Business Daily, based in Shanghai, reported this week that the proposals were deemed impractical.
CISA secretary general Shan Shanghua said the reports were unfounded and insisted the proposals were still under development, according to the Beijing Times on Wednesday.
In a possible effort to ease tensions with Australia, the most sensitive charge of stealing state secrets was not included on the arrest sheet. They still face the lesser charges of commercial bribery and "using improper means to obtain commercial secrets about our country's steel businesses." [ID:nSP499437]
Spot iron ore prices that have doubled from this year's lows to $115 a tonne -- about 50 percent above the contract price that Rio has agreed with other Asian customers -- have made CISA's insistence on a bigger cut increasingly untenable.
"By what authority does CISA try to control what steel mills do or do not import?" columnist Sheng Dalin, who wrote the China Youth Daily commentary, told Reuters.
"Even the government is limited in what areas it can set prices, for instance electricity, so why should an industry association try to set prices if even the government doesn't have this power?" (Additional reporting by Alfred Cang; Editing by Jonathan Leff)
