JGBs lifted by Nikkei and Treasuries, curve flattens
2009-08-12 02:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese government bonds gained on Wednesday, with 10-year futures pulling away from seven-week lows hit earlier in the week on the back of stronger U.S. Treasuries and after the Nikkei stock average retreated from 10-month highs.
The yield curve flattened, with the two-year/20-year spread tightening by 2 basis points from a four-year high hit the previous day.
"The market is focused squarely on what the Federal Reserve will do with its government debt buying scheme, with particular interest on whether it will extend the programme scheduled to end next month," said Shinji Ebihara, a quantitative analyst at Mizuho Securities.
As part of its quantitative easing, the Fed plans to buy up to $300 billion in Treasuries and attention is on if the central bank will end the programme as scheduled next month, extend it or increase it.
The Fed is expected to hold its benchmark overnight rate in a range of zero to 0.25 percent, with a statement on the decision due at about 1815 GMT.
An extension of the Fed's debt purchase programme is considered the most bond market friendly option, at least for the short term, but market players said the possibility of the U.S. central bank exploring alternatives had not been overlooked.
"The JGB market has partially priced in the possibility of the Federal Reserve ending its bond buying scheme as scheduled next month," said Shinji Nomura, chief market analyst at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
The yield curve flattened as longer-dated JGBs outperformed their shorter-maturity counterparts thanks to bargain hunting in the superlong zone by pension funds, market players said.
The two-year/20-year yield spread tightened by 2 basis points to 189.5 basis points. It reached 191.5 basis points on Tuesday, its steepest in four years according to Reuters data.
shed 1.4 percent, its run to a 10-month closing high the previous day tempered by profit taking ahead of the Fed meeting, weaker Chinese shares
The next supply hurdle for the U.S. bond market is a $23 billion 10-year note auction scheduled later on Wednesday, an outcome the JGB market is watching with keen interest. (Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
