Malaysia to cancel Internet filter study-source
2009-08-12 12:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Malaysia is to cancel an Internet filter tender that drew comparisons with China's "Green Dam" project and triggered an outcry from opposition politicians as well as criticism from industry bodies, a source told Reuters. No one from the industry regulator, the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, was immediately available for comment.
A copy of the tender documents, seen by Reuters, appeared to contradict that statement.
"The tender is going to be cancelled," said the source, who had direct knowledge of the tender but declined to be identified due to the sensitivity of the issue.
The Information Ministry came up with the proposal for the filter in April, but the idea was apparently blocked by Prime Minister Najib Razak, the source added.
That could bring not only pornography but also boost the presence of the country's opposition which in 2008 inflicted the government's biggest ever losses in elections and used the Internet to get its message across Malaysia's tightly controlled mainstream media.
China backed down on its "Green Dam" software, which it said was aimed at halting the spread of pornography, under pressure from the U.S., human rights and industry groups.
It raised concerns that the government would crack down on the Internet, a popular medium for voicing criticism of the National Front coalition that has ruled this Southeast Asian country for 51 years. [ID:nKLR500414]
The firewalls, which the source said could have been introduced six to eight months after the study was completed at the end of this year, could have cost in the region of 200 million Malaysian ringgit ($57.01 million) to implement.
The issue of unfettered access to the Internet is important economically for Malaysia, which has attracted investment from technology companies such as Microsoft Corp (
Its Multimedia Super Corridor, set up in 1996, attracts investments worth 1.6 billion ringgit ($458 million) annually, according to industry data.
Najib has announced a series of economic liberalisation measures to attract foreign investment and diversify Asia's third most trade dependent economy away from its reliance on electronics and commodities exports. [ID:nKLR467124]
Boosting banking, finance and the knowledge economy, all of which are helped by fast Internet connections, are key planks of Najib's economic strategy.
(Writing by David Chance; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
