U.S. and European stocks fall on recovery doubts
2009-08-11 17:22:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. and European stocks slumped on Tuesday on weakness in banking shares, failing to follow through on strength in Asia where Japanese shares hit a 10-month high.
The Japanese yen rose against other major currencies on disappointing Chinese economic data and investors' increased risk aversion.
Financial shares led U.S. stocks lower after an influential analyst said recent gains were overdone and after a report showed American businesses have not signaled confidence in the economy by boosting inventory. The two factors led to increased caution among investors, who are questioning a five-month rally in major stock indexes.
Wall Street turned lower after the U.S. Commerce Department said inventories at wholesalers fell 1.7 percent in June, marking a 10th consecutive decline to the lowest level in more than two years. The decline was nearly double what analysts had expected, casting a bearish tone over markets that had been grasping at signs that the U.S. recession will soon end.
Richard Bove, a veteran banking analyst at Rochdale Securities, said financial stocks would likely see a short-term pullback because fundamentals have yet to improve and bank earnings may be weak into the third and fourth quarters.
The benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 index
declined 12.75 points, or 1.27 percent, to 994.35, edging further from last week's peak at 1,081. The Dow Jones Industrial Average
slumped 96.50 points, or 1.03 percent, to 9,241.45.
Denmark's biggest financial group, Danske Bank (
), fell 2.5 percent after it reported a drop in second-quarter profit. France's Natixis (
) plunged 17.5 percent after the firm's parent, BCPE bank, told French market regulator AMF it does not plan to delist Natixis as part of a strategic review.
In Asia, Japan's Nikkei
rose 0.58 percent to 10,585.46, its highest close since October 3, with construction stocks gaining on expectations for reconstruction efforts after recent Asian floods and a earthquake. As in Europe and the United States, the Japanese market is also anticipating recovery in stronger earnings that have yet to materialize, said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
"Evidence so far is not yet convincing enough for such a recovery for real," Akino said. "Trade could be rangebound until earnings reports for the first half (April-September) run their course."
China reported below-forecast growth in factory output and investment, also reminding financial markets that the world's third-largest economy is not yet back on a solid footing.
The U.S. data eroded gains broadly around the globe, with the MSCI-all-country world index .MIWD00000PUS, the global benchmark for many investors, edging lower about 1.0 percent.
"We do have concerns about the sustainability of the rally, but we would also point out that valuation measures remain attractive and that there is still a large amount of cash on the sidelines waiting to be invested," Bob Doll, global chief investment officer for equities at BlackRock, said in a note.
"As a result, we believe the current cyclical bull market remains intact."
Stock declines helped revived the bid for government debt, which for weeks had suffered as expectations of faster global growth enticed investors to buy more volatile equity assets. Traders were looking ahead to the conclusion on Wednesday of a meeting of the Federal Reserve, which is expected to leave U.S. interest rates unchanged.
Two-year U.S. Treasury note yields declined 0.06 percentage point to 1.18 percent, while 10-year levels fell 0.1 percentage point to 3.67 percent. The two-year Schatz yield declined 0.04 point to 1.49 percent as the 10-year yield was near unchanged at 3.47 percent.
Against the yen, the dollar declined 1.27 percent to 95.88. The euro edged up 0.04 percent to $1.4149.
In energy and commodities prices, U.S. light sweet crude oil fell $1.21, or 1.71 percent, to $69.39 per barrel, and gold rose 75 cents, or 0.08 percent, to $945.40.
