GLOBAL MARKETS-World stocks slip on recovery doubts
2009-08-11 13:35:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. and European stocks slumped on Tuesday as doubts lingered about whether banks were clear of the financial crisis, though Japanese stocks hit a 10-month high.
Financial shares led U.S. stocks lower after an influential analyst said recent gains overdone, and after a report showed American businesses have not signaled confidence in the economy by boosting inventories. The two factors led to increased caution among investors, who are now questioning five months of rallies in major stock indexes.
Stocks turned lower after the U.S. Commerce Department said inventories at wholesalers fell 1.7 percent in June, marking a 10th consecutive decline to the lowest levels in more than two years. The decline was nearly double what analysts expected, casting a bearish tone over markets that had been looking for an end to the U.S. recession.
Richard Bove, a veteran banking analyst at Rochdale Securities, said financial stocks would likely see a short-term pullback because fundamentals have yet to improve and bank earnings may be weak into the third and fourth quarters.
The benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 index
was down 14.17 to 992.93 at midsession in New York compared with last week's 1,081 peak. The downbeat mood carried over into Europe where the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300
Denmark's biggest financial group Danske Bank (
) saw its stock fall 2.5 percent after it reported a drop in second-quarter profit. France's Natixis (
) plunged after the firm's parent BCPE bank told French market regulator AMF it does not plan to delist Natixis as part of a strategic review.
In Asia, Japan's Nikkei
rose 0.58 percent to 10,585.46, its highest close since Oct. 3, with construction stocks gaining in wakes of a battering storm and an earthquake in East Asia. As in Europe and the U.S., the Japanese market is also anticipating recovery in earnings that have yet to materialize, said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
"Evidence so far is not yet convincing enough for such a recovery for real," Akino said. "Trade could be rangebound until earnings reports for the first half (April-September) run their course."
China reported below-forecast growth in factory output and investment, also reminding financial markets that the world's third-largest economy is not yet back on a solid footing.
The U.S. data eroded gains broadly around the globe, with the MSCI-all-country world index .MIWD00000PUS, the global benchmark for many investors, edging lower about 1.0 percent.
"We do have concerns about the sustainability of the rally, but we would also point out that valuation measures remain attractive and that there is still a large amount of cash on the sidelines waiting to be invested," Bob Doll, global chief investment officer for equities at BlackRock, said in a note.
"As a result, we believe the current cyclical bull market remains intact."
Stock index declines helped revived the bid for government debt, which for weeks had suffered as expectations of faster global growth emboldened investors to feel safer buying more volatile equity assets. Traders also eyed results from a two-day meeting of the Federal Reserve ending Wednesday.
Benchmark two-year U.S. Treasury note yields declined 0.04 percentage point to 1.2 percent, while 10-year levels fell 0.06 percentage point to 3.71 percent. The two-year Schatz yield EU2YT=RR declined 0.03 point to 1.49 percent as the 10-year EU10YT=RR yield was near unchanged at 3.47 percent.
Against the yen, the dollar
In energy and commodities prices, U.S. light sweet crude oil CLc1 fell $1.51, or 2.14 percent, to $69.09 per barrel,
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
