RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asia stocks make little ground, yen climbs
2009-08-11 03:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks struggled to eke out gains on Tuesday as policymakers warned of lingering economic uncertainty and data showed China's recovery may be moderating.
The yen climbed across the board and sterling hit a 13-year low against the Aussie dollar, while oil topped $71 a barrel.
Many Asian investors are pinning their hopes on China leading a regional recovery as Western economies continue to sputter, but Chinese data for July showed that although exports rose from June, industrial output did not grow as much as expected. [ID:nPEK328668]
"This data argues for some moderation in growth in Q3 versus the big gains we saw in Q2. The recovery is still on track, at least at the headline level," said Ben Simpfendorfer, an RBS China economist in Hong Kong.
only managed a 0.6 percent gain, however, and investors across the region were cautious as Japan, South Korea and Singapore all indicated that the economic outlook was still uncertain despite some signs of improvement.
A firmer yen put pressure on shares of Japanese exporters, pushing car giant Honda Motor (
The Bank of Japan kept interest rates steady at 0.1 percent, and said the economy had stopped worsening but was still in a difficult situation. [ID:nT328059]
South Korea's central bank also kept rates on hold, with Governor Lee Seong-tae saying it was still unclear the economy was back on solid footing and warning that bond markets have overpriced the chances of a rate rise.
Lee's comments sparked a rally in government debt, pushing five-year treasury bond yields KR5YT=KSDA down 11 basis points to 4.88 percent.
The MSCI Index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS, which has rallied nearly 80 percent since a global rebound in equities began on March 9, was up 0.2 percent but blue chips were mixed.
The yen and the U.S. dollar rose in reaction to China's economic data, notably against the Aussie and the New Zealand dollar
The market has begun to price in tightening by the Federal Reserve as early as February, a shift encouraged by last week's encouraging jobs report. That has helped lift the dollar although analysts are wary on the outlook.
"Whether a paradigm shift is taking place with regards to a loosening in correlation between risk aversion and the U.S. dollar is still too early to call," said Jonathan Cavenagh, a currency strategist at Westpac in Sydney.
against $1.4143 late in New York, and at 96.88 yen
fell to a 13-year low against the Australian dollar <AUD= at 50.9 UK pence in early Asian trade, after slumping in overseas trade as investors fretted about the Bank of England's shock expansion of quantitative easing last week and possible deflationary pressures in the UK economy.
Singapore's stock market was the best performer in the region, gaining 2.2 percent by early afternoon and catching up after a public holiday. The government sprung a surprise by upgrading its final second-quarter GDP growth but it warned that economic recovery would be neither "quick nor strong" [ID:nSP429778].
) extended Monday's losses after China stepped up spying allegations against the firm. The stock slid 1.1 percent even though Australia brushed off China's report accusing the company of overcharging and spying on Chinese steel mills [ID:nSYD540071]
In Tokyo, shares of construction companies, including Obayashi Corp (
), rose on expectations for reconstruction work after mudslides in the past week and a strong earthquake that jolted Tokyo on Tuesday. Obayashi gained 5.2 percent.
fell 1 percent against the dollar and past its 14-day moving average for the first time in nearly a month as investors trimmed exposure to local stocks and continued to worry about possible official intervention to curb the currency's strength [ID:nSEO326134].
Many analysts, however, see the won regaining steam as the economy picks up.
