FOREX-Dollar slightly softer vs euro; sterling weak
2009-08-11 04:47:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar was slightly softer against the euro on Tuesday and market players pondered whether the U.S. currency could sustain its gains from its recent rally on the back of smaller U.S. job losses last month.
The jobs data boosted expectations for higher U.S. interest rates by early next year, so investors will likely take their cue on the dollar from the U.S. Federal Reserve's policy meeting which concludes on Wednesday.
"It's still a mixed picture at present," said Lee Hardman, currency economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. While it may be too early for a cyclical dollar rally, "the risk is for the dollar to strengthen in the near term."
At 0805 GMT, the euro was little changed at $1.4161
, having fallen to a near one-week low of around $1.41 on Monday. Traders saw support at the 40-day moving average around $1.4095.
The market showed little reaction to German consumer price inflation which was revised up to show a fall of 0.5 percent in July year-on-year, while the harmonised consumer price index took its first annual drop since the index was introduced in 1995.
Sterling fell against the dollar after hitting a low of $1.6431 on Monday, weighed down after the Bank of England increased quantitative easing and on expectations for a dovish tone in the central bank's Inflation Report due on Wednesday.
The dollar was largely flat against higher-yielders such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, but the yen gained as investors trimmed long positions in those currencies after Chinese data showed below-forecast factory expansion.
China's industrial output grew at the fastest rate in nine months in July but fell short of expectations, prompting some in the market to take profits on riskier trades, dealers said. [ID:nPEK328668]
The Aussie was down 0.3 percent against the yen at 81.09 yen AUDJPY=R, off a 10-month high of 82.00 yen on Monday, while the New Zealand dollar was down 0.5 percent at 65.37 yen NZDJPY=R, also retreating from a 10-month peak at 65.90.
, off an eight-week high of 97.79 yen set last week.
The Fed is expected to keep rates steady, but give a slightly brighter picture of the economy while dampening rate hike speculation. It is also likely to end its $300 billion Treasury purchases programme, as scheduled.
Traders are keeping an eye on the U.S. Treasury's debt sales which kick off later in the day.
"A slight event risk we can see for the dollar today is the start of the August Treasury refunding," said analysts at ING.
Meanwhile, the euro hit a session high against the Swedish crown of 10.2700 crowns EURSEK= after Standard & Poor's cut sovereign credit ratings for Estonia and Latvia on Monday. It said it may do the same for Lithuania. Swedish banks are heavily exposed to the Baltic region, which is gripped by deep recession.
S&P cut Estonia's investment grade rating to A-minus from A, and trimmed Latvia's speculative grade rating to BB from BB-plus.
