China's CIC eyes $1 billion funding in Australian miner
2009-08-11 04:26:00.0
China's CIC eyes $1 billion funding in Australian miner | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
China's CIC eyes $1 billion funding in Australian miner
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Tue  EDT
) and China Investment Corp (CIC), China's $200 billion sovereign wealth fund, are in advanced talks on a $1 billion-plus convertible bond investment to help the Australian iron ore miner fund its expansion, two sources said on Tuesday.
The talks follow news on Monday that China's Yanzhou Coal (
China is increasingly looking to less politically sensitive joint ventures and financing deals, rather than takeovers, to invest in global natural resources to support its economic growth.
"Fortescue needs fairly significant funds to expand," said James Wilson, an analyst at DJ Carmichael, noting Australia's third-largest iron ore miner after Rio Tinto (
"They have what, about $500 million in profits? That's not going to cut it if they want to expand," he said.
The potential financing deal comes at a sensitive time for Australia-China relations, following China's detention a month ago of four Rio Tinto employees in Shanghai on suspicion of stealing state secrets.
The men, including Australian Stern Hu, remain in detention and have yet to be charged, increasing political pressure on Australia's Mandarin-speaking Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.
Earlier in the year, Rio walked away from a $19.5 billion deal with China's state-owned Chinalco in favor of a tie up with rival BHP Billiton.
Still, analysts and bankers expect Chinese companies to pursue other Australian resource firms. So far this year, Chinese firms have invested about $2.2 billion in Australian energy and resource companies.
CIC's top officials paid a low-profile visit to Australia in July and had closed door meetings with Fortescue to discuss the potential funding, one of the sources said.
"Investment is investment," said the source with knowledge of CIC's overseas strategy. "Australia is still very important to China in terms of the bilateral trade relationship."
"Plus, a convertible bond is safe as an investment tool in this case," the source added.
In recent months, China's sovereign wealth fund has shifted its strategy toward investments in natural resources. Last month, CIC bought a 17.2 percent equity stake in Canada's Teck Resources (
That deal did not require government approval under Canada's foreign investment rules, which only review transactions when a foreign company takes control of a domestic firm.
Fortescue is also talking to different parties about other funding options, an investment banker with direct knowledge of Fortescue's strategy told Reuters.
Earlier this year, China's Valin Iron & Steel Co was cleared by foreign investment regulators in Australia to take up a 17.55 percent direct interest in Fortescue for around $770 million.
CIC was created in 2007 to manage part of China's roughly $2 trillion foreign exchange reserves for higher returns.
), but is now pursuing new deals abroad as the global financial crisis eases.
