South African Markets - Factors to watch on Aug 11
2009-08-11 01:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Tuesday.
Most Asia stock markets drifted lower on Tuesday as policymakers warned of lingering economic uncertainty and data showed China's recovery may be moderating, while sterling hit a 13-year low against the Aussie dollar.
Many Asian investors are pinning their hopes on China leading a regional recovery as Western economies continue to sputter, but Chinese data for July showed that although exports rose from June, industrial output did not grow as much as expected. [ID:nPEK328668] [ID:nHKG327189]
South Africa's rand regained some of its poise against the dollar on Friday after touching 3-week lows partly on concerns about wage strikes, while the bourse gained for the 7th straight day, boosted by platinum and banking stocks.
of blue chips gained 0.1 percent to 22,652.41 points, reversing earlier losses in the session. [ID:nL7374275]
South African markets were closed on Monday for the National Women's Day holiday.
) reported a 6 percent drop in full year headline earnings per share on Tuesday, in line with its forecast of a 5-10 percent drop. [ID:nWEA5465]
Gold prices inched up on Tuesday but stayed near a 10-day low hit the previous day when the dollar's broad rise hurt sentiment, with investors awaiting the outcome of the Federal Reserve's meeting ending on Wednesday.
Market reaction was muted to a slew of Chinese data including industrial output, which was a tad below forecast, and trade, which was slightly better, as traders focused on what the Fed may say about the U.S. economy and recovery prospects. [ID:nBJB000643] [ID:nBJB000645]
For the latest precious metals report, double click on [GOL/]
U.S. stocks fell on Monday, but were off their session lows, as investors booked profits following a four-week rally that took the broad S&P 500 index to a 10-month high on Friday.
The drop comes ahead of an abundance of economic data due this week, including the Federal Reserve's statement on interest rates and the economy, as well as government figures for monthly retail sales.
For the New York stock market report, double click on [.N]
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- Surging markets at risk of "30 percent correction, volatility", says investor guru
- Weak credit extension and retail sales data shows S.Africa lags cycle, says analyst
