Rescuers search Taiwan village destroyed by mudslide
2009-08-10 23:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Helicopters dropped rescuers into a village in southern Taiwan on Tuesday to search for victims of a mudslide that may have buried hundreds of people after a typhoon hit the island, officials said.
Over the past few days, about 80 people have been confirmed killed by Typhoon Morakot and tropical storm Etau, including 38 in Taiwan, 23 in the Philippines, 13 in Japan and six in China, according to officials in the region. The storms have caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.
In Taiwan, heavy rains at the weekend from Typhoon Morakot set off mudslides that wiped out houses in a village in Kaohsiung county in the south. Officials have said about 600 people could not be accounted for and they were feared buried. [ID:nTP256013]
Officials had rescued nearly 100 people from the village out of about 1,000 residents, a military officer surnamed Hu, who was involved in the rescue, told Reuters.
Another official from the disaster agency said some villagers had been contacted, although he did not have specific figures.
"Some people have been contacted and some are still missing and we're still on the scene checking," the official said.
Heavy rain had washed out roads and bridges in the area, severing almost all land vehicle traffic. Helicopters were the only way to reach the village. Many victims were being brought to the town of Cishan for medical treatment.
The typhoon has started to weaken over China's coastal regions after battering Taiwan. It caused floods in Taiwan's densely-populated south and farm-related losses on the island were estimated at more than T$5 billion ($152 million).
A landslide triggered by rains from the typhoon toppled up to seven houses in eastern China late on Monday, the official Xinhua news agency said. It said two people had been killed.
In Japan, tropical storm Etau approached the island's central area and Tokyo, hours after a magnitude 6.5 earthquake that threw food and bottles from store shelves and disrupted transport. [ID:nT322240]
Japan's weather agency warned of possible landslides and flooding, as the quake followed heavy rain. TV pictures showed one motorway partially washed out.
Heavy rains from the storm have killed 13 people with 15 missing in Hyogo and Okayama prefectures in western Japan, municipal officials said.
(Additional reporting by Beijing bureau, Chisa Fujioka in Tokyo and Rosemarie Francisco in Manila; Writing by Lee Chyen Yee; Editing by Ken Wills)
