UPDATE 3-MOVES- BNP Paribas, Amherst, Willis
2009-08-10 17:20:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced since Friday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The bank named Margaret Ren as chairman and chief executive of corporate finance, Greater China. She was previously managing director and chairman of China Investment Banking at Merrill Lynch (Asia Pacific) Ltd.
BNP Paribas' corporate and investment banking unit announced that it has created an Insurance Solutions Group for the Americas, to be headed by Francois Leblanc. Josee Deroy has been appointed a director of the new group.
Amherst Securities Group, L.P., a broker-dealer specializing in residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS), announced that Jim Regan has joined as head of its asset-backed securities (ABS) trading. Regan was recently the head of ABS trading at Cohen and Company.
Willis Aerospace, a division of Willis Group Holdings, has appointed Stephen Kisor as executive vice president and head of the Willis Aviation office in Los Angeles. Kisor was previously Aon.
The unit of Jefferies Group Inc JEF.N named Robert Minkoff as a senior vice-president and senior trader of trade claims. Minkoff joins Jefferies from Liquidity Solutions Inc, a distressed debt hedge fund, where he worked most recently as a vice-president.
Separately, Jefferies also said it has hired Stephen Grahling to be managing director and head of event driven in its equity sales and trading division. He was previously a managing director at Citigroup (
) and launched that firm's event driven U.S. risk arbitrage trading desk.
The insurer named William Glasgow as chief restructuring officer of AIG Global Real Estate. Glasgow previously served as chief operating officer of Scanlan Kemper Bard companies. It also said Robert Gifford was appointed president and CEO of AIG Global Real Estate, succeeding Jeffrey Hurd.
The company, which runs the Nasdaq Stock Market, promoted Adena Friedman to the post of chief financial officer. Friedman will replace David Warren who is stepping down from the role. [ID:nN10446219]
), where he was head of pricing and valuations and pooled pension administration.
) said it named Richard Kirkham as principal. Prior to joining Piper Jaffray Ltd, Kirkham was partner in U.K. small/mid-cap sales at Oriel Securities.
