China Eastern to push Shanghai Air merger in H2
2009-08-10 11:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Mon  EDT
China Eastern, one of the country's top three carriers, also said it earned a net profit in the first half of the year of 984.65 million yuan ($144 million) under international accounting standards, turning around from 212.50 million yuan net loss a year earlier, helped largely by fuel-hedging gains.
The carrier did not provide earnings guidance for the rest of the year but warned about uncertainties continuing to face the industry, including weak international air traffic and the lingering impact of the H1N1 flu virus.
Board Secretary Luo Zhuping said in April, however, that the carrier had a chance to return to the black for the full year with a pick-up in domestic air travel.
China Eastern unveiled a detailed plan last month to acquire Shanghai Air via a 9 billion yuan share swap that will give them roughly half of the air travel market in China's financial hub.
Monday's statement gave no timeframe for completing the deal.
During the six-month period, China Eastern carried 20.79 million passengers, up 14.78 percent from a year earlier with help from a recovering domestic economy, but its cargo volume fell 8.13 percent as the global economic downturn continued to weigh on foreign trade, it said.
Its fuel-hedging contracts in the first six months yielded a mark-to-market gain of 2.79 billion yuan, compared with a 451 million yuan gain in the year-ago period.
Under domestic accounting standards, China Eastern's first-half net profit was 1.17 billion yuan, up from 41.62 million yuan.
China's airlines faced strong headwinds last year as a slowing economy hit demand for air travel, pushing the three biggest carriers into a combined loss of more than $4 billion.
But domestic air traffic has resumed its normal growth pattern this year, as Beijing's aggressive economic stimulus package lifted consumer confidence.
The country's air passenger volume rose 24.6 percent to 17.72 million in June, the fastest growth rate in at least three years, according to official data.
Big Chinese state carriers also received cash aid from the government to ease their operating woes. China Eastern's state parent has received 9 billion yuan in government aid since December, of which 7 billion yuan was injected into the listed unit through a share placement.
