European shares fall on miners, autos; insurers up
2009-08-10 00:37:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares fell on Monday after hitting their highest close in more than nine months on Friday, as miner Rio Tinto (
Within the sector, Xstrata XTA.L, BHP Billiton (
), Anglo American (
), Fresnillo (
), Kazakhmys (
In the auto sector, Volkswagen (
) was also weaker, losing 3.7 percent after Morgan Stanley downgraded it to "underweight" from "overweight". The FTSEurofirst 300 ended higher for a fourth straight week on Friday, aided by stronger second-quarter corporate earnings and, despite Monday's losses, is up 46 percent since hitting a lifetime low in March. It slumped nearly 45 percent last year.
"It's a fair assumption that corporate earnings growth will, having turned around, form a base in the second quarter," said Robert Parker, vice chairman at Credit Suisse's asset management arm.
"The outcome has been better than analysts' forecasts. I suspect that will be the case in the third quarter, although I question whether it's durable going forward through the middle of next year," he said, adding that consumers in developed countries had to cut spending and raise their savings.
Banks were also generally weaker, with Lloyds Banking Group (
) shedding 4 percent on a report in the Sunday Times that the bank may consider a multi-billion pound share issue as part of a partial withdrawal from the government's asset protection scheme. [ID:nLA282962]
), BNP Paribas (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Santander (
), down 0.5-3.6 percent.
) advanced more than 13 percent, boosted by the company's return to profit in the second quarter and positive broker comments.
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100
, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
"Looking to the coming weeks, seasonal aspects suggest that the much more bullish sentiment recently will be subjected to a brief test once the predominantly positive impulses from the second quarter reporting season run their course," said Gerhard Schwarz, head of global equity strategy at UniCredit.
"Setbacks should, however, remain moderate and short-lived. We continue to recommend exploiting setbacks to increase equity exposure."
Within the sector, Prudential (
), Standard Life (
), Old Mutual (
) for $530 million, boosting its number-one position in digital ad communications.
Goldman Sachs raised its forecast of China's gross domestic product growth for 2009 to 9.4 percent from 8.3 percent, while Morgan Stanley said the U.S. car market had bottomed and looks poised for a very strong rebound.
French industrial output rose more strongly than expected in June as autos output rose, and a Bank of France survey pointed to prospects of a slight pick up in industry. [ID:nLA179484] (Additional reporting by Atul Prakash; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
