Q+A: China's state secrets law
2009-08-10 07:38:00.0
(Reuters) - China's state secrets watchdog has accused mining multinational Rio Tinto of engaging in commercial spying over six years at what it says was a huge loss to China.
The report from China's National Administration for the Protection of State Secrets, and its comments on the case of four Rio employees detained and accused of espionage could foreshadow stricter controls on how foreign companies do business in China.
Rio says its employees did nothing unethical and offered no bribes to Chinese steel mills. Following are some questions and answers about China's state secrets regulations:
WHAT DOES THE CURRENT STATE SECRETS LAW COVER?
Economic data, particularly involving gold holdings, currency movements, and key economic indicators, have at different times been considered state secrets as have more traditional matters involving the military or movements by China's top leaders.
WHO HAS BEEN CHARGED UNDER THE LAW?
The charge has been variously applied to academics, dissidents and journalists, as well as business executives.
Cases may be economic, like that of the Rio Tinto employees, or apply to the prosecution of activist Huang Qi, detained in Sichuan province after he helped parents of children killed in last year's earthquake there.
SHOULD OTHER FOREIGN COMPANIES BE WORRIED ABOUT THE LAW?
But there is no expectation that the case will prompt companies to pull out of China, now too deeply enmeshed in the global economy and tied into the business model of multinationals and smaller competitors.
HOW OFTEN DOES IT GET INVOKED IN COMMERCIAL MATTERS?
While competitors within an industry regularly take cases about commercial secrets to the courts, only the government can launch an investigation into violations of state secrets law.
WHAT ARE THE USUAL PENALTIES?
Penalties under the law can vary from a short period in jail to execution if the case involves a serious breach of national military security, such as spying for Taiwan.
WHAT ARE THE RECENT REVISIONS?
China's largely rubber stamp parliament, the National People's Congress, in June reviewed a draft revision of the law on State Secrets, which took effect in its current form in 1989.
The changes were the product of several years of examination and focused on technical challenges to protecting secrets in the Internet era, the official Xinhua agency said.
The draft law also aimed to minimize the number of people with access to secrets, and "set up more scientific secret recognition, rating and termination procedures," Xinhua said.
WILL THEY MAKE THE LAW CLEARER?
According to legal expert Jerome Cohen, co-director of the U.S.-Asia Law Institute at New York University, the new draft will toughen controls on secrets rather than clarify the rules.
"There is no attempt to narrow the expansive scope of state secrets, which still includes a category for 'other matters classified by the National State Secrets Bureau'," Cohen wrote in a commentary in the South China Morning Post, co-authored with Institute research fellow Jeremy Daum.
They said the classification process remained "unclear, unchecked and in the hands of too many levels of authority for standardization."
The commentary also said there was no mechanism to challenge the classification of information as secret, or guarantee that unmarked documents would not subsequently be declared secret.
(Reporting by Emma Graham-Harrison, editing by Ron Popeski)
