UPDATE 3-MOVES-AIG, Bank of America, RBS, HSBC
2009-08-07 15:25:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Friday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The insurer named Robert Gifford as president and chief executive of AIG Global Real Estate, the international real estate investment organization.
Most recently, Gifford worked at real estate investment management adviser AEW Capital Management.
AIG also appointed William Glasgow as chief restructuring officer of AIG Global Real Estate. Most recently, Glasgow was chief operating officer of private equity firm Scanlan Kemper Bard Cos.
Banc of America Securities-Merrill Lynch Research hired William Bird as senior U.S. advertising, marketing and information services analyst. Bird joins the company from Steinberg Asset Management.
) said Allison Mahoney has joined the company as a senior vice president. She was previously at U.S. Trust Co, and will now be based in New York City.
Hang Seng Bank said Dorothy Sit, who will become vice chairman and chief executive of Hang Seng Bank (China) Ltd upon approval of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, has been named non-executive director.
Joseph Poon, managing director and deputy chief executive, has resigned and will leave the board effective Sept. 30. It also said Edgar Ancona, non-executive director, has resigned from the company's board effective Sept. 1. Ancona will be replaced by Iain Mackay.
Schroeder was named managing director and will be covering restaurants, while Dede was appointed vice president and will be focused on wireless communication hardware and software.
Crewson's appointment is effective immediately.
O'MELVENY & MYERS LLP
The firm announced that Joel Hogarth, a finance and restructuring lawyer, joined as a partner in its Asia practice. Hogarth comes to O'Melveny from White & Case, and will be based in Singapore.
The law firm said Duane-David Hough has joined the firm's intellectual property practice as a partner in the New York office. He comes to Mayer Brown from Fish & Richardson.
The provider of online trading services has appointed Graham Beale and Vincent Sangiovanni as directors, Institutional Sales.
The wealth management firm said that Lady Emily Compton, former social editor at Tatler, is joining the company. (Reporting by Brenton Cordeiro in Bangalore, and Juan Lagorio in New York)
