EMERGING MARKETS-China worries rattle; rouble dips on rate cut
2009-08-07 07:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Worries that China might rein in bank lending knocked emerging assets off recent multi-month highs on Friday while Russia's rouble dropped to its lowest level in three weeks after an interest rate cut.
German exports surged in June at their fastest pace in nearly three years, adding to signs that Europe's biggest economy is pulling out of recession. [ID:nL7727644]
But investor concerns that Chinese authorities may choke off liquidity that has fuelled a rally on the mainland flared up again after a central bank governor said bank lending in the world's largest emerging economy would slow in the second half of the year. [ID:nPEK171632]
"For the emerging markets, China is more of a focus today than the U.S. non-farm payrolls report," said Shanat Patel, global strategist at Liberum Capital.
"The authorities have a tight-rope to walk in China. If they rein in lending too much, they will derail the recovery but if they leave it as it is, they will allow an asset bubble to form," he said.
, which fell nearly 3 percent in the overnight Asian session, suffered their biggest weekly loss since March.
and Romanian shares .BETI slipped around 1 percent, off the 10-month highs they reached in previous session.
Softer commodity prices helped snap a six-session winning streak on the South African bourse, causing its key index
Russia's central bank surprised the market with its fifth rate cut since April -- a move that came sooner than most analysts had expected.
The rouble fell over 1 percent to trade at 37.8 versus its euro-dollar basket RUS=MCX after the central bank said it would cut the benchmark refinancing rate by 25 basis points from Aug. 10, adding to its previous four 50-basis-point rate cuts. [ID:nL760686]
UniCredit analyst Vladimir Osakovsky said central bank is likely to cut rates by another 75 bps by the end of the year to revitalise the economy and stimulate bank lending, adding that the move would be supportive for local bank stocks though negative for the rouble.
"We see the move as supporting our expectation of considerable weakening of the rouble later in the year, and reiterate our forecast of 32.8 roubles per dollar end-2009," he wrote in a research note.
Persistent worries over labour unrest in South Africa continued to pressure its rand currency, which pared losses after suffering its biggest daily fall in over four months on Thursday.
South Africa's central bank is set to decide on interest rates next week but most analysts expect rates to stay unchanged on concerns that double-digit wage demands could weigh on inflation. [ID:nL6722371]
Emerging sovereign debt spreads 11EMJ, which have rallied to early September levels, were 3 bps wider to trade at 351 bps over U.S. Treasuries.
(Reporting by Sebastian Tong; Editing by Andy Bruce)
