Bank of China may buy stake in rail company
2009-08-07 03:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
A company logo of Bank of China is displayed at a news conference in Hong Kong March 24, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Fri  EDT
) may invest almost 10 billion yuan ($1.5 billion) to buy a minority stake in a railway company that is building a high-speed rail link between Beijing and Shanghai, state media reported on Friday.
Bank of China spokesman Wang Zhaowen confirmed to Reuters that the bank intended to buy a stake in Beijing-Shanghai High-Speed Railway Corp, but described the figures in the China Daily newspaper report as "groundless".
He declined to provide details about the investment amount or what form it would take, adding that the deal was not yet complete.
"When we have details, we will announce them," Wang said.
China Daily earlier reported that Bank of China Group Investment Ltd, the bank's investment arm, would acquire a near 8 percent stake in the high-Speed railway company from China Railway Investment Corp, a unit of the railway ministry, which is the majority owner of the high-speed rail company.
The Chinese government is considering floating key assets of its three major railway operators to help bankroll a massive expansion of its railway system, state media have reported.
China plans to spend an estimated 350 billion euros ($502.4 billion) on railway construction, expansion and upgrades over the next three years.
At least part of the Beijing-Shanghai express railway, a 1,318-km line between the country's capital and its financial hub, is expected to be injected into the listing vehicle.
