Canada banks, insurers in China to drum up business
2009-08-07 13:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Executives at Canada's big banks and insurers are heading to China next week as part of an official mission to drum up business, saying the participation of top Canadian officials will open doors to new ventures.
), as well as executives at Canada's big five banks -- Royal Bank of Canada (
), Toronto Dominion Bank (
), Bank of Nova Scotia (
), Bank of Montreal (
They join Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney and Finance Minister Jim Flaherty in the visit to Beijing and Shanghai from Aug. 10 to 14, in which Flaherty will seek to open up new business opportunities for Canadian banks and insurers.
"A lot of business in China is done government-to-government, and with Minister Flaherty and Governor Carney going, we're going under the umbrella of the government," Gilles Ouellette, chief executive of BMO's private client group, said in an interview.
Julie Dickson, head of Canada's federal regulator, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, as well as other government officials will also participate.
Manulife CEO Donald Guloien said the trip is largely a goodwill mission to offer Canadian expertise to Chinese officials, explaining how Canadian financial institutions emerged relatively unscathed from the global crisis that hobbled and bankrupted banks and insurers around the world.
"The Chinese ... want to understand what it is about the regulatory financial environment that has made it so positive for Canadian financial institutions during this period of time," Guloien said in an interview.
The group will travel together and meet Chinese officials as one, rather than break off in one-on-one sessions to raise individual concerns or proposals, Ouellette said. But he noted there will be time for the executives to attend to private business as well.
Bank of Montreal has been doing business in China since 1818, Ouellette said, and the country's relatively untouched market for mutual funds and investment banking is an attractive target for the bank's wealth management and capital markets divisions.
"Our focus is first in Canada, second in the United States, and third in China, and we want to develop that," he said, noting that BMO has a competitive advantage in China because it financed the first shipment of wheat to the country during the 1960 famine.
"Since then they've treated us very favorably, and we're just trying to continue to leverage it," Ouellette said.
The trip will help lay the groundwork for a trip to China later this year by Prime Minister Stephen Harper and was preceded by visits by the trade, foreign affairs and transport ministers.
The Harper government is courting the coveted Chinese market and emerging markets in general as export sales to the United States slow. (Additional reporting by Louise Egan in Ottawa; editing by Peter Galloway)
