UPDATE 1-Consol sells China US steel-making coal in rare deal
2009-08-07 16:03:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Aug 7 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Fri  EDT
(Adds spokesman quote, analyst comment, background, paragraphs 3-13; adds byline)
) has sold 88,000 tons of steel-making coal to China in a deal rare for U.S. miners due to shipping distance, a spokesman said on Friday.
The deal, first reported in the trade publication Coal & Energy Price Report, calls for August shipment from Lambert's Point Terminal in Virginia, spokesman Tom Hoffman said.
"This is one vessel. We hope it will lead to more," Hoffman said. The coal comes from Consol's Buchanan mine, which has been running at reduced capacity, he said.
"It's not something you see very often just because the economics are a lot harder, particularly when you're competing with the Australians, who are much closer," he said.
The United States has been a regular exporter of steel-making coal, also called metallurgical or coking coal, but mostly to the Atlantic Basin, not China.
The sale is a ray of hope for the U.S. coal export market, which collapsed at the end of last year as the deepening recession ended a U.S. coal export boom in 2007-2008.
Analysts said it reflects effects of the Chinese government's economic stimulus program. China's coal imports have grown and exports declined as its economy has grown.
"The China stimulus clearly seems to be doing something," said Morgan Stanley analyst Mark Liinamaa.
Others cited shipping congestion in Australia, the major Chinese supplier. Rebounding demand lengthened loading waits and slowed deliveries temporarily, some experts said.
"You had a lot of people in the steel industry expecting met coal demand to be weak. Then when demand rebounded, everybody wanted it," Liinamaa said.
"We have been working with the railroad to come up with a competitive rate that would allow us to move coal to China," he said, referring to Norfolk Southern Corp (
"I think we got what we consider to be acceptable margins for the coal," Hoffman said.
"We've been willing any time the situation requires to idle mines rather than produce coal we can't sell or have to give away," Hoffman said. (Editing by Marguerita Choy)
