Q+A-Malaysia's proposed Internet filter prompts criticism
2009-08-07 03:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Malaysia's information minister said on Friday a proposed Internet filter similar to China's "Green Dam" software" was aimed at stopping pornography.
Critics say, however, it could also be used to clamp down on the opposition and may hurt investment. [ID:nSP398433]
With a quiescent mainstream media, largely owned by the political parties that have ruled Malaysia the past 51 years, the government has been challenged by a vibrant new media culture.
Here are some questions and answers about Malaysia's plans for Internet censorship and what could happen next:
WHY HAVE AN INTERNET FILTER?
That is just an excuse, critics say, to police websites publishing damaging stories about the government. These range from investigations of corruption, scandals involving government officials, to a clip of prominent lawyer arranging judicial appointments that appeared on YouTube.
Prime Minister Najib Razak is often a target of attacks on the Internet. He is still linked by opposition websites to the murder of a Mongolian model, although he denies the allegation, which has not been proven.
Despite a rise in Najib's approval ratings recently to 65 percent from 45 percent, his National Front coalition remains vulnerable. The government has been beaten in six out of seven by-elections since the 2008 election. WILL IT BE AN EFFECTIVE CONTROL?
It could work. Tender documents specify a filter at the Internet gateway level, meaning service providers such as Telekom Malaysia (
), Redtone (
), Green Packet (
That will be more effective than "Green Dam", which aimed to force manufacturers to bundle Internet filtering software with sales of new personal computers. [ID:nSP514751]
Malaysian web surfers could get around blocks at gateways by using proxy servers that mask a user's identity from Internet service providers. But it's an endless game of pursuit as the authorities can also block websites providing free proxies.
WHEN COULD THE GOVERNMENT IMPLEMENT THIS?
Very soon. An industry source says the government could impose the filters late this year or in 2010, coinciding with the rollout of a high-speed broadband network run by Telekom Malaysia. [ID:nKLR51031]
Malaysia aims to increase broadband penetration to half of all homes by 2010 as part of its drive to boost economic efficiency. This compares with neighbouring Singapore's rate of 78 percent and Hong Kong's 80 percent.
WILL THIS HURT NAJIB'S ECONOMIC REFORMS?
Najib has introduced a raft of reforms, including the removal of some economic privileges for dominant ethnic Malays, to lure investments and shore up an export-reliant economy likely to post negative growth this year. [ID:nKLR467124]
) announced last year it was considering a proposal to set up the world's largest server farm in Malaysia's version of the Silicon Valley, the "Multimedia Super Corridor" (MSC).
A government initiative, MSC was started in 1996 promising tax breaks and no restrictions on the Internet. Firms already there include Mircosoft MFST.O. Annual investment into the corridor is $458 million, according to industry data.
FDI between January and May was just 9 percent of 2008's total of 46.1 billion ringgit.
AND NAJIB'S POLITICAL PROSPECTS?
The government's reputation has also been stained by the recent death of an aide to an opposition lawmaker after being questioned by a state body. [ID:nSP457611]
The government is fighting back in cyberspace. Najib has a website called 1Malaysia (www.imalaysia.com.my). In the past, the government has looked at proposals to register all bloggers.
Analysts say filtering websites shows Najib's government is fearful of the Internet culture that emerged in 1998 after Anwar, a deputy prime minister then, was sacked and charged with corruption and sodomy and then jailed.
The opposition, which had no access to mainstream media, harnessed the Internet during the 2008 elections, making frequent and effective use of blogs, websites and services like Twitter.
