Fewer conflicts make economy top focus for commods
2009-08-06 00:45:00.0
(Reuters) - The easing of conflicts in the Middle East and Nigeria and the lessening of tensions with Iran and North Korea have made commodity investors less jittery about geopolitics than they were a year ago, turning market focus almost entirely on the economy.
This week's decision by the Palestinian government to pursue a two-state solution with Israel -- while keeping alive an "armed struggle" option -- is an example of the relative calm in the Middle East that has taken the heat off oil prices, analysts say.
Just a year ago, before the elections of U.S. President Barack Obama and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, most Palestinians were doubtful of ever seeing peace in the Middle East.
From Thursday, militants in Nigeria will be given a 60-day amnesty to lay down weapons and stop disrupting the supply of crude from the world's eight largest oil exporter. Until July last year, crude prices were hitting record highs partly because of rebel attacks on oil installations in Nigeria.
The U.S. government under Obama also has had fewer spats with North Korea and Iran compared with the Bush administration, which oversaw constant saber-rattling with the two states last year over their nuclear programs.
On Wednesday, North Korea freed two U.S. journalists it had held since March, while the White House acknowledged the controversial re-election of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad without congratulating him.
"I think the geopolitical concerns are still there, but the health of the global economy is paramount right now," said Gene McGillian, analyst with Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut.
"I think those troubled areas -- Nigeria, the Middle East and also North Korea -- have been in the market for a while and until the global economy kind of settles down, their impact will be a little less stretched," McGillian said.
Scott Anderson, an economist who specializes in commodities at Wachovia Securities in Charlotte, North Carolina, agreed.
"The commodity markets are focused like a laser beam right now on global growth prospects," Anderson said.
"We're seeing a nice rebound in Chinese growth, which is trickling to other markets in Asia. We're starting to see signs of life in the U.S. economy. That has helped put a floor under some commodity markets, especially oil," he said.
The U.S. economy contracted less than expected in the second quarter, data released last week showed, reinforcing hopes that the worst of the financial crisis was over.
But some say investors have become too focused on economic recovery, to the extent of ignoring everything else.
"Most people involved in the markets look at supply-demand, fundamentals, political events, things of that nature. But the market hasn't really paid much attention to any of that stuff," said Tom Bentz, a crude oil analyst at BNP Paribas Commodity Futures in New York.
"All of the wonderful economic news we've been hearing about, all this talk of green shoots that's been going on for the last several months, hasn't had any impact on oil consumption. The oil price keeps going up on expectations of demand, rather than actual demand. There's still a lot of storage out there," Bentz said.
Crude oil prices fell from record highs near $150 a barrel last July to below $33 in December as the recession battered world consumption. They have more than doubled since, breaching $70 this week, despite crude and gasoline stocks topping a 5-year band in the four weeks to July 31 and distillate stocks, which include heating oil and diesel, holding near 25-year highs.
And while Nigeria, Iran and North Korea may have temporarily gone off the radar, the biggest political threat to the economy may come from sources that hitherto were a major force in global trade -- like China.
"China can figuratively take over the U.S. without even firing a shot," said Mike Pento, chief economist for Delta Global Advisors in New Jersey.
"We owe them so much money and we're beholden to them for the stability of our currency and our bond market. That's another geopolitical issue that's just not talked about much," Pento said.
China's crackdown in July on employees of Australian mining giant Rio Tinto over allegations of industrial espionage is one instance of how Beijing could flex its political muscle, said George Constantinides, Leo Melamed Professor of Finance at Chicago University of Booth.
"In the future, China could restrict the export of its of its raw materials so that it can channel them into domestic production," Constantinides said. "With the growth of the Chinese economy, we'll see that happening more so."
