South Africa's ANC denies arms deals accusations
2009-08-06 06:11:00.0
(Reuters) - South Africa's ruling ANC on Thursday denied opposition allegations that the country's arms control body had authorized "dodgy" deals such as a weapons exhibition for North Korea and possible sales to Iran, Syria and Libya.
David Maynier, a Democratic Alliance MP and shadow defense minister, told Reuters this week the NCACC had authorized a marketing permit for a South African-based company in the past three years to demonstrate and exhibit military support equipment for North Korea.
"Maynier clearly does not want the facts to get in the way of a good story. The authenticity and/or legitimacy of his alleged sources is highly dubious. It is high time that the DA backed up its conspiracy theories with hard facts," the African National Congress (ANC) said in a statement.
"By presenting the media with such a poorly researched and factually empty 'report', the DA has once again successfully sent the public on a wild goose chase and betrayed its opposition mandate."
North Korea has turned its back on negotiations with regional powers, including the United States and China, to convince it to give up ambitions to build an atomic arsenal.
South African politics have been tarnished by a multi-billion dollar government arms deal for submarines, frigates and jet fighters reached in the late 1990s.
Critics accused government officials of corruption in the deal, one of the most controversial in post-apartheid South Africa.
President Jacob Zuma, who was cleared of charges related to the 1990s arms deal, has vowed to end corruption in South Africa, the continent's biggest economy.
The DA said that over the last year or so, the NCACC had authorized contracting and export permits for multiple grenade launchers and precision-guided glide bombs for Libya and multiple grenade launchers for Syria.
Authorization was pending for sniper rifles for Syria, it said. Authorization of aviator G-suits, worn by pilots to prevent blackouts or loss of consciousness, was pending for Iran, it added. Iran is locked in dispute over its nuclear program that it says is for energy and the West suspects is for arms.
