UPDATE 2-Tenaris sees energy firms resuming projects
2009-08-06 14:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Tenaris SA, the world's top producer of seamless steel pipes for the energy industry, is seeing signs that its energy company customers could resume their medium-term projects, its chairman and CEO said on Thursday.
Oil groups have started to put in motion projects that will come onstream in the second part of 2010 on expectations that a recovery in China and other emerging markets will support crude prices and demand in the medium term, Paolo Rocca told analysts on a conference call.
On Wednesday, Tenaris reported a 67 percent fall in second-quarter profit due to weaker demand from oil companies, and forecast lower sales and operating income in the second half of the year than in the first. [ID:nN05427039]
"We are starting to perceive increasing interest by our national and international customers in resuming development of their medium-term projects. In some areas like in the Middle East we are seeing more tendering activity," Rocca said.
"We expect therefore a gradual recovery in our shipments in the first half of 2010," he said. Big projects entail a time lag of several months between procurement, production and delivery.
Tenaris' (
) fortunes are closely linked to global energy exploration and oil prices, which have fallen sharply from sky-high levels in mid-2008.
Currently, benchmark prices are around $71 CLc1.
"We are receiving inquiries from (Saudi) Aramco after a long time of not receiving and we are seeing big tenders coming from KOC (Kuwait Oil Co)," he said, adding that some infrastructure projects, like SAS in the Emirates and al Jubail in Saudi Arabia, were also picking up.
In Egypt, Italy's Eni (
) has increased activity after discussions with the government slowed it down, he said. Eni has also increased activity in Congo and resumed studies on the Goliat project in the Barents Sea.
In the Caspian Sea, Lammertyn said the Karachaganak and Kashagan projects are ramping up their activities after a period of slowdown.
Turning to South America, Rocca said Mexico is the most dynamic market at the moment and there the number of active drilling rigs has increased.
He said Brazil could face some delays due to "political and budgetary" reasons, but he expects development by Petrobras (
