TOPWRAP 1-Britain prints more money, German outlook brightens
2009-08-06 09:01:00.0
(Reuters) - The Bank of England said on Thursday it would print an extra 50 billion pounds to lift the recession-hit economy and Europe held rates at a record low as central banks wait for clearer signs that the crisis is easing.
Upbeat quarterly company earnings and improving economic data have driven the world's stock markets around 55 percent up since they bottomed out in March. But the jury is still out on whether those figures point to a sustained recovery or a temporary stabilisation of the world economy.
In Germany, manufacturing orders rose at their fastest pace in two years in June on strong foreign demand, a sign that the industrial sector in Europe's largest economy is recovering.
But in Britain, the BoE said the economy had suffered a deeper recession than expected, though there were signs the downturn was bottoming out and conditions in Britain's main export markets were improving.
The BoE's decision to expand its quantitative easing programme by far more than expected to 175 billion pounds enables it to continue its programme of bond purchases with newly created money for three more months.
"It is encouraging... but given the fragility of the economic recovery and doubts over the ultimate effect, I would not want to say this is the end of it," said Jonathan Loynes, Chief UK Economist, Capital Economics.
"If they decide in three months' time that the economy still needs more stimulus they might actually do more... It does not tell us anything about the economic outlook that we did not already know."
Prices of government debt surged on the news and sterling fell. [nL6104621]. Equity markets, meanwhile, carried on with their five month rally, driven higher by positive earnings news. Wall Street looked set to join in with mild gains.[MKTS/GLOB]
While there was little tension in the markets over actual rate changes from the ECB and BoE, investors are looking for signs of optimism about the economy and moves to add stimulus.
CHINESE GROWTH, JAPANESE DEFLATION
The surge in German manufacturing orders was welcome news. Adjusted for seasonal swings, orders rose by 4.5 percent on the month, the biggest gain since June 2007 and the fourth consecutive monthly rise, the Economy Ministry said in Berlin.
"This is a further sign of stabilisation. But we are still a long way off a self-supporting recovery," Deutsche Bank analyst Stefan Bielmeier said.
In Australia, employment confounded expectations by rising 32,200 in July to keep the jobless rate steady at 5.8 percent, a a sign of strength that heightened the prospect of an early hike in interest rates from a record low of 3.0 percent.
Such a move would make Australia's central bank the first of any developed nation to tighten policy since tentative signs of a global recovery began, reflecting the effectiveness of stimulus here and Australia's position as a major resource supplier to China's growing economy.
A Chinese government thinktank said China's gross domestic product was expected to grow about 8 percent this year as the economy recovers. The State Information Centre said investment remained the driver of the rebound in the world's third-largest economy.
But in Tokyo, sources said the Bank of Japan will probably forecast three years of deflation extending to March 2012 as weak domestic demand is seen capping economic growth. That could delay its exit from its current low interest rates. (Reporting by Reuters bureaux; writing by Angus MacSwan; editing by Lin Noueihed)
