UPDATE 1-China iron ore prices top $110, up 10 pct on week
2009-08-06 05:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Iron ore prices topped $110 into China this week as the country's steel mills kept soaking up material, although some market participants expressed concern over the speed of a near doubling in prices since April lows.
Sharp rises in iron ore prices, driven largely by China's seemingly insatiable demand for the steel-making raw material, have driven prices up from a low of $58 in April, undermining attempts by the country's steel industry to secure a 40 percent cut 2009 in term iron ore prices.
Indian ore of 63/63.5 percent iron content for future delivery was quoted at $110 a tonne, up 10 percent on the previous week, while some ores for immediate delivery were bid at more than 900 yuan ($131.8) a tonne, industry consultancy Mysteel said. "The feeling at the moment is that there is no stoppage," said a large east-India miner and exporter. "At whatever rate a deal is getting closed, sellers are asking for more for the next one."
The east India miner said he concluded a deal at $108.5 per tonne C&F on Wednesday for ores with 63.5 percent iron content, but on Thursday, he was prepared to ask for "$110, maybe $112 or $114."
Trade sources in China confirmed the prices but said that sentiment was growing cautious, with fewer deals on Thursday because of the speed of the price increase.
Chinese steelmakers have been pushing up prices of their products on strong demand from the construction sector as the economy recovers and China's infrastructure focused stimulus package takes effect.
) plans to raise September prices for its major steel products by 700 to 1,600 yuan ($102-$234) per tonne versus August tags, the official Shanghai Securities News reported on Thursday, citing trade sources. [ID:nSHA47035]
For a factbox on China's steel prices in August and September, click on [ID:nSHA70583].
However, trade sources said Baosteel (
), China's largest steel mill, whose prices as a benchmark for the domestic market, was reluctant to match the price increase in its September offering. Xu Lejiang, chairman of Baosteel, also warned last week during CISA's biannual meeting that steel demand could fall sharply when major public infrastructure projects in China enter their final stages.
Some Indian exporters said supplies were tight with some eastern ports such as Haldia and Paradip functioning slowly owing to the monsoon rains, and west ports not expected to start iron ore fines trading until the end of this month.
"Because of the congestion at Haldia due to a strike and the waiting period for vessels, no new cargo is available there," said Raja Dhupar, vice president of Yazdani International, a trading firm. "At Paradip, the waiting period is still 15 days."
For a graphic on Indian iron ore exports, click:
