UPDATE 3-Gerdau posts unexpected loss in Q2 on write-downs
2009-08-06 14:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian steelmaker Gerdau (
), the largest in the Americas, unexpectedly posted a second-quarter loss as it wrote down the value of assets and as a stronger local currency and a plunge in steel prices weighed on revenue from overseas subsidiaries.
The net loss totaled 329 million reais ($178 million), Gerdau said in a regulatory filing, compared with a previously reported profit of 2.12 billion reais a year earlier.
Gerdau, Brazil's biggest producer of long-rolled steel, was expected to report a net profit of 707 million reais for the second quarter, according to the average forecast of five analysts polled by Reuters.
"The result, because it was impacted by nonrecurring issues, surely doesn't reflect our efforts" to streamline operations and maintain profitability, Chief Executive Andre Gerdau Johannpeter said on a conference call with journalists.
The write-downs come as Gerdau, betting on growing demand for steel particularly from China and other emerging market economies, went on an acquisition spree that spanned from the United States to Colombia. Assets fell to 49 billion reais from 56 billion at the end of the first quarter.
Preferred shares of Gerdau shed 2.7 percent to 22.05 reais, the lowest since July 31. Preferred stock of Metalurgica Gerdau (
), a unit of the group, dropped 3.5 percent to 27.42 reais, the biggest intraday drop since July 7.
Revenue fell 41 percent from a year earlier to 6.4 billion reais as Brazil's currency gained 19 percent in the period and hampered revenue from subsidiaries located overseas. Sales volume in the local market offset the impact of plunging steel prices, Gerdau said.
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, a measure of cash flow and operational profitability known as EBITDA, tumbled to 571 million reais in the second quarter. In the year-earlier period, Gerdau had EBITDA of 2.75 billion reais.
But the company reported a 21 percent increase in raw steel production to 3.1 million tonnes in the quarter, fueled mainly by solid demand in Brazil.
"It is quite early to say we are through," Gerdau said on the call. "But it is plausible to say we see some light at the end of the tunnel."
The Gerdau Acominas unit will keep its second furnace in operation, reversing plans last month for a temporary shutdown. Gerdau switched on Acominas' first furnace on July 1.
Foreign exchange gains allowed financial income to exceed expenses by 517 million in the second quarter, compared with 434 million reais a year earlier.
Gerdau's first-half net loss was 294 million reais, compared with a profit of 3.21 billion reais in the year-earlier period. EBITDA for the first six months dropped to 1.19 billion reais from 4.73 billion reais in the first half of 2008. ($1=1.845 reais)
(Reporting by Guillermo Parra-Bernal; Additional reporting by Alberto Alerigi Jr; Editing by Gunna Dickson and Richard Chang)
