UPDATE 4-W.House says policy toward North Korea unchanged
2009-08-06 23:11:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States held back on Thursday from making conciliatory gestures to North Korea after Bill Clinton's visit there, and Clinton said he wanted to avoid saying anything publicly that might "tip the balance."
"I'm not a policymaker anymore," Clinton said in New York.
In words that may well serve to reassure U.S. allies Japan and South Korea, Gibbs said U.S. policy had not changed as a result of Clinton's visit.
Clinton, in his first public comments since returning on Wednesday with journalists Euna Lee and Laura Ling, said he was "profoundly honored" to be a part of the mission. He chose his words carefully.
"I wanted those young women to be able to come home and I wanted our two countries to have the ability to decide where to go from here," he said.
"But anything I say beyond that could inadvertently affect the decisions and moves either here or in North Korea and I have no business doing that. I'm not a policymaker anymore," Clinton said at the headquarters of the Clinton Foundation.
Ling's sister, Lisa Ling, said on Thursday that Laura told her that she and Lee stepped briefly onto North Korean territory before their arrest in March.
"When they left U.S. soil, they never intended to cross into North Korea," Lisa Ling told CNN. "(Laura) said that it was maybe 30 seconds and then everything just sort of got chaotic."
'TIP THE BALANCE'
U.S. officials are anxious to get Clinton's impressions of the ailing Kim, whose government tested a nuclear device in May and since then has launched a series of missiles.
Obama's national security adviser, General Jim Jones, said he hoped Clinton's visit to North Korea would ultimately lead to progress.
Asked if he thought the visit would change U.S.-North Korean relations, Jones answered: "No, I don't think so. I think that this was a humanitarian mission."
"We certainly hope it will lead to good things," he added. But he said: "Who knows where the future will lead? ... We're delighted that it worked out this way, but I wouldn't draw any other conclusions beyond the fact."
Clinton has begun briefing White House and State Department officials about his trip and a meeting with President Barack Obama is expected soon, although not before Obama travels to Mexico on Sunday for talks on Monday with the leaders of Mexico and Canada.
He said he had a brief conversation with Obama and a longer one with his wife, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
Hillary Clinton said on Thursday that perhaps Bill Clinton's mission might prompt North Korea to improve its dialogue with the United States.
"What we're hoping is that maybe, without it being part of the mission in a way, the fact this was done will perhaps lead the North Koreans to recognize they can have a positive relationship with us," she said in a CNN interview. (Additional reporting by Jeff Mason in Washington and Edith Honan in New York; Editing by Philip Barbara)
