RPT-Asia oil, commods job-swapping fuels upturn hope
2009-08-06 23:10:00.0
(Reuters) - An unseasonal summer round of job-switching and head-hunting in Asian oil and commodities trading circles may be the latest indicator that the market is preparing for a full recovery from nearly a year of turmoil.
At least nine senior oil and commodities trading executives have either left high-profile posts or jumped to other firms in the past two months, long after the typical spring period of musical chairs that follows bonus pay-outs, sources say.
While it was not immediately clear where many of the traders now on "gardening leave" would be heading, the changes come amid widespread anecdotal evidence that hiring is on the upswing after a period of uncertainty and anxiety that had frozen expansion plans and deterred those who had jobs from leaving them.
"Going by the way the industry is looking for people and the way people are moving around in the past two to three months, it would certainly seem that the worst is over and things are getting back to normal," a headhunter who specialises in recruitment for the oil industry said.
Those who left their jobs recently include Muwaffaq Salti, global head of JP Morgan Chase's (
) fuel oil trading team; Sean Mulhearn, Standard Chartered Bank's (
) global head for commodities sales and marketing, who confirmed his resignation to Reuters on Wednesday; and Yew Teng Leong, Noble Group's (
Salti, a former Morgan Stanley (
) trader who was based in London with aggressive up-and-comer JP Morgan for nearly three years, quit last Friday, industry sources said.
A JP Morgan spokesman declined to comment on Salti's departure but said the firm remains "fully committed" to the development and expansion of its energy business globally.
Yew, a more than 15-year veteran fuel oil trader who had been with Noble for about three years, left about a month ago. It was not immediately known which firm Yew would be joining. Neither Yew nor Salti could be reached for comment.
), including veteran Jeffrey Chen, sources said.
The UK bank, in turn, has hired a senior marketing staff from Goldman, but has yet to replace the departure of its former Asia marketing chief Russell Norton, who left less than two months ago.
When contacted, a Barclays spokesman declined comment on Norton's departure.
"It's like the musical chairs season has started early this year as usually, this happens at the beginning of the year, after bonuses are paid," another trader said.
The development in Asia mirrored that in the United States, where the best traders are being wooed again by banks and hedge funds with top dollar, after hundreds of commodity traders lost their jobs last year as the recession took its toll.
Energy firms in Asia are also planning expansions to capture a bigger slice of future growth, looking past grim months on hopes the worst of the crisis is over, industry executives said recently, though the optimism is moderated by the view the industry still holds risks such as poor refining margins.
With the prospect of tougher regulatory limits on U.S. futures trading, the unfettered markets of Asia -- as well as the proximity to influential consumer China -- may look like a good bet, putting a premium on those with regional expertise.
"It's understandable that the recovery seems to be starting here in Asia than the U.S. because there's still a lot of business to be tapped here, especially from China and India as well as others like Vietnam and Pakistan," an industry veteran said.
He added the Asian market, with Singapore as its trading centre for commodities, is self-regulated, unlike Western markets, which face increasing scrutiny from regulators.
Also, untapped markets such as Vietnam and Pakistan, which are consuming increasing volumes of commodities, have been looking at allowing their oil importers to hedge their purchases.
The recovery in commodities, with copper prices doubling from last year's lows, also spurred banks and trading firms to invest in traders who can optimise opportunities in market swings.
Not to be left out, some physical oil trading companies are also looking to hire.
U.S.-based Cargill [CARG.UL] is looking for a senior fuel oil trader for its Singapore office, while Hong Kong-listed Brightoil Petroleum (
) is looking to expand its team by one or two trading staff after securing a licence from Singapore's port authority to supply marine fuels.
Australia's biggest investment bank Macquarie Group (
), which recently expanded its oil trading business in Singapore by hiring a senior marketer, is looking to expand further by hiring another fuel oil and distillates trader to be based in Sydney. (Additional reporting by Luke Pachymuthu and Sambit Mohanty; Editing by Ramthan Hussain and Jonathan Leff)
