Oil firms open to tax spat talks with Ecuador
2009-08-06 20:27:00.0
(Reuters) - A foreign oil consortium operating an Ecuadoran pipeline said on Thursday it "is open to dialogue" with the government, which says the companies owe hundreds of millions of dollars in back taxes.
The consortium's statement was its first public response to President Rafael Correa's assertion last month of its alleged tax debt. He also demanded it negotiate a new operating contract.
The pipeline spat is among the recent skirmishes between foreign oil companies and the Correa administration, which is seeking to boost oil revenue as the economy flags.
The consortium partners are Spain's Repsol YPF (
), Brazil's Petrobras (
), France's Perenco and Andes Petroleum, which is controlled by China's National Petroleum Corp.
The 300-mile (485 km) pipeline -- known as the Heavy Crude Oil Pipeline, or OCP -- carries some 130,000 barrels of heavy crude oil per day. It pumps oil from northeastern fields to Eseraldas on the Pacific coast.
"OCP Ecuador works in accordance to the law and the contract signed with the state, and it is open to talk with authorities," the consortium said in a statement.
On Monday, the government named a commission to study the OCP contract. The commission has 45 days to issue its findings.
As Correa prepares for his Aug. 10 inauguration for a new term, his vice president, Lenin Moreno. said Thursday the government would take charge of foreign oil operations if companies fail to raise output.
Since taking office in 2007, Correa, a leftist ally of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, has raised taxes on the oil industry and threatened to end contracts if oil companies do not agree to become service providers in exchange for a fee.
Ecuador's skirmishes with foreign oil companies in recent years include the seizure of the local assets of U.S. oil company Occidental Petroleum (
The government last month took charge of the operations of two oil blocks belonging to Perenco, over a tax dispute with the French company.
Correa's aggressive tactics have prompted several companies to sue the OPEC nation in foreign courts and cut investment. (Reporting by Alexandra Valencia; Writing by Eduardo Garcia; Editing by Gary Hill)
