MONEY MARKETS-Australian data stokes early rate rise talk
2009-08-06 02:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian bill futures fell and swaps jumped after an unexpected rise in employment raised concerns about an early rise in interest rates, while yields in China were higher over fears Beijing may take steps to rein in liquidity.
Australian data showed an addition of 32,200 jobs in July, the largest increase in nine months and in stark contrast to market forecasts for a 20,000 drop.
Three-year Australian bond futures YTTc1 lost 0.07 points to 94.86 after touching a low of 94.82. September bill futures YBAU9 shed 0.07 points to 96.56, off a trough of 96.54.
The one year IRS AUDQM3AB1Y= rose 9 basis points to 3.94 percent, while the overnight indexed swaps AUDOIS showed 70 basis points of rate rises in the next 12 months, compared with 45 bps a week ago.
"Today's unexpected rise in the employment data won't do anything to dispel market expectations that the RBA may start raising rates within months," said Besa Deda, chief economist at St George.
"The market has been pricing in a rate hike by the end of this year, you'll probably see markets bring that forward a little bit," he said.
Adam Carr, chief economist at ICAP, also expects rates to rise from here after data showed the resilience of the economy.
"I still think the first hike would take place in December but there are risks of a hike earlier," he said.
In China, where the economy has shown similar resilence, there has also been debate about monetary tightening after the country's central bank released a report that warned about "asset price bubbles and vicious inflation" if it was slow in reversing expansive policies.
The seven-year bond CN7YTFIX=R yield rose to a new nine-month high of 3.22 percent from 3.2127 percent and the five-year bond CN5YTFIX=R yield also rose to a 9-month peak of 2.974 percent, up from 2.9504 percent.
"They are retaining loose policy terms when they address the public, but in terms of action PBOC and CBRC have begun to tighten in terms of where the lending goes, to make sure it does not got to property and stock markets," said Zhiming Zhang, Hong Kong-based analyst with HSBC.
The central bank continued to increase the yields at its 3-month bill auction. On Thursday, it drained 75 billion yuan at 1.2876 percent, up for the sixth straight week.
But analysts do not expect any increase in the policy rates or banks' reserve ratios.
Ben Simpfendorfer, economist at Royal Bank of Scotland, sees China's central bank tightening policy modestly via its guidance window and by increasing its sterilisation bills issuance.
"However, I expect no change in the policy rate, the 1-year working capital rate, as deflation will persist in the second half of the year," he said.
Any rate increase would be out of step with the official line, analysts say.
"Hiking reserve ratios or rates will be deemed as not sticking steadfastly to the appropriately loose monetary policy and would be against the party line," said HSBC's Zhang.
Three-month dollar funding costs in Singapore SIUSD3MD=ABSG slid to a fresh new low of 0.47571 percent from 0.47714 percent after London interbank market posted new lows overnight. (Reporting by Umesh Desai; Editing by Kim Coghill)
