RPT-PRESS DIGEST - Wall Street Journal - Aug 6
2009-08-06 01:04:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Thu, Aug 6 2009
Wed, Aug 5 2009
Thu  EDT
* Bank of America Corp's (
) loss projections for Merrill Lynch swelled by nearly $2 billion two days before shareholders approved the securities firm's takeover, but bank executives concluded that the losses were not severe enough to disclose publicly before the vote, according to company emails and people familiar with the situation.
) to help manage and break apart the insurer, according to a Wall Street Journal analysis.
* Cisco Systems' (
) profit tumbled as revenue declined 18 percent on lower networking-gear sales, but CEO Chambers said he saw signs that orders are improving from earlier in the year.
) said credit trends among its cardholders are showing signs of improvement for the first time in 18 months, even though the most creditworthy customers are still keeping a tight grip on their wallets.
) posted a $203 million loss as strength in its cable networks was trumped by the advertising slump weighing on its other TV, film, Internet and publishing businesses.
* Taylor, Bean & Whitaker Mortgage Corp, one of the largest independent home-loan providers, closed its mortgage-lending operation, an event that further consolidates an industry increasingly dominated by a few big banks.
) has been struggling in recent months as the recession has sapped demand for freight services. Now, in an industry known for its hardball tactics, YRC's competitors are piling on, trying to pick off its clients by telling them the company's weakness could put their shipments at risk.
), which recently reported one of its strongest quarterly profits, made more than $100 million in trading revenue on a record 46 separate days in the period, according to a regulatory filing.
* The U.S. Treasury Department, responding to growing demand from China and other investors, will boost the sale of inflation-protected bonds that hold their value as consumer prices rise.
* Europe's major central banks may decide against providing further stimulus at their regular meetings Thursday as they ponder the growing body of evidence that suggests their economies are on the mend.
* Prudential Financial Inc's financial-services business reported a 4.9 percent drop in second-quarter earnings, ending a streak of three quarterly losses.
* U.S. President Barack Obama's top car industry adviser said he expects General Motors Co [GM.UL] will return to profitability and hold an initial public offering before Chrysler Group LLC.
) swung to a second-quarter profit due to cost cuts, but the Internet-phone-service provider continues to struggle with keeping customers.
) is in the lead to buy Microsoft Corp's (
) digital ad agency, Razorfish, according to people familiar with the matter.
