UPDATE 2-ON Semi posts qtrly loss, sees Q3 revenue above Street
2009-08-05 18:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Chipmaker ON Semiconductor Corp (
) posted a second-quarter loss, hurt by lower sales and charges, but guided higher revenue for the third quarter.
For the current quarter, the company forecast revenue of $445 million to $455 million. Analysts were expecting revenue of $429.0 million.
"While there is great uncertainty on the trajectory of the economic recovery, we believe the worst of the crisis is behind us," Chief Executive Keith Jackson said in a conference call with analysts.
Backlog levels at the beginning of the third quarter were up from the same period sequentially and represent about 90 percent of the expected revenue, Jackson said, adding that he sees average selling prices for the quarter to be down about 1 percent sequentially.
"We are beginning to see stabilization in each of our end-markets and a resumption of seasonal growth patterns in our consumer-oriented end market," Jackson said.
"The company is seeing strength in consumer, wireless and personal computer end-markets sequentially with some automotive and medical strength as well. They are not yet seeing strength in their industrial end-markets," said Caris & Company analyst Craig Ellis by phone.
Makers of chips used in computers, mobile phones and other devices are starting to see a recovery as the new academic year approaches, helped by China's massive stimulus package.
Earlier this month, Intel (
), the world's biggest chipmaker, said computer markets were strengthening, and Texas Instruments TXN.N, which makes chips for everything from cellphones to industrial equipment, also gave an upbeat outlook. [ID:nN14260734] [ID:nBNG358011].
For the second quarter, ON Semiconductor reported a net loss attributable to the company of $3.0 million, or 1 cent a share, compared with earnings of $34.2 million, or 8 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
The company, which counts LG Electronics (
), Motorola MOT.N and Samsung Electronics (
) among its top customers, said the latest quarter included net charges of 10 cents a share from special items.
Analysts on average were expecting earnings of 2 cents a share, excluding items, on revenue of $406.5 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
Shares of the company closed at $7.51 Wednesday on Nasdaq. (Editing by Anne Pallivathuckal and Anil D'Silva)
