UPDATE 2-Malaysia's Maxis eyes $2bln listing, taps banks-sources
2009-08-05 06:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Malaysia's biggest mobile phone operator, Maxis Communications, plans to raise $2 billion in a public offering later this year, underscoring the revival of Asian IPO's as equity markets rebound.
The offering, which could be the biggest in Malaysia since 1995, comes just two years after Maxis was taken private by its reclusive billionaire owner, Malaysian tycoon Ananda Krishnan, who owns telecom assets in India and Indonesia.
), Credit Suisse (
) and CIMB BUCM.KL to advise it on a listing in Kuala Lumpur. Under Bursa Malaysia rules, a company needs to sell a minimum 25 percent stake to list on the stock exchange.
"It will create some sort of excitement because it was the darling of investors then and it had substantial foreign shareholdings too," Abdul Jalil Rasheed, equities chief at Aberdeen Asset Management's Malaysia unit said on Wednesday .
The move comes after Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak last month asked Maxis Communications Bhd to re-list on Bursa Malaysia to boost liquidity and draw in investors to Southeast Asia's most laggard stock market so far this year .KLSE.
Goldman Sachs, Credit Suisse and CIMB declined to comment on the share sale plans. The sources declined to be identified because details of the deal are not public.
"There is no announcement at this point. An announcement will be made at the appropriate time," Catherine Leong, Maxis' head of public relations, told Reuters when asked for a comment.
IPOs have sprung back to life in booming markets in Asia, led by China after new share offerings grinded to a halt last year due to the meltdown in markets. [ID:nSHA259930].
), Southeast Asia's largest budget carrier, said this week it plans to raise about $170-$180 million through private placements to institutional investors. [ID:nKLR469331]
"With such huge capex, perhaps Maxis has found itself geared to the limit and needs to turn to capital markets for funds," investment bank ECM Libra said in a research note.
Maxis said in March it was planning to invest $5 billion over the next three to five years to accelerate Aircel's cellular coverage expansion in India. [ID:nDEL495460]
"Now is probably a good time for Maxis to be re-listed. With that kind of size, the stock will provide the kind of liquidity investors were looking for," said Aberdeen's Rasheed.
The Malaysian market is up 34 percent this year versus a 50 percent rise in Singapore's main index
Krishnan, ranked by Forbes Magazine as Malaysia's second-richest man at $7 billion, controls 75 percent of Maxis. The rest is owned by state-owned Saudi Telecom Co Ltd 7010.SE.
Krishnan also owns pay-television operator Astro All Asia Networks AAAN.KL and Tanjong Plc TJPL.KL, a power and gaming group, and satellite operator Measat Global MTCB.KL, through his investment vehicles.
