UPDATE 2-Ferrexpo upbeat on H2; shares jump
2009-08-05 05:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Ukrainian iron ore producer Ferrexpo (
) said on Wednesday it expects to be more profitable in the second half after trading reached a low point in the six months to end June, lifting its shares.
The comments were made as the company announced first-half profit dropped 73 percent, although it was slightly above market expectations, on lower prices for the steelmaking raw material. It also deferred a decision on its interim dividend.
Iron ore prices and demand have picked up worldwide, said Investor Relations Manager Gavin Mackay. "We are very bullish on Q3."
Spot iron ore prices in China rose above $100 a tonne last week, according to industry consultancy Mysteel. [ID:nPEK7715]
"The consensus is that demand will be very strong in the third quarter and level out at the new higher level in the fourth quarter," Mackay said.
Ferrexpo shares were up 10.4 percent at 174.9 pence, a two-month high, at 0916 GMT.
Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation fell to $60.3 million in the first half from $228.0 million in the year-earlier period. Revenue declined 42 percent to $301.8 million.
Cash costs fell about 16 percent from the year-earlier period despite the recent rise in oil prices. About 70 percent of Ferrexpo's costs are in the local currency.
"The positive tone from the trading update continues with the company reiterating that demand is reviving in its traditional European and domestic markets," said Cazenove.
Ferrexpo will defer a decision on its interim dividend until October when sales prices are likely to have aligned with the international benchmark settlements for iron ore pellets and more normal trading conditions will apply, it said.
"We have decided not to cancel it, but the quantum will be determined in late October," said Mackay.
) settled on an iron ore pellet contract price reduction of 48.3 percent with steel mills in Japan, South Korea and Europe, although China, the world's top iron ore consumer, has yet to ratify these settlements.
Ferrexpo's pricing is usually aligned with Vale's contract prices.
