No thirsting for cash in China even as loans slow
2009-08-05 04:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese banks are likely coming to the end of an unprecedented lending surge that powered the world's third-largest economy in the first half of the year.
Global financial markets may react with dismay, but the truth is far less frightening: China will remain flush with liquidity even if new credit seems to fall off a cliff.
Bank loans averaged 1.23 trillion yuan ($180 billion) per month in the first half of the year, hitting 1.53 trillion yuan in June alone.
Hence the potential for a queasy feeling in investors' stomachs if the rumors are correct and July loans fell to 500 billion yuan. The official figure is due in the next 10 days.
"The government may adjust things a little, having seen it will hit its target of 8 percent GDP growth this year," said Xing Ziqiang, an economist at China International Capital Corp in Beijing.
"But it is very difficult to reduce loans because a lot are going to infrastructure projects that will take three to five years to complete," he said.
The sustained demand for financing -- coming, in large part, from the government itself -- means that lending next year will more or less be in line with the 2009 total. New loans are likely to top 10 trillion yuan this year and hit 7-8 trillion yuan in 2010, Xing said.
There is also a big element of seasonality to the timing of loan issuance that should make a lower July total no surprise. Banks are known for rushing to book loans at the end of quarters to flatter their totals, making for subdued starts to quarters.
Lending is notably slow in July, and 500 billion yuan in new loans would actually be more than four times the average for the month over the past decade.
Nevertheless, fears about fast-vanishing liquidity flared last week when Chinese media reported that the country's two biggest banks had imposed caps on their own lending targets.
Beijing has in the past used a quota system to control lending, telling banks not to exceed specific ceilings. Such credit management was a key prong of China's monetary tightening in 2008 -- and it was subsequently blamed for contributing to the economy's marked slowdown at the end of last year.
The specter of a new set of quotas sent Shanghai stocks tumbling 5 percent, eliciting a swift promise from the Chinese central bank to keep monetary policy loose and desist from slapping quantitative controls on lenders.
China has provided one of the rare pockets of economic growth in the world this year, acting as a pillar of support to other countries mired in recession, so suggestions it might restrict expansion also sounded alarm bells in global markets.
Official reassurances notwithstanding, investors missed the point. Whether lending caps are hard or soft, Beijing-directed or voluntary, China's month-by-month distribution of bank loans is certain to be lopsided, with about 75 percent in the first half and 25 percent in the second half.
This front-loading, though, need not be a cause for concern.
First, many of the new loans have been recycled back into banks as deposits, keeping the Chinese loan-to-deposit ratio basically flat at a decade low of about 67 percent. In other words, companies have effectively secured their own credit lines, holding the money in wait for investment opportunities.
"Deposits are now flowing into real economy. Money is circulating at a higher speed," said Liu Yuhui, a researcher with the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Second, much of the burst in loans has been in discounted bill financing, short-term credit that can be rolled over into longer-term loans without being registered as new lending. Bill financing rose to 9.2 percent of outstanding loans at the end of June from 4.2 percent a year earlier.
The biggest headache for Chinese regulators has not been the volume of lending but the destination -- in particular, whether loans have inflated buoyant stock and property markets.
To that end, the Chinese Banking Regulatory Commission has pledged to step up oversight over loan usage and has also tightened banks' capital requirements.
But these rule changes have largely been at the margins. The absence of stiffer measures is a sign that Chinese authorities think that the lending so far has been necessary for reviving the economy and, largely, on mark.
Societe Generale economists reckon that 50 percent has ended up in real projects and a further 30 percent has provided essential working capital to corporations. Of the remainder, some has clearly slipped into the stock market, but much has also gone into building up much-needed commodity reserves.
Another apparent policy shift in Beijing that is easy to exaggerate is an intensification of central bank bill sales to mop up excess cash. With money streaming into China from abroad, these actions are, in fact, focused on keeping liquidity from swelling further, not on drying it out.
A persistent trade surplus and a return of speculative capital inflows mean that China could add, conservatively, $20 billion a month to its foreign exchange reserves.
That translates into a monthly creation of about 140 billion yuan of high-powered base money, offsetting withdrawals by the central bank through its open-market operations.
"Just like a pond, there is water drainage, but there is more water flowing in," said Zhang Zongxin, an economist with Northeast Securities in Shanghai.
