Uighur leader says children's letters were coerced
2009-08-05 04:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Exiled Uighur activist Rebiya Kadeer said on Wednesday she believed two of her children had been coerced by Chinese authorities into writing letters accusing her of orchestrating unrest last month in Xinjiang region.
"I believe it is against their conscience, against their will, to force them to say things against me. I believe that it is a form of dictatorship imposed upon them by the government," Kadeer told journalists.
Xinhua said the letters were written by Kadeer's son, Khahar, and daughter Roxingul, as well as younger brother Memet. Some of her children still in Xinjiang have been jailed or held under house arrest for years.
State television also broadcast interviews with the two children, and Kadeer's brother, in which they castigated the exiled leader. The government denies coercion was involved.
"Kadeer's relatives wrote the letter and were interviewed of their own will," the state-run China Daily paraphrased an unnamed Xinjiang government official as saying. "They were not forced by the government."
China has protested to the Australian government, which granted Kadeer a visa to visit a film festival showing a documentary about her life. It also condemned Japan's decision to allow the activist to visit.
"I think it is extremely inappropriate for the Chinese government to use its muscle to pressure other countries," she said. "I believe the Chinese government is basically trying to impose its authoritarianism on the whole world."
In Xinjiang's worst ethnic violence in decades, Uighurs on July 5 attacked Han Chinese in the regional capital of Urumqi after police tried to break up a protest against attacks on Uighur workers in south China.
The official death toll from the riots stands at 197, most of them Han, the majority group in China's 1.3 billion population. Almost all the others were Uighurs, a Muslim people native to Xinjiang and culturally tied to Central Asia. (Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
