China Sky One eyes acquisitions
2009-08-05 03:51:00.0
(Reuters) - China Sky One Medical Inc, CSKI.O, an over-the-counter drugmaker, said it aims to tap potential growth in China's pharmaceutical market through acquisitions after Beijing's announced a blueprint for health-care reform.
The Nasdaq-listed Chinese drugmaker would consider raising capital to fund future acquisitions, with priority on products before looking at companies and brands, CEO Liu Yanqing told Reuters.
"It is a good environment for us to consider fundraising," Liu said in an interview on Wednesday. "The U.S. capital market is recovering, companies with China exposure are enjoying strong recognition and many investment banks and funds have expressed confidence in prospects for China's economy."
China Sky One Medical had said earlier that it would focus on increasing market share in 2009 by strengthening sales and distribution networks, building and enhancing its brand image, and making strategic acquisitions to support growth.
It projected 2009 full-year revenue to increase by 40 percent year on year to US$128 million-US$130 million driven by growth in product sales, with gross margin at about 74 percent.
"In view of the strong growth potential of the China market, we are confident we will meet our full-year target," Liu said. He said the company had no plan to list shares in China or Hong Kong.
China Sky One, which is due to release its second-quarter results soon, recorded US$24.8 million first-quarter revenue.
The company expects to spend more to enhance brand awareness in China, which accounted for 90 percent of its revenue, to secure a bigger share of the US$40 billion domestic pharmaceutical market, Liu said.
Research and development costs would account for 10 percent of 2009 sales revenue, up from 8 percent last year, he said.
Expenses for advertising will account for 10-12 percent of the sales this year, compared with 8 percent in 2008, Liu said, adding that expenses would be adjusted in accordance with market changes and national health-care reforms.
"We are cutting a piece of the cake, but its hard to say how big the piece of cake will be," he said.
China's 850 billion yuan ($124.3 billion) health-care reform plan aims to bring coverage to 200 million uninsured Chinese, but still relies heavily on spending by cash-strapped local governments and may disappoint international companies eager to enter the domestic market.
Many Chinese pharmaceutical companies, including Jiangbo Pharmaceuticals JGBO.OB and diagnostic products maker Mingyuan Medicare (
) are gearing up, hoping to reap benefits from the reform plan.
