M.Stanley eyes Shanghai property sale: sources
2009-08-04 07:29:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Aug 4 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Fri, Jul 31 2009
Fri, Jul 31 2009
By George Chen, Asia Private Equity Correspondent
By George Chen, Asia Private Equity Correspondent
Tue  EDT
) aims to sell a Shanghai office building for around 2.5 billion yuan ($366 million) to a Hong-Kong-listed developer, sources said on Tuesday.
) for the sale of The Exchange, a building on Shanghai's historic Nan Jing Road, according to sources familiar with the matter.
The deal would be SOHO's first property investment in Shanghai, China's financial hub, as the developer has focused mainly on the capital, Beijing.
"Morgan Stanley hopes to cash out while SOHO is keen to expand into Shanghai so this is almost a perfect time for both," said one source.
"But the only problem is of course the price," said the source, adding some market watchers valued the property widely between 2 billion yuan and 3 billion yuan due to uncertainties on its business prospects.
MSRE aims to close the deal before the end of this year, said the sources who declined to be identified before an official announcement is made.
No agreement has been signed yet and some other investors have also shown interest in the property but SOHO China, run by influential Chinese property tycoon Pan Shiyi, is the frontrunner, the sources said.
Morgan Stanley began making property investments in Shanghai in 2003 and undertook real estate projects with local partners including Forte 2337.HK and Shanghai Dragon, an investment arm of the city government.
Early this year, Morgan Stanley was close to raising $6 billion for a new global property fund, in which China Investment Corp, the country's $200 billion sovereign fund, committed $800 million, Reuters reported.
"The prospect of office leasing market in China is not very positive due partly to uncertainties in the global economy, while residential properties are apparently more attractive now," said another of the sources.
has gained over 80 percent this year, helping local investors shift focus to property.
