Niger votes on presidential power extension
2009-08-04 14:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Niger, a major uranium producer, voted on Tuesday on extending President Mamadou Tandja's term by three years in a referendum criticised by the opposition and the international community as undemocratic and bad for stability.
Tandja, who has ruled the Saharan state since 1999, is asking for three more years to oversee big foreign investments including a $5 billion oil deal with China National Petroleum Corp and a 1.2 billion euro ($1.73 billion) uranium mine contract with France's Areva CEPFi.PA.
His second and final term expires at the end of 2009, a deadline which the highest court has said cannot be altered.
Turnout appeared to be low, reflecting widespread apathy about a poll Tandja is expected to win. Police were present at polling stations, but voting was largely peaceful.
Tandja argues the people of Niger want him to stay to finish the projects, which will bring billions of dollars into the country, one of the poorest in the world.
"In voting today, I believe I have responded to the will of the people, who have asked me to remain as head of state," Tandja said after casting his vote in the capital Niamey.
"The (anti-referendum coalition) CFDR reiterates its call for all citizens of Niger, all sincere democrats and all patriots to mobilise against this illegal referendum," he said.
Voting was peaceful apart from in Illela, a town around 600 km (370 miles) northeast of the capital Niamey, where an incident was reported, electoral commission president Hamidou Moumouni said. He did not elaborate.
Niger's impoverished population, most of whom are illiterate, are not highly politicised. In the last presidential election in 2004, voter turnout was only 31 percent.
"It's difficult to give an exact figure, but according to our reporters turnout is high, especially in rural areas," Moumouni said of Tuesday's turnout.
Earlier, in Boboye, a farming region around 100 km (60 miles) east of Niamey, a local official had said the referendum was less important than the harvest to farm workers.
Security forces closed landlocked Niger's borders for 24 hours from midnight on Monday while voting, which closed at 1800 GMT, went ahead. Results are expected within three to five days, the electoral commission said.
After several setbacks for democracy in West Africa over the past 12 months, including military coups in Mauritania and Guinea and the assassination of the president in Guinea-Bissau, the international community is keen to stress that departures from constitutional governance will be punished.
The European Union, a major donor, has already suspended the payment of one tranche of aid to Niger, and warned that Tandja's pursuit of an extended presidential term could have "serious consequences" for EU cooperation with Niger.
"The dissolution of the constitutional court and the exercise of government powers without parliamentary control are grave violations of core democratic values and the principles of the rule of law," said Sweden, the current EU president.
"The Secretary-General calls on the people of Niger to exercise utmost restraint and urges all parties to refrain from any form of violence," said a U.N. statement.
