TOPWRAP 2-Markets pause as banks, Toyota offer more hope
2009-08-04 07:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Two European banks and the world's biggest carmaker offered more positive signs on Tuesday that the global economy is emerging from crisis, but in the financial markets investors became concerned that hopes of a sustained recovery may be overdone.
France's biggest bank BNP Paribas BNP.PA and Asia-focused bank Standard Chartered (
) also both beat forecasts with their quarterly results, boosted by government incentives to trade in aging used cars that have bolstered demand for new vehicles in many major economies.
But while Toyota lifted an earlier outlook on the back of the results, it still sees an operating loss of 750 billion yen ($7.89 billion) and a net loss of 450 billion yen this year, underlining doubts over whether the economy is recovering sustainably or just stabilising.
"Demand is being supported to a large extent by government schemes, and it's difficult to get a read on how much this will translate into a fundamental recovery in demand," Senior Managing Director Takahiko Ijichi told a news conference.
Those doubts also showed up in stock markets, where investors paused to assess the state of the economy after rising for 13 of the last 16 sessions.
Better corporate earnings and improving data have helped push global equities, measured by MSCI .MIWD00000PUS, to a near 10-month high on Monday. Banks led Tuesday's losses in what dealers said looked mainly like a temporary correction.
"If you run up so fast and so far, it's quite natural that you have some profit taking," Luc Van Hecka, chief economist at KBC Securities, said.
Sooner or later, the round of bankruptcies brought on by the recession will also have to lead to consolidation of major businesses -- with the financial sector an obvious candidate after the turmoil of the last year.
BNP's second quarter net profit rose to 1.6 billion euros ($2.3 billion) from a year ago, boosted by its acquisition of some of assets from struggling Fortis FOR.BR.
"It's about staying ahead of the game," Chief Executive Peter Sands said.
"Given that we see Asia having a shorter and shallower recession than other parts of the world, our clients are seeing a light at the end of the tunnel, and we want to anticipate that and support them."
A person familiar with the matter had previously told Reuters that the bank was set to pay about $200 million for Royal Bank of Scotland's (
) for $550 million, as the part-nationalised bank shrinks its global footprint and retreats to its core markets. [ID:nSYD460598]
Earlier, Australia's central bank closed the door on further interest rate cuts in an economy that has fared better than most developed nations during the world's slide into the deepest recession in 80 years. [ID:nSYD220403]
Australia's second-quarter retail sales, which make up nearly a quarter of the economy, staged their biggest increase since late 2007, and combined with a jump in house prices to trigger expectations of higher interest rates, maybe as soon as December. (Reporting by Sambit Mohanty, in Tokyo, Wayne Cole in Sydney, Kevin Plumberg in Hong Kong, Nicole Maestri in San Francisco) (Writing by Patrick Graham; Editing by Richard Hubbard)
