U.S., China disagree sharply over handling of Snowden case
2013-07-11 19:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Senior U.S. and Chinese officials sharply disagreed on Thursday over China's handling of fugitive Edward Snowden, the former spy agency contractor accused of divulging U.S. surveillance program secrets who was allowed to leave Hong Kong last month.
In remarks after high-level political and economic talks, the United States said it was disappointed that Chinese authorities did not send Snowden, on the run in Hong Kong, back to face U.S. justice.
"We were disappointed with how the authorities in Beijing and Hong Kong handled the Snowden case, which undermined our effort to build the trust needed to manage difficult issues," U.S. Deputy Secretary of State William Burns said.
China's State Councilor Yang Jiechi said Hong Kong's actions were in accordance with the law. "Its approach is beyond reproach," he said about the decision to not detain Snowden.
Snowden left Hong Kong for Moscow, where he is believed to be stuck in the transit area of the city's international airport, amid speculation he might board a flight to travel to Latin America where he has been offered asylum.
(Reporting by Anna Yukhananov and Paul Eckert; Editing by Alistair Bell and Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
There are, either, too many ¡°laws¡± in the World, or, there too many Lawyers
Jul 11, 20137:24pm EDT--
The Chinese are rightly or wrongly very annoyed that we haven¡¯t returned their dissidents who have managed to leave China, despite repeated Chinese government requests for us to do so. We also lecture them, in my opinion rightly, for their limited human rights and basic legal protections of free speech and press, every chance we get. Now the shoe is on the other foot and the Chinese aren¡¯t all that thrilled about returning one of our dissidents. Tit for tat.
Jul 11, 20137:32pm EDT--
The US had asked the HongKong government for extradition of Snowden, but the Chinese decided to violate the existing tradition treaty. The case is quite clear.
Jul 11, 20137:38pm EDT--
