PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - Aug 4
2009-08-03 23:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sat, Aug 8 2009
Tue, Aug 4 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Mon, Aug 3 2009
Fri, Jul 31 2009
Mon  EDT
) has said John Richards will be leaving the company after a decade as chief executive, to be replaced by David Atkins, the managing director of Hammerson's UK business. The news came as the commercial property group revealed losses had doubled in the six months to the end of June. Hammerson's pre-tax losses rose from 417 million pounds to 819 million pounds on gross rental income over the period. Although the group suggested the stabilisation of yields and a pick-up in lettings on new developments showed signs of recovery, the adjusted net asset value per share fell to 373 pence.
Although Dawson Holdings DWN.L said on Monday it was putting its core news distribution business into administration, chief executive Hugh Cawley maintains the group will retain a presence on London's main market. According to Cawley, Dawson will be looking to bolster its remaining divisions which represent healthier long-term growth prospects. Shares were unchanged at 6.75 pence.
Bucking the economic trend, Telecity has announced an 80 percent increase in pre-tax profits in the first half of the year. The data centre provider, which is currently halfway through a three-year new-build expansion programme, reported a 33 percent rise in revenue for the six months to June 30 and an increase in revenue per square metre of 16 percent. Ever-increasing Internet demand has seen Telecity garner an impressive client list, including BT (
) -- a trend that looks likely to continue, according to chief executive Mike Tobin. "We are continuing to sign up key names," he says.
) has reported a first-half loss on the back of a decline in a broad range of industries ranging from aerospace to cosmetics. Matters were not helped by the group's decision to close one of its factories situated in the northeast and the resultant costs of the closure. Of its three core divisions, worst-hit was Elementis' chromium arm which saw a sales drop of 49 percent in constant currency terms. Over the first six months of the year, the group moved from a pre-tax profit of 26.8 million pounds to a loss of 30.2 million pounds.
The Sunday Times is to become the first UK Sunday newspaper to launch its own website. Until now, the paper has shared a domain with its daily counterpart but, to the great interest of other newspaper publishers, News Corp (
) intends to create a site where users may be charged for access. However, doubts are already being cast over the decision to charge for content, with Douglas McCabe, publishing analyst with Enders Analysis, saying: "It will be very interesting to see how they manage it. We live in a global culture of free news, and that will prove hard to change."
Nick Tranter, a former derivatives specialist with BNP Paribas, has been hired by equities broker Execution. The move marks Execution's expansion into listed derivatives, mirroring the growing trend among brokers to offer "multi-asset class" business. Tranter, who will head-up a new unit, will be reporting to Execution's European equities head Garreth Hodgson. Responding to the accepted notion that the derivatives business has largely been run by "a few familiar faces", Hodgson said: "We felt there was demand to explore alternative people doing their derivatives business. The clients felt there was scope for that to be shaken up."
Telecommunications regulator Ofcom is looking to revive its plans to hasten the process of transferring a customer's mobile phone number when they change their network provider. Consumers currently face a two day wait before their number is transferred. Ofcom's original attempt to slash the wait to just two hours was dashed by the Competition Appeal Tribunal in September, following a challenge by Vodafone (
), supported by O2, Orange and T-Mobile. On Monday, the regulator published a document for public consultation, setting out four options for reforming the current system. Depending on which of the proposals is chosen, the change could take effect in either 2011 or 2012.
) reporting 2.9 billion pounds, both in the first six months of the year, the FTSE 100 index rose by 1.6 percent. This led to optimism that global recovery from the economic crisis has begun in earnest, aided by stronger manufacturing performance in the United States, China, the eurozone and Britain. However, the boost in shares resulted in falls for the dollar and the yen as investors started to look for riskier investments.
Equity markets in Britain are under review by the Financial Services Authority, which is taking a close look at high-frequency trading and the use of alternative trading platforms. Sophisticated computer programs have led to the growth of high-speed trading and the trading of large share blocks which do not have publicly-posted prices until the completion of the trade, known as dark pools. UBS veteran Henry Knapman, on secondment to the FSA, is leading the British study. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is also investigating whether regulatory action might be necessary.
According to a survey by price comparison site uSwitch.com, nearly 75 percent of British shoppers now choose supermarket own labels, compared to only 25 percent a year ago. The rise was attributed to cost-conscious consumers as well as supermarkets expanding their own ranges in order to prevent shoppers from taking their custom to cheaper chains. Some private label brands such as Heinz remained brands that consumers would prefer to buy, and Reckitt Benckiser (
Energy regulator Ofgem has approved a 25 percent increase in investment in the UK's electricity distribution networks, aimed at the restoration of crumbling infrastructure and the adoption of "smart grid" technology. This would increase investment to 1.3 billion pounds a year over five years, adding up to 20 pounds a year to a typical electricity bill. Companies looking to achieve carbon dioxide emission cuts are also being encouraged with a 500 million pound incentive plan. The majority of electricity distribution in the UK is controlled by foreign companies such as France's EDF (
), Germany's E.ON AG (
), Spain's Iberdrola (
), and Berkshire Hathaway from the United States.
Accounting firm Deloitte has announced a two percent drop in revenues to 1.93 billion pounds in the year to May 31, making it the first of the "Big Four" to report shrinking revenue for six years, since KPMG did so in 2003 following the dotcom bust. Deloitte's tax advisory and corporate finance units turned from leading growth to leading the slowdown. Rival accounting giants PwC and Ernst & Young, both set to report next month on their financial year which ended on June 30, are expected to announce either flat or declining growth.
