Contango play extends to oil, metals, softs -banks
2009-08-04 07:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The financing of commodity storage trading plays in Asia is on the rise, as weak prompt demand encourages traders to store oil, metals and agricultural products for future sale, bankers said on Tuesday.
Graham Murray, regional head for Structure Trade & Commodity Finance at Japan's Sumitomo Mitsui Bank (
), said the contango play on crude and oil products, which began early this year, has extended to metals and selected agricultural products.
"Over the last couple of weeks, we've been getting enquiries on financing the contango play for metals and some agricultural products," he told Reuters on the sidelines of a trade financing conference, but declined to name the commodities.
"It's safe, we can take collateral on it, and people are comfortable with it. It's a good opportunity -- other European and Asian banks are also looking quite deeply into this. We're not the only ones."
A contango is a market structure where commodity prices are expected to rise in the future, signalling weak immediate demand and encouraging players to store supplies for future sale on expectations of a price recovery.
Analysts said the wide contango in aluminium and copper earlier this year had lured traders. The contango in aluminium, used in transport and packaging, remains high, but that for the red metal has since flipped into a mild backwardation.
Aluminium on the London Metal Exchange was quoted at $1,935 a tonne, with a discount of $27.0/$23.0. Three-month copper was quoted at $5,945, at a premium of $2.0/$5.0. RING=
But copper, used in the power and construction sectors and considered a gauge of economic activity, has just about doubled in both Shanghai and London this year, fuelled by Chinese demand and economic optimism.
"The wide contango in aluminium earlier this year sparked interest in this storage play, but since then, the contango has narrowed, and while it's not as profitable as before, traders can still make money," said a commodities analyst at a European bank.
But analysts expect rising stocks in the current quarter to put further downward pressure on copper and aluminium, which could re-ignite interest in the contango play.
"Our analysis of historical data shows the third quarter to have the largest build of copper and aluminium inventories into LME warehouses," Morgan Stanley said in a note published in July.
There is also mileage left in the oil storage play, said Murray of Sumitomo Mitsui.
"It's still going on, and rental of floating vessels is cheaper than landed storage. The only problem is getting lines big enough to cover the ship, but there are club deals for that."
For oil contango plays, club-style deals -- where banks band together to provide financing and share the risk -- typically range from $80 million to $150 million and involve two to four participants.
"Sometimes, if the deal gets too big, you need other players, especially with the restrictions that banks have on exposure levels these days. So if the bank is conservative, it might only want to do $50 million out of a $100 million deal," Murray added.
Sumitomo Mitsui Bank also closed a few club-style deals for oil last year, one of which included funding floating storage for fuel oil, which remains backwardated, unlike gas oil and jet fuel.
Swiss trader Mercuria Energy Trading recently leased a supertanker to blend and store fuel oil off southern Malaysia, while Southern Petrochemical Co Ltd, an affiliate of China's Sinopec Group, paid $15 million for a 284,000-tonne supertanker to store fuel oil for bunker trades.
Besides club-style agreements, banks also issue unsecured credit lines and structured deals to finance these inventory plays, Bruce Weller, BNP Paribas' (
"People do ask about financing the contango play both in crude and products, and now might be a good time as capital costs are lower than back in the boom days," Weller added.
On Monday, Dutch bank ING (
