European banks see some light, UBS clients decamp
2009-08-04 06:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Rising profit from Standard Chartered and BNP Paribas raised hopes that European banks were over the worst of the financial crisis, and even a big loss from UBS masked its best underlying performance in two years.
) was another heavy outflow of 39.4 billion Swiss francs from its wealth and asset management divisions, but a bigger-than-expected net loss of 1.4 billion francs was mostly down to one-off charges.
Sarasin analyst Reiner Skierka said UBS's overall results were "quite good," but he remained cautious on the bank's future until it could reverse the outflow of clients' cash.
), France's biggest bank by market value, posted a 6.6 percent rise in net profit, while Asia-focused Standard Chartered (
"It's about staying ahead of the game," Chief Executive Peter Sands said. "Given that we see Asia having a shorter and shallower recession than other parts of the world, our clients are seeing a light at the end of the tunnel."
BNP Paribas's CEO also sounded a more confident note.
"I am relatively positive about the markets," he said.
Other European banks have also recently reported profits to the end of June, including HSBC (
) in Britain and Switzerland's Credit Suisse (
), a victim of the credit crunch that was nationalized by the British government in early 2008, said its first-half losses had grown by a quarter.
CEO Gary Hoffman said the bank was constrained by capital, and future developments hinged on unemployment levels and a revival in property prices.
), Russia's second biggest lender, also reported a bigger-than-expected net loss of 20.5 billion roubles ($656 million) for the first quarter as loan provisions rose faster than expected. The bank said it did not expect to return to profit this year.
) for $550 million, as the bank shrinks its global footprint and retreats to its core markets.
Banking shares were mostly lower, with the DJ Stoxx banking index .SX7P down about 0.9 percent.
UBS and VTB were down more than 4 percent, while BNP Paribas was up 0.15 percent. StanChart was also down more than 4 percent, but traders put that down to the fundraising, which will involve placing 4 percent of its stock.
(Additional reporting by Reuters bureaus in Europe and Asia, editing by Will Waterman)
