FOREX-Aussie holds firm near 10-month highs after RBA
2009-08-04 02:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The Australian dollar trimmed earlier gains but held firm near 10-month highs against the dollar and the yen on Tuesday after the Reserve Bank of Australia kept interest rates unchanged, as widely expected, and backed views for eventual rate hikes later this year.
The central bank went so far as to say the global economy is stabilising and downside risks have diminished, although it also said its present accommodative setting is appropriate.
In contrast, the euro fell and sterling erased earlier gains to over nine-month highs as investors took profits from strong rises in those currencies.
"The RBA's comment supported market views that Australia may see a rate hike within this year," said a senior trader for a Japanese trust bank.
"Hedge funds and CTAs are all in the same trade in which they buy stocks, oil and the Aussie," said the trader, adding that their trades are based on hopes for an economic recovery.
, triming earlier gains to $0.8471 on the Reuters dealing system, the highest since late September.
It rose above 80.80 yen earlier and hit 10-month peaks before trading at 80.10 yen AUDJPY=R, nearly unchanged on the day.
The dollar edged up but stayed near its lowest level this year against a basket of currencies, as bullish global stock markets and upbeat economic data lifted investor risk appetite, denting the greenback's safe-haven appeal.
The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six other major currencies, was flat at 77.649. It fell as far as 77.451 the previous day, its lowest since Sept. 29.
, still not far from this year's high of $1.4445 hit on trading platform EBS on Monday.
Against the yen, the euro lost 0.3 percent to 136.90 yen EURJPY=R after earlier rising as high as 137.70 yen on EBS, its highest since mid-June.
, up 0.1 percent on the day after falling from $1.7005 hit earlier in the day on the Reuters dealing system, its highest in more than nine months.
Earlier in the day, the New Zealand dollar rose to $0.6712, its highest in 10 months.
Traders said gains in the New Zealand dollar and sterling were also supported by positive manufacturing reports from the United States, Europe and China on Monday that boosted hopes for the global economy.
"Expectations for a global economic recovery were boosted further after the series of upbeat data," said Tomohiro Nishida, treasury department manager at Chuo Mitsui Trust and Banking.
"The market will likely keep its risk-taking stance but we may see some correction as we get closer to Friday's U.S. employment report," he said. (Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Michael Watson)
