HarbourVest sees longer buyout cycles
2009-08-03 14:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Fundraising cycles for large private equity houses are likely to lengthen as the slow pace of investment leaves many with unspent capital from previous funds, said the head of HarbourVest's fund of funds business in Europe.
Large private equity buyouts have ground to a halt in the wake of the credit crisis as debt funding for new deals has dried up. There were no European buyouts over $1 billion in the first six months of 2009, compared with 17 in the same period of 2008 and 36 in 2007, according to Thomson Reuters data.
As a result, many large buyout firms still have substantial capital to deploy from funds raised three or four years ago, said managing director George Anson.
"Many groups are putting off their fundraisings until at least the middle of next year," said Anson.
While he declined to name specific firms, houses such as BC Partners BCPRT.UL, Permira PERM.UL and Cinven CINV.UL that may have raised new funds in frothier times still have significant capital committed in 2005 and 2006 left to deploy.
HarbourVest raised $5.5 billion for investment in the United States in May 2006 under the banner of the HarbourVest Partners VIII fund, of which $2.9 billion was slated for buyouts -- an amount it would not target in today's climate, said Anson.
The private equity fund of funds specialist, which has some $30 billion of assets under management, raised a separate 2.4 billion euros ($3.39 billion) international fund in June 2005, of which 400 million euros was earmarked for Asia-Pacific.
In Europe, while the focus is on small to mid-market buyout funds, HarbourVest is still backing large buyout firms that show "real operational expertise", said Anson. The firm aims to be a top-five investor with a typical commitment of 60 million to 70 million euros per fund.
Deciding between Candover's 2008 fund and Charterhouse's CHCAP.UL ninth fund HarbourVest chose Charterhouse, based on the firm's "individualistic" approach, he said.
HarbourVest has been an investor in firms including TA Associates, Bain, Apax and Permira since the 1980s.
NOTHING VENTURED, NOTHING GAINED
While buyout activity has slowed, the U.S. venture capital arena remains "pretty resilient", said Anson. But the firm is not looking to raise a similar-sized fund to the $2.1 billion it raised in 2006 as part of the forthcoming HarbourVest IX programme, expected to be launched later this year, he added.
"You can easily justify having a venture-focused fund of funds in the U.S. because there is such a huge depth and breadth in that market, that just doesn't exist in Europe," said Anson.
But he believes there are some credible players in Europe able to match the U.S. top tier, citing Index Ventures, the largest shareholder in Skype before it was sold to Ebay.
"It's been one of the few European venture groups that's produced consistently positive and additive returns to our programme," he said.
HarbourVest VIII included a $500 million credit opportunities fund for investment in mezzanine and distressed debt. However, Anson is cautious when backing firms that buy into debt in the hope of a default as they are protective of their investment targets and are harder to subject to diligence.
"We just don't have a 'trust you' kind of mentality, we really need to know how the investment works," said Anson.
Anson is also wary of emerging markets such as India and China, where he believes manager quality, the legal framework and intellectual property rights still have "some way to go".
