PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - Aug 4
2009-08-03 17:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Mon  EDT
The annual profit reporting season is set to begin after what has been the most calamitous year on investment markets in decades. A move by the Australian Securities Exchange a couple of year's ago to condense the reporting season to just four weeks means that 32 major companies will report their results on August 19 and 20, whilst 36 will report on August 26 and 27. However, Perpetual Investment's head of Australian equities, John Sevior, says too much emphasis is put on profit reports. Page 1.
Long-awaited 2007 election spending promises are finally coming into effect, with more than A$6 billion in discretionary grants approved by the Federal Government in the first half of this year. The spending, which includes grants for community infrastructure, regional revitalisation and health and ageing programs, is providing a boost to the Rudd Government's A$70 billion economic stimulus package. Earlier this month, Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner introduced tougher guidelines for minsters approving grants in their electorates. Page 1.
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) yesterday warned that the economic downturn was likely to trigger another round of corporate collapses, and that many companies' risked trading-related breaches of the Corporations Act. The chairperson of the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board, Merran Kelsall warned that auditors would face increased scrutiny after a string of recent corporate collapses including Allco Finance Group, Centro Properties Group, ABC Learning Centres and Babcock & Brown. Page 1.
Former treasurer Peter Costello has called for a wider release of the confidential Liberal Party report on the Coalition's defeat in the 2007 election, sparking a row amongst his colleagues. In yet another setback for Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull, Federal Liberal Party members are supporting Mr Costello's criticism that the party has not yet released its findings into the 2007 Howard Government defeat. "The party membership have the right to know what's in the report,' Liberal backbencher Wilson Tuckey said yesterday. Page 5.
Northern Territory's Minister for Indigenous Policy Alison Anderson is believed to be on the verge of carrying out her threat to quit the government after a dispute over funding for indigenous housing. Mrs Anderson, who criticised her party after learning of plans to cut millions from the A$672 million Strategic Indigenous Housing and Infrastructure Program, will meet with the cabinet today and is believed to be unrepentant about her uncompromising stance. Page 1.
Senior Treasury official Godwin Grech yesterday admitted that he concocted the "fake email' at the heart of the OzCar scandal, claiming he was "under enormous pressure' to pass the contents of the email to Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull. However, Mr Grech still insists there was an original email from Kevin Rudd's office requesting assistance for Ipswich car dealer and Labor donor John Grant. Mr Grech also said he had met with Mr Turnbull and Senate deputy Eric Abetz one week before the Senate inquiry into the matter. Page 1.
Contraband supplies of the controversial abortion drug RU486 are being smuggled into the country and are being used by women to terminate their own pregnancies, claims a veteran Brisbane obstetrician. Adrienne Freeman yesterday said three patients had told her they had obtained RU486 on black markets in China or India with the intention of taking it here. Ms Freeman warned that the known incidents of women taking illegally imported abortion pills were the "tip of the iceberg' of a much wider problem. Page 1.
The Opposition justice spokesperson George Brandis yesterday queried how taxpayer assistance came to be awarded to a company that hires the Prime Minister's campaign manager as a lobbyist. As corruption claims continue to strangle the Queensland Labor Party, Mr Brandis said Wayne Swan had questions to answer over the issue. "They go to the integrity of the government,' said Senator Brandis yesterday. Mr Brandis also accused the Labor Party of a having a "deep and endemic mates culture.' Page 2.
The New South Wales Teachers Federation has conceded that underperforming teachers that fail to improve should leave the profession. Deputy President Gary Zadkovich has urged state governments to invest more money into programs aimed at improving the quality of teaching, calling for "initiatives that genuinely improve the quality of teaching and learning in our classrooms.' He criticised "gimmicky announcements' about teaching policy, saying one of the concerns was the lack of help given to principals to deal with poor teachers. Page 1.
The New South Wales Supreme Court yesterday heard how the terrorism suspect Mohammed Omar Jamal had defended former Prime Minister John Howard in an intercepted telephone conversation. In his final submissions on his client, Gregg Scragg said Mr Jamal could not have been involved in a radical jihadist conspiracy involving Melbourne's Sheikh Bakr because he had previously voiced support for Prime Minister John Howard. In the conversation, which involved people deemed responsible for the invasion of Iraq, Jamal was recorded saying "keep John Howard out of it.' Page 2.
) have sacked the controversial radio and television host Kyle Sandilands from his job as judge on the talent show Australian Idol, amid public fury over a stunt on his radio show where a 14-year-old girl revealed she had been raped. Ten explained its decision, saying Australian Idol was a "family-friendly show' and that Sandiland's radio persona had "taken on a more controversial position.' Sandiland's 2DayFM radio show has been in "recess' since the scandal. Page 5.
The Climate Change Minister Penny Wong yesterday dismissed a list of nine principled demands from the Opposition on changes to the emissions trading scheme (ETS). Senator Wong effectively ruled out a deal with the Opposition on the ETS, which is due for a Senate vote next week. Ms Wong also ruled out extra compensation to the coal industry as proposed by the Opposition, saying "if their proposition is that coal should simply face no cost whatsoever when other industries face a carbon cost, Mr Turnbull should explain why that is the case.' Page 4.
Child Safety Commissioner Bernie Geary yesterday said that hundreds of vulnerable Victorian children without a dedicated caseworker were missing out on the critical attention they needed. It is believed that one-quarter of child-protection cases in Victoria on the books of the Department of Human Services have no assigned caseworker. But a department spokesperson said child protection workers were allocated to most cases and that "all cases are prioritised in order of need and urgency.' Page 1.
The Australian Trade Commission (Austrade) has denied tipping off a senior diplomat about investigations into child sex offences. John Finnin, who resigned as Austrade's head of trade for Europe, the Middle East and Africa in May 2006, was convicted of 23 child sex offences last month. Austrade spokesperson Gregory Harvey yesterday insisted that the convictions were for conduct after Finnin had left his post, whilst Austrade chief Peter O'Byrne said claims that Austrade tipped off Finnin were "grossly inaccurate and unfair.' Page 1.
A survey of senior high school students has found that up to a third have experienced unwanted sex. The survey, in which 3000 students in years 10 and 12 were questioned about their sexual experiences, reported a 30 percent increase in the number of year 12 girls who drank alcohol, measured against a similar survey done in 2002. Researcher Anthony Smith said the survey found that the most common reasons for unwanted sex were pressure from a partner or just being drunk. Page 1.
More than 40 former Members of Parliament (MPs) last year used their lifetime Gold Pass to take holidays to places such as Cairns and Broome at the taxpayer's expense. Unlike other retirees who pay from their savings, pension or superannuation, former MPs have taxpayers pay for their business-class domestic flights, with the only exception being for trips that are for "commercial purpose.' The Greens have called for a parliamentary audit of the Gold Pass scheme. Page 2. --
