GLOBAL MARKETS-Banks, China kick equities to 2009 high
2009-08-03 07:23:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks shot up to yet another new 2009 high on Monday with banking news from Europe and signs of a pick up in Chinese economic activity driving investors to buy.
) appeared to have settled a tax dispute without the need to pay a fine, bad debts at Barclays (
Europe's main banking index .SX7P was up 3.4 percent and is now up 144 percent since March's floor.
HSBC said its first half profits halved from a year ago but the results were better than analysts had calculated. [ID:nL3661800] Asian stocks clambered up to an 11-month high, helped by Chinese shares.
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS were up 1.3 percent, passing the levels of early September last year and taking gains on the year to around 47 percent.
This all drove the MSCI all-country world share index .MIWD00000PUS up more than 1 percent, eclipsing its previous high for the year which was reached on Friday. This has in part been fuelled by upbeat company results, particularly on Wall Street.
"All in all, given the better than expected corporate results, the markets continue to support the idea of an imminent recovery," wealth manager BSI said in a note, adding that risk appetite was growing as more investors fear missing the rally.
The dollar hit its lowest point this year against a basket of currencies after higher oil prices, firm global stock markets and economic data boosted investments in riskier assets. The currency is usually hit by risk-positive news.
"It's hard to find any negative news out there at the moment, it's all about the risk appetite trade coming back in," CMC Markets analyst James Hughes said.
"Almost as big as the banking results today have been oil prices, which have risen above the key $70 level and helped commodity currencies," he added.
Euro zone government bond yields, which move inversely to prices, jumped higher as investors switched to higher-risk investments.
The 10-year Bund yield was at 3.326 percent EU10YT=RR, 4.6 basis points more than in late Friday trade while the 2-year Schatz yielded 1.289 percent EU2YT=RR. (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer; Editing by Ruth Pitchford) (To read Reuters Global Investing Blog click
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Fund Hub click on
