China Everbright plans overseas expansion after IPO
2009-08-03 05:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Everbright Securities Co, which is raising as much as $1.6 billion in an initial public offering in Shanghai, plans to expand overseas and diversify businesses to support growth, its president said on Monday.
Everbright Securities may consolidate securities businesses within its parent Everbright Group, China's second-biggest financial conglomerate, and will set up a subsidiary in Hong Kong as soon as possible, Xu Haoming said.
"Everbright Group has rich securities resources in Hong Kong, so it's an option for us to consolidate brokerage, asset management and underwriting businesses within the group," Xu said during a road show to retail investors.
Everbright, China's 10th biggest brokerage by market share, is raising funds to compete more effectively with bigger rivals such as China International Capital Corp (CICC) and Citic Securities Co.
The Shanghai-based brokerage will use the proceeds to grow its nascent private equity unit, add brokerage outlets and expand its underwriting market share to more than 5 percent. It is also preparing for financial innovations such as index futures.
Broadening revenue streams is important for Everbright, as fiercer competition erodes margins for brokerage businesses while CICC and Citic dominate the underwriting market for big IPOs.
"We will use the proceeds...to fully transform our growth models," Chairman Tang Shuangning said during the same event. "We will consolidate and expand our traditional businesses while fully embracing innovation and exploring overseas opportunities."
Everbright Securities, which controls a venture with Prudential Financial Inc (
), and owns stakes in Dacheng Fund Management Co, aims to have its fully-owned asset management business, President Xu said.
The brokerage said late on Sunday that it plans to sell up to 520 million shares, or 15.21 percent of its enlarged capital, at 19 to 21.08 yuan apiece, pricing its IPO at 52.78 to 58.56 times the company's 2008 earnings.
When asked if the ratio was too high, Gui Shuifa, president of underwriter Oriental Securities said: "2008 is the most difficult year for brokerages. If we look back at the end of 2009, the price/earnings ratio for Everbright Securities should be reasonable." (US$1=6.832 Yuan)
