Mexico peso firms, stocks climb to one-year high
2009-08-03 17:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico's peso firmed sharply on Monday and stocks jumped to their highest in more than a year as a U.S. survey showed the contraction in manufacturing there slowed in July, supporting hopes of a recovery at Mexico's factories.
The collapse in demand for Mexico's manufactured exports has pushed the country into its deepest recession since the 1930s, and any sign of a rebound in closely linked U.S. factories bodes well for Mexican stocks and the currency.
MEX01 firmed 0.63 percent to 13.1125 per U.S. dollar, on track to its strongest close since late May.
closed up 2.4 percent at 27,692.48, its highest since July 21, 2008.
The peso has lost around one-quarter of its value since last year as consumer demand slowed in the United States, which buys around 80 percent of Mexico's exports.
The U.S. survey followed similar surveys of manufacturing in the United Kingdom, Europe and China that all came out better than expected.
"The whole international market has a good tone, but there is not sufficient confidence in Mexico's recovery to bet on the peso," said Pedro Tuesta at 4Cast consultancy in New York.
A Mexican manufacturing index improved in July, pointing to future growth for the first time in over a year. [ID:nN03513062]
Analysts noted Mexico's factory report is still relatively new and does not yet have a big market impact.
Mexico's peso has been unable to hold onto gains below 13 per dollar since late last year as investors worry that demand in the United States for Mexican exports could remain weak for some time.
Furthermore, investors expect Wall Street ratings agencies will downgrade Mexico's debt later this year as the recession crimps tax revenue and government income from oil exports slips amid declining production.
"If we did not have this shadow, people would be more willing to buy below 13 per dollar," said Juan Jose Resendiz, an analyst at Arka brokerage in Mexico City.
In stock trading, shares in America Movil (
), a top U.S. cement supplier whose debt problems have been exacerbated by the downturn in the United States, rose 3.38 percent to 12.85 pesos. Cemex won a payment extension on Friday on around $1.2 billion debt. [ID:nN31481109] (Reporting by Michael O'Boyle; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
