Gold and silver rise on dollar slide and Wall St rally
2009-08-03 15:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold and silver futures rose to seven-week highs on Monday as a weaker dollar, better physical demand and fresh buying from commodity funds boosted investors' appetite for hard assets amid a Wall Street rally.
Economic optimism should provide underlying support to bullion, which had been weighed down heavily this year because of deflation fears, but the direction of the U.S. currency will ultimately set the tone for the yellow metal.
"There is new money coming into everything. Stronger equities and commodities are reflecting that. Of course, the dollar continues to weaken, and that is the driving force right now," said Bill O'Neill, managing partner of New Jersey-based LOGIC Advisors.
U.S. December gold futures settled up $3 at $958.80 an ounce on the COMEX division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. They hit a session peak of $966.90 an ounce, the highest price since June 10.
Spot gold was at $956 an ounce at 2:38 p.m. EDT (1838 GMT), up from $953.90 an ounce late in New York on Friday.
The dollar fell broadly as a rally in stocks and encouraging economic data eroded the greenback's safe-haven appeal. U.S. Treasuries prices also slipped.
"At the moment we're seeing the dollar as the key factor to movements in the gold market," said Eugen Weinberg, senior analyst at Commerzbank. "In the past few months (gold) has gone from being a safe haven to becoming a dollar play."
Bullion was also boosted by inflation worries stirred by a sharp rise in the U.S. stock market. The S&P 500 index rose above the 1,000 level for the first time in nine months as investors welcomed fresh indications that the recession is abating.
Positive manufacturing reports from the United States, Europe and China lifted hopes about the global economy and boosted risk appetite.
Better economic sentiment also boosted silver's industrial demand component, traders said.
Silver was at $14.25 an ounce against $13.89. Earlier it touched a high of $14.47, the highest price since mid-June.
The largest silver ETF, the iShares Silver Trust, said its holdings rose to a record 8,828 tonnes on Friday, while Switzerland's Zurich Cantonal Bank said its silver holdings rose by 1.929 million ounces, or 3.8 percent, last week.
Investment demand for gold and jewelry buying remain lackluster, however. Holdings of the largest gold ETF, the SPDR Gold Trust, fell nearly 50 tonnes in July.
ETFs issue securities backed by physical commodities, and constituted a big source of gold demand in the first quarter.
Among other precious metals, platinum was at $1,234 an ounce, against $1,207.50, while palladium was at $270.50, against $261.50. Both metals are used in autocatalysts.
General Motors Co GM.UL said on Monday its U.S. auto sales fell 19.4 percent in July from a year earlier, but retail sales rose from the month before for a fifth consecutive month, supported by the U.S. government's "Cash for Clunkers" incentives. European car sales also posted gains in July.
(Additional reporting by Catherine Bosley and Pratima Desai in London; Editing by Walter Bagley)
