TOPWRAP 1-Emerging markets power ahead, Japan gloom darkens
2009-08-03 03:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Factory activity hit multi-month highs in emerging economies in July as they scrabbled out of the worst global recession since the 1930s, but developed economies continued to shrink, although at a slower pace.
Asian stocks inched up to an 11-month high on Monday as evidence mounted that the global economic recovery is gathering speed, giving a boost to oil and copper prices while hurting the safe-haven U.S. dollar.
Two surveys showed Chinese factory growth accelerated in July, thanks to a revived domestic economy and a slight pick-up in demand for its exports, though global demand still appeared sluggish. The China PMI from brokerage CLSA hit a one-year peak. [ID:nBJB000642]
In the United States, a report on Friday showed the economy shrank at a smaller-than-expected 1 percent on an annualised pace in the second quarter, with economists expecting growth to resume in the second half of the year after the longest contraction on record.
The economic debate in the coming week is almost certain to be dominated by Friday's U.S. non-farm payrolls report, a potential roadblock given that jobs are among the last to improve when economies do and have a large impact on consumer sentiment.
Investors will also be watching sales reports by U.S. auto makers on Monday that are expected to show how big a boost they received from the government's $1 billion "cash for clunkers" programme that offered incentives to buy new, more fuel-efficient cars and triggered a rebound in demand.
The improving economic backdrop has already contributed to an array of upbeat quarterly earnings reports from companies around the world, prompting analyst upgrades to forecasts that are spurring investors to shift funds into equities.
"Brokers have done a complete reversal in the last week, with uplifts in forecasts, uplifts in sentiment and commentary and price targets," said Jamie Spiteri, a dealer at Shaw Stockbroking in Sydney.
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS edged up 0.5 percent to the highest levels since early September, taking gains so far this year to 47 percent.
But Japan's Nikkei share average
), Astellas Pharma (
But many investors feel that for the kind of asset rally that has been under way for the past few months to continue, real signs of global economic recovery will be needed, not just signs that the worst is over.
In China, a private purchasing managers' index rose in July to a one-year high of 52.8 from 51.8, as resurgent domestic demand spurred manufacturing activity in the world's third-largest economy. [ID:nBJB000642]
Output growth and order books both hit 14-month highs in July, a sign that the flow of new work was improving and giving businesses reason to expect sustained recovery momentum.
A companion PMI, produced for the National Bureau of Statistics, rose to 53.3 in July from 53.2 in June, its fifth straight month above the 50 mark. [ID:nPEK191248]
In neighbouring India, manufacturing activity growth held steady in July amid robust local demand and a slight rebound in exports, but intense competition curbed companies' pricing power even as raw material costs jumped, a survey showed. [ID:nBOM394377]
In Moscow, the Russian purchasing managers' index rose to a 10-month high in July, signalling that a year-long contraction in the manufacturing sector may be nearing its end, data from VTB Capital showed.
Russia is weathering its first recession in a decade, hurt by low oil and commodity prices, reduced global demand and the global credit crunch. But recent data -- including the PMIs -- suggest the worst of the crisis may have passed and a slow recovery path is beginning.
July manufacturing activity in Ireland also increased on the month, but was still below the 50-point mark, which delineates expansion from contraction. Similar trends are expected in data from Switzerland, Italy, France, Germany and the Eurozone to be released later on Monday ECONG7.
In Sydney a private measure of Australian manufacturing climbed to its highest in 10 months in July as new orders and production improved, though overall activity still contracted in the month. [ID:nSYD458046]
Yet signs of weakness persist, suggesting the road out of recession will not be easy.
Japanese wage earners' total cash earnings tumbled 7.1 percent in the year to June, the biggest annual drop on record, which could hurt consumer spending and add to deflationary pressure on the world's No 2 economy. [ID:nT165637]
Weakening household demand for goods is playing an increasing part in pushing the world's No. 2 economy deeper into deflation, with core consumer prices falling a record 1.7 percent in the year to June. [ID:nT23765]
In Australia, job advertisements in newspapers and on the Internet fell for the 15th straight month in July, pointing to still soft demand for labour despite signs of an economic pickup elsewhere, a survey showed on Monday. [ID:nSYU0067945]
Commodity markets should not rely too heavily on rebounding demand from China because it has created supply overhangs that could set off a price correction, top economist Nouriel Roubini said.
"The risk in the second half of this year is that the rate of accumulation in China must slow down -- one of the factors that a downside correction in commodity prices, however modest, may occur," Roubini told a mining industry gathering in Australia. [ID:nSYD178881] (Writing by Clarence Fernandez; Editing by Kim Coghill)
