UPDATE 2-IFM raises $37 mln, sees price rise, shares jump
2009-08-03 04:30:00.0
(Reuters) - South Africa's International Ferro Metals Ltd (IFM) (
) raised 22.2 million pounds ($37.17 million) in a share placement and said fourth quarter contract prices would rise, boosting its shares as much as 16 percent.
The London shares, which have more than tripled this year, touched a peak of 58 pence, up 16 percent, and were trading 10 percent higher by 0820 GMT on Monday. This compared with a 3.2 percent increase in the UK mining index .FTNMX1770.
Ferrochrome, a key ingredient in stainless steel, had been hit hard by the global downturn and large amounts of capacity were shut down in South Africa, the world's largest producer of the alloy.
Chief Executive David Kovarsky said demand has improved recently, especially in the China, the world's biggest steel producer.
"The analysts say the supply-demand situation is going to get tighter over the next four to five months," he told a conference call.
"I think that there will be an increase in the fourth quarter, and will reflect a strengthening in the rand... our dollar costs have gone up, and also will reflect the continuing shortage of ferrochrome... I think it will be quite a healthy increase."
"The company has recently conducted an intensive marketing campaign in China and believes ... the current increase in both prices and demand are sustainable," a statement said.
IFM placed 50.36 million new shares, representing 10 percent of existing shares, at 44 pence per share to existing shareholder JISCO of China and new institutional investors, a statement said.
Jiuquan Iron and Steel Group Company Limited (JISCO), the largest steel maker in northwest China, has a 29 percent stake in the company.
IFM plans to use the funds to build a co-generation power plant, which will generate 11 percent of the firm's electricity needs.
The plant will also be compliant with the Clean Development Mechanism, a process by which companies can offset their carbon emissions, and will have the potential to earn about 1.4 million euros per year in Certified Emission Reduction income, it added.
The power plant -- due to be commissioned in September 2010 -- will enable the company to ramp up to 100 percent capacity, or 267,000 tonnes a year, from the current 90 percent.
Power shortages in South Africa has forced utility Eskom to cap supply at 90 percent of normal levels. ($1=.5972 Pound) (Reporting by Eric Onstad; editing by Simon Jessop and David Cowell)
