UPDATE 2-ANZ likely to agree $775 mln RBS Asian deal-source
2009-08-03 02:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (
) for about $775 million, a source briefed on the situation told Reuters on Monday.
The deal would mark ANZ's biggest overseas purchase, cement its position as a regional bank and would be a key step in Australia's fourth biggest bank's goal to generate a fifth of its revenue from Asia by 2012.
ANZ has been in talks for weeks to buy retail and commercial banking operations in six Asian markets from RBS, which is selling assets to concentrate on its home market after racking up huge losses during the credit crisis.
"I think it will happen this week at some stage. This week is more likely," the source said. The source declined to be identified as the negotiations were confidential.
ANZ's Asian aggressive expansion is in contrast to the strategy adopted by the three top Australian banks - National Australia Bank (
), Westpac Banking Corp (
), which have heavily relied on domestic growth.
"It's clearly good for (ANZ's) Asian expansion strategy if they get these assets for a reasonable price," said Mark Nathan, a fund manager with Fortis Investment Partners, which oversees about A$4 billion, including ANZ shares.
But ANZ was not in talks to buy RBS's Indian and Chinese businesses, the source said. Some analysts have questioned the wisdom of an Asian deal with RBS minus the Indian and Chinese operations, which are seen as the prized assets. ANZ raised about $2 billion in May to fund the potential acquisition. [ID:nSYD20494]
"China and India just proved to be too difficult given that ANZ doesn't have banking licence (for those countries) at this moment," the source added.
ANZ was pursuing assets in Hong Kong, Singapore, the Philippines, Indonesia, Vietnam and Taiwan, the source added. ANZ has spent about A$2 billion over the past decade in buying mostly minority stakes in banks from China to Vietnam.
An RBS spokeswoman in Hong Kong said: "We are well advanced with the sale process, however due to regulatory constraints and the confidentiality of the process we will not be commenting on any individual bidders or elements of the transaction process until its completion."
RBS could time the annnoucement to align with the release of its first-half earnings on Aug. 7, the source added.
"RBS has a small number of branches across multiple geographies... across Asia. In our view, this is what appeals to ANZ in effectively holding the potential for a bolt-on acquisition across multiple geographies to strengthen their existing presence," the report added.
ANZ shares ended up 2.5 percent, in line with gains in its peers after Goldman Sachs JBWere upgraded its rating on Australian banks.
RBS, 70 percent owned by the British government, has put the assets up for sale as part of a plan to retreat to its home market and exit or shrink in up to 36 other countries.
) was in talks to buy RBS's assets in China, India and Malaysia, a source told Reuters last month. RBS had initially planned to sell the entire group to one buyer for at least $2 billion.
ANZ is being advised Credit Suisse, while Morgan Stanley is advising RBS. ($1=A$1.20) (Additional reporting by Alison Leung in Hong Kong and Saeed Azhar in Singapore; Editing by Anshuman Daga)
