Militant urges targeting China over Uighurs
2009-08-01 14:35:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Sat, Aug 1 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Sat  EDT
"They (Chinese) must be targeted both at home and abroad. Their embassies, consulates, centers and gathering places should be targeted," Abdul-Haq al-Turkistani said in a video posted on an Islamist website on Saturday.
"Their men should be killed and captured to seek the release of our brothers who are jailed in Eastern Turkistan ... Our duty, we in Eastern Turkistan, is to continue to resist without desperation," said Abdul-Haq, described by an al Qaeda-linked website as the leader of TIP.
Abdul-Haq, whose group has launched violent attacks in the past, accused China of committing "barbaric massacres" against Muslims in Xianjiang, which TIP calls East Turkistan.
Uighurs are a Muslim people native to Xinjiang, in China's far west, and have cultural ties to Central Asia and Turkey.
Uighurs attacked Han Chinese in Urumqi, capital of Xinjiang, on July 5 after police tried to break up a protest against fatal attacks on Uighur workers at a factory in south China. Han Chinese in Urumqi launched revenge attacks later in the week.
The violence saw 197 people killed and more than 1,600 wounded, mostly Han Chinese. About 1,000 people, mostly Uighurs, have been detained in an ensuing government crackdown.
Exiled Uighur activist Rebiya Kadeer said on Wednesday that nearly 10,000 Uighurs involved in deadly riots in China's northwestern Xinjiang region went missing in one night.
Abdul-Haq's face was digitally blurred in the Arabic-language version of the video which also contained a collage of footage of the violence in the region.
Beijing does not want to lose its grip on Xinjiang. The vast territory borders Russia, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, has abundant oil reserves and is China's largest natural gas-producing region.
(Writing by Inal Ersan; editing by Michael Roddy)
