SCENARIOS-Japan set for change of govt in Aug 30 election
2009-08-03 02:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's main opposition Democratic Party maintained its lead over Prime Minister Taro Aso's conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in a newspaper poll issued on Monday ahead of a national election on Aug. 30. [ID:nT44020]
A win for the opposition Democrats would end more than 50 years of almost unbroken rule by the LDP and likely clear a policy deadlock in parliament, where the opposition controls the upper house and can delay government legislation.
The Democrats are promising to pay out allowances to families, keep the sales tax at 5 percent for the next four years and reduce bureaucrats' control of policy-making as a way to cut wasteful spending. [ID:nT187305]
Following are possible outcomes of the election for the 480 seats in parliament's lower house, where Aso's LDP and its junior coalition partner, the New Komeito, currently hold a combined 333 seats.
The Democratic Party has a good shot at either winning a majority on its own or becoming the biggest party in the lower house and forming a coalition with smaller allies, ousting the LDP from power for only the second time in its 54-year history.
Financial markets would welcome the prospect of a breakthrough in a long-running political stalemate but worry about the ability of the untested Democrats to govern and the impact of their ambitious policies on Japan's huge public debt.
Plans to hand out cash to families and rid highways of tolls have prompted worries of bigger government bond issuance and a rise in bond yields, although the Democrats say they can secure funds by cutting waste and tapping special reserves.
Even if they win a majority on their own, the Democrats need help from two small parties, one conservative and one leftist, in order to keep control of parliament's upper house.
A new coalition government, like the LDP, would stress the need to revive the economy over repairing Japan's tattered public finances and would be unlikely to make sharp shifts in policies as Japan tries to shake off its worst recession in 60 years. [nECONJP]
A victorious Democrat-led government would quickly focus on keeping voter support, probably by implementing pledges to boost household incomes ahead of an upper house election next year.
If Democrats stumble on the way to the polls, the result could be that the margin of victory is so small that there is a tug of war as both the LDP and Democrats try to lure defectors or small parties and form a ruling coalition.
That could happen if the LDP lures back conservative voters with charges that the Democrats are weak on security, while forecasts for a landslide opposition victory could also prompt some risk-averse voters to opt for the LDP.
A fuzzy outcome could spark a realignment of party allegiances, though not necessarily along clear policy lines.
Opinion polls suggest the chances at present appear slim but the LDP and its junior partner, the New Komeito, could win a simple majority and stay in power.
Without the two-thirds majority, Japan's policy stalemate would worsen, at least until the mid-2010 upper house election.
If the policy stalemate drags on, the idea of a "grand coalition" among ruling and opposition blocs could be revived as the only way to break the deadlock.
Aso's predecessor, Yasuo Fukuda, attempted to form such a coalition with then-Democratic Party leader Ichiro Ozawa, only to have the Democrats reject the notion soundly. (Additional reporting by Linda Sieg)
