RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asia growth recovrey lifts stocks, hits dlr
2009-08-02 23:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks inched up to an 11-month high on Monday on mounting evidence that the global economic recovery is picking up speed, giving a boost to oil and copper prices while hurting the safe-haven U.S. dollar.
The U.S. economy shrank at a smaller-than-expected 1 percent on an annualised pace in the second quarter, with economists expecting growth to resume in the second half of the year after the longest contraction on record.
The improving economic backdrop has contributed to an array of upbeat quarterly earnings reports around the world, prompting analyst upgrades to forecasts that are giving investors more confidence to shift funds into equities.
"Brokers have done a complete reversal in the last week, with uplifts in forecasts, uplifts in sentiment and commentary and price targets," said Jamie Spiteri, a dealer at Shaw Stockbroking in Sydney.
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS edged up 0.5 percent to the highest levels since early September, taking gains on the year to 47 percent.
But Japan's Nikkei share average
), Astellas Pharma (
"Investors in Japanese stocks can't aggressively buy or sell at this moment as the external environment is holding steady, with U.S. stocks pausing at high levels," said Yutaka Miura, a senior technical analyst at Mizuho Securities in Tokyo.
The dollar hit a 7-1/2-month low against a basket of currencies, hurt by the rebound in commodity prices on hopes the healing global economy will boost demand.
The dollar index, a gauge of its performance against a basket of currencies, was little changed at 78.327 .DXY after initially falling to 78.111, the lowest since December.
jumped to a 10-month high, while the pound
U.S. crude oil prices CLc1 hit a one-month high of $69.75 a barrel, while Shanghai copper futures SCFc3 soared 5 percent.
(Additional reporting by Sonali Paul in Melbourne and Aiko Hayashi in Tokyo; Editing by Kazunori Takada)
