Bewildered, big oil wants fruitful next Iraq round
2009-07-31 11:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Deal-makers from the world's biggest energy firms will demand more from Iraq's second oil deal bid round since the U.S.-led invasion after many walked away bewildered and empty handed from the first round last month.
Iraq is offering ten oil and gas fields at auction in late November, another chance for international energy companies to compete for access to the world's third-largest oil reserves.
Baghdad awarded only one of eight fields auctioned in the first round, offering such a low return on investment that most oil firms left the table despite having spent hundreds of millions of dollars in the pursuit of Iraq's vast oil wealth.
BP and China's CNPC won the only and biggest prize, a deal to work on one of the world's largest producing oilfields, Rumaila.
"We'll need to see better margins, it's as simple as that," said an executive at a major western oil company when asked what it would take for big oil to sign deals in the second round.
After years of talks, to realize only on the day of the auction that the sides were so far apart on something as basic as payment, frustrated many involved.
Oil firms have put a lot of money into courting Iraq since 2003: between them over half a billion dollars on training Iraqi officials, negotiating quixotic contracts, technical studies and preparing bids and more, a senior executive estimated.
"Everybody was astonished at what happened there," said an executive at a European firm. "It is hard to accept what they came out with and believe that will be the case going forward."
Another executive was blunter on what happened. "The whole process was a shambles from start to finish," he said.
KEEPING TALKS ALIVE?
"Nobody will walk away from it," said one of the executives. "We're still looking for ways to push this forward."
After Oil Minister Hussain al-Shahristani made much of the transparency of the auction, closed bilateral talks were unlikely to yield results. But oil firms, hungry for access to Middle Eastern reserves, would try anyway.
"International oil companies will push every button they can," said an Iraq oil industry observer.
Looking ahead, oil firms would try to bridge gaps on payment at a workshop in Istanbul on August 25. They are also expected to meet ministry officials in early November.
Baghdad says it can sign new deals under existing legislation, but old laws date back to Saddam Hussein's dictatorship and are untested in a democracy. Basic issues such as who holds authority to approve deals remain unresolved.
After years of isolation through sanctions and war, Iraq's oil ministry seemed unaware of the techniques firms can use to boost output, and the cost, executives said.
They bid to boost Iraq's output from oilfields auctioned by a whopping six million barrels per day (bpd), four times more than the rise Iraq targeted. By failing to agree to more deals, Iraq missed out on four million bpd of additional oil.
"The higher the production you pledge, the higher the fees, as you are trying to get difficult oil," said one executive.
Oil firms will also have to contend with rising resource nationalism in Iraq, which will likely be especially pointed as Iraqi politicians look toward national elections in January.
On a day heavy with symbolism as U.S. troops pulled out of Iraq's cities, Shahristani painted his role in the auction as fending off big oil exploitation. Big oil says they offered their services cheaply.
"We were bidding against our peers," an executive said. "The ministry thought we were all going to make huge profits. But the returns were poor even for this region. It was incredibly competitive, and there was nowhere else for us to go."
