Brazil stocks seesaw on U.S. GDP, real slips
2009-07-31 11:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks seesawed early on Friday, as data from the United States showed a slower-than-expected pace of contraction in the world's largest economy but weak consumer spending.
gained 0.43 percent to 54,714.58 in morning trading, a day after rallying on higher commodity prices and the hope of continued growth in China.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 0.21 percent to 1.879 reais per dollar.
"The (U.S.) economy's giving a sign that the pace of deterioration is slowing," said Debora Morsch, who helps manage about 500 million reais in equities at Corretora Solidus.
That's especially good news for Brazil, where analysts have expected a recovery ahead of developed nations.
U.S. gross domestic product fell at a 1 percent annual rate in the second quarter, government data showed on Friday. Analysts polled by Reuters had forecast GDP falling at a 1.5 percent rate in that time. [nN30365410]
U.S. economy indicators have a broad impact on global stock markets because it is the world's biggest economy.
Petrobras and Vale, the two stocks with the heaviest weighting in the Bovespa index, both gained. State-controlled energy company Petrobras (
"We believe that this is slightly positive for Petrobras, as it is always good to see additional financing coming in," an Itau Securities report noted.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, advanced 0.75 percent to 32.25 reais. The company this week posted an 84 percent drop in its second-quarter earnings year-on-year, but said that it expected stronger metals markets in the third quarter. [ID:nN30372565]
) jumped 4.88 percent to 9.02 reais on the back of a strong earnings report released after the markets closed on Thursday. The world's third-largest commercial aircraft manufacturer posted second-quarter earnings up nearly a third, helped by a mix of lower costs, higher revenue and a tax rebate. [ID:nN30341033]
The fall in U.S. consumer spending contributed to the strengthening of the dollar, wrote Kathy Lien, director of currency research at GFT Forex, in an emailed note.
"Safe haven flows rushed into the U.S. dollar...," she wrote. "Without the consumer participating, the U.S. economy will have a difficult time rising out of recession."
Changes in yields in Brazilian interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:> were mixed but undramatic. The Brazilian central bank yesterday hinted that the current round of monetary easing could be halting, after policymakers this year slashed 500 basis points off the benchmark interest rate to a record-low 8.75 percent.
Investors are betting that the benchmark rate will stay put for some time as the Brazilian economy emerges from recession and inflation stays relatively tame. (Reporting by Luciana Lopez; Editing by Theodore d'Afflisio)
