Commodity hunger could hobble growth prospects
2009-07-31 06:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The rally in some vital basic resources has endured into the second half of this year, but red flags are being raised too as hopes for global growth in 2010 risk being engulfed by commodity-induced inflation.
Oil and industrial metal copper, needed to fuel growth and therefore recovery, have made gains this year of 50 and 85 percent respectively.
"If, at this point, a rise in commodity prices were to drive input costs higher...this would derail any economic recovery," said Philippe Bonnefoy, founder of Swiss-based investment adviser Cedar Partners.
Investors in those markets have fed on a tide of risk-seeking investments in global equity markets, as funds re-allocated money after the global financial meltdown, and on China's restocking process.
Moving into the third quarter, China's restocking is said to have faded, leading some analysts to conclude that green shoots had been priced in by now.
But while prices saw some sharp losses earlier this week, copper is still up some 14 percent so far this quarter, while oil is holding around $67 a barrel -- keeping faith with share prices -- and gold has kept a $900 an ounce handle even as flows into exchange traded products waned.
"If rising commodity prices cause inflation (or raise inflationary expectations), they could force the U.S. Federal Reserve to raise rates too early," said Adam Robinson, director of commodities at U.S. fund Armored Wolf.
GROWTH?
"However, much of the strength has been due to the speed at which the supply side has adjusted to lower demand conditions," the bank added.
Data from leading world economies suggests the global downturn is bottoming. But for a sustainable recovery, growth is key -- and that is in short supply.
Figures due on Friday were expected to show the U.S. economy contracted for a fourth consecutive quarter, the first time that has happened in records dating to 1947.
U.S. consumer prices were expected to rise 1.6 percent in 2010, approaching the top of the Fed's 1-2 percent comfort range for keeping borrowing costs at 0-0.25 percent.
The International Energy Agency, which sees a floor for oil prices at between $50 and $60, has also warned on the risk a further rally would pose to growth.
"We have a concern that if the price moves up very quickly while economic recovery is not happening, it will have a negative impact on real economic recovery," he told Reuters last week.
Major basic resource consumer China looks set to hit its once optimistic-looking target of 8 percent growth this year, before expanding by 8.8 percent in 2010, a Reuters poll earlier this month showed
Nomura's chief Asian economist Rob Subbaraman said that commodity price gains were probably a bigger risk than generally appreciated, particularly oil prices.
"We don't want to get into the false sense of security... just because oil prices shot up in 2005-08 and there wasn't much effect on the global economy, it doesn't mean it will be the same this time."
(Additional Reporting by Susan Fenton in Hong Kong, Barbara Lewis in London and Barani Krishnan in New York)
(Reporting by Veronica Brown; editing by William Hardy)
