Russia launches Far East pipeline, eyes Exxon gas
2009-07-31 06:37:00.0
Russia launches Far East pipeline, eyes Exxon gas | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Russia launches Far East pipeline, eyes Exxon gas
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
KHABAROVSK, Russia
Fri  EDT
KHABAROVSK, Russia
"I would like to stress that the domestic market will be a priority for the gas from East Siberia and the Far East," Putin said at a ceremony to mark the launch of construction.
Exxon signed its Sakhalin-1 deal with Russia in the early 1990s under a production sharing agreement that guarantees stable returns regardless of changes in legislation and exempts the U.S. energy major from Gazprom's export monopoly on gas.
The 1,350 km (844 mile) first phase of the Sakhalin-Khabarovsk-Vladivostok pipeline is due to come on stream in the third quarter of 2011, but Gazprom and ExxonMobil have yet to agree on gas supplies.
"We will need to work intensively with Exxon to obtain these 8 to 10 billion cubic meters of gas from Sakhalin-1," Gazprom Deputy Chief Executive Alexander Ananenkov told Putin after the inauguration ceremony.
Gazprom, which has faced demand destruction for its pipeline gas in Europe since the start of 2009, says it wants to expand in the gas liquefaction business to tap new markets.
It plans to build a liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant near the pipeline's southern terminus in Vladivostok, which would produce gas for export by sea to Asia. It launched Russia's first LNG plant this year, linked to the separate Sakhalin-2 project.
The Sakhalin-1 consortium's earlier plans to supply gas to China have been put on hold, despite contracts with Beijing.
Analysts expect Russia to step up pressure on the consortium, which also includes Russia's Rosneft, Japan's Itochu
and Marubeni and India's ONGC, to sell cheap gas.
Russian Energy Minister Sergei Shmatko estimated the cost of the entire far eastern pipeline project at $11 billion. He said Gazprom's costs could be passed on to consumers by a nationwide increase in tariffs.
The pipeline will initially have capacity for 6 billion cubic meters of gas per year, rising to about 30 bcm after subsequent stages increase its length to 1,800 km (1,125 miles).
"This will satisfy the priority gas demands of a number of far eastern Russian regions and create additional potential for gas exports to the Asia-Pacific region," Gazprom said in a statement.
Shmatko, also at the inauguration ceremony in the city of Khabarovsk, said any potential supply problems related to the project would be temporary.
"There is gas there. There is the possibility of agreeing with Exxon and receiving at least 8 billion cubic meters," he said.
The project has been producing around 200,000 barrels per day of oil after starting a few years ago. But production sharing agreements such as that signed by Exxon lost favor in Russia during the economic revival from the 1998 crisis.
Under such deals, foreign partners start paying Russian taxes only after they have recouped their original investment.
"The Energy Ministry thinks that current projects, in today's environment, are not particularly attractive for Russia," Shmatko said. "We do not want to have more production sharing agreements, and we will not have them."
At the Sakhalin-2 oil and LNG project, Royal Dutch Shell ceded control after months of pressure from Russian ecological agencies, which threatened to impose huge fines on it. Gazprom now runs the project.
