UPDATE 1-Bharti, MTN may give update on talks on Monday -sources
2009-07-31 09:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Telecoms firms Bharti Airtel (
) are likely to update the market on Monday on talks aimed at merging their operations, two sources with direct knowledge of the matter said.
Exclusive negotiations towards a deal, which would see each firm pay cash and stock for a stake in the other and create the world's third-largest mobile phone group, were due to lapse on Friday.
India's Bharti and South Africa's MTN revived merger talks in May, a year after previous talks broke down over who would control a merged entity. A merger would create an emerging markets giant with more than 200 million customers across India, Africa and the Middle East.
), although its annual sales of $20 billion would be dwarfed by China Mobile's $60 billion and Vodafone's $65 billion.
"Probably it will be issued on Monday," said one source, of a possible company statement.
"You won't probably get anything until Monday," said the other source.
MTN's second-largest investor said earlier this week that the South African firm was likely to reach an agreement with Bharti by the end of August, a month later than the original deadline. [ID:nLS596350]
Shares in Bharti Airtel closed 3.1 percent lower on Monday, underperforming the broader market
that gained 1.8 percent, amid concerns India's top mobile operator may need to sweeten its offer if talks are extended.
MTN shares rose 1.19 percent to 128.50 rand by 1256 GMT, slightly trimming earlier gains. The rand
firmed a bit after comments from the sources, trading at 7.79 to the dollar.
A spokeswoman for MTN declined to comment and a spokeswoman for Bharti Airtel, when asked when the company would give an update on its talks with MTN, said, "when I can say something to you, I will issue a statement."
The deal would give both firms exposure to new markets ripe for growth, while a full merger, the eventual aim of the talks, would yield cost savings, allow for technology sharing and provide financial muscle for more expansion, analysts say.
"There could be niggling concerns on whether the extension is just to tie-up the remaining loose ends or to thrash out the financial details to garner support of MTN shareholders," V.K. Sharma, head of research at Anagram Stock Broking, said.
Market talk of Bharti sweetening its terms has hit its stock ever since MTN's top shareholder, South Africa's state pension fund Public Investment Corp, said in June that it believed there was room for improvement on the price. [ID:nL21014136].
) was advising Bharti Airtel, while Bank of America Merrill Lynch (
) were advising MTN. (Additional reporting by Narayanan Somasundaram in MUMBAI and Gugulakhe Lourie in Johannesburg) (Editing by Tony Munroe, Himani Sarkar)
