UPDATE 2-Bekaert H1 hit by destocking, writedowns
2009-07-31 06:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Belgian steel cord and wire manufacturer Bekaert (
) posted a slide in first-half profits, hit by customer de-stocking in the battered housing and auto sectors and inventory writedowns, but said the price of wire rod had likely hit a bottom.
Bekaert, in a statement on Friday, reported a 47 percent drop in first-half operating profit, because of continued weak demand in Europe and North America.
"Everyone is selling stock but nobody is buying. That has had a very significant impact in Europe," Chief Executive Bert De Graeve told a news conference.
Recurring earnings before interest and tax (REBIT) fell to 86 million euros ($121 million), just above the average estimate of 85 million euros in a Reuters poll of seven analysts.
Decreasing wire rod prices also led to a 40 million euro hit on the profit margin in the first half of 2009, De Graeve said.
"While most analysts anticipated a negative impact in the 15-20 million range, the inventory writedown came at 40 million. Hence while published REBIT was in line with estimates, the underlying performance was significantly better," Bank Degroof analyst Bernard Hanssens said in a note to clients.
Bekaert shares were down 0.14 percent at 84.4 euros at 0935 GMT, against a 0.84 percent rise for the wider Bel20
Bekaert, whose products are used to reinforce tyres and concrete, said visibility remained limited.
"We hope that the destocking effect will disappear after the holiday period in the mature markets," De Graeve said.
He said Bekaert saw no further negative impact on its profit margin from raw material prices, which were stabilising.
"Wire rod prices will probably not go down further in the third quarter," De Graeve said.
Bekaert has a quarter of the world's market share in steel cord and is rapidly expanding in China, where it has about 7,000 staff, a third of its total workforce.
The group said it was able to capitalise on the rebound of the Chinese economy after the Chinese New Year. Favourable currency movements, including the Chinese yuan against the euro, also helped sales and boosted profit in the Asia-Pacific region, the group said.
"Since the growth pattern of China, India, Brazil and Turkey will stay high, we still estimate that Bekaert's strategic decision to reposition its business towards emerging markets is favourable for future value creation," Hanssens said.
Royal Bank of Scotland analyst Pieter Zwinkels said he would not change his 2009 estimates for now, but would raise estimates for 2010 by 15-20 percent, given Bekaert's focus on China.
The group, which also produces window film for houses and cars for insulation and to hold glass shards, said net debt fell to 621.8 million euros from 627 million at the end of 2008, mainly as a result of a reduction in working capital.
Bekaert had no plans to issue more bonds in the near future, he said.
The group issued two bonds in March, which were fully subscribed and raised a total of 300 million euros. ($1=.7095 euro) (Editing by Simon Jessop)
