HK, China shares end July on strong note
2009-07-31 05:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong and China stocks rose on Friday, regaining their composure from Wednesday's steep sell-off, after the central bank reassured investors it would stick to a loose monetary policy and would not curb lending.
Both markets recorded another month of hefty gains in July, the seventh successive monthly gain for Shanghai and the fifth winning month for Hong Kong, fuelled by positive earnings momentum and analyst upgrades.
In the absence of a major disappointment in U.S. economic data due next week, or in corporate earnings that will continue to trickle in through August, analysts expect the stock markets to continue their upward trajectory.
"A lot of people, including some long funds out there, are still underweight on the market because they didn't buy the recovery story. But there is only so long you can wait, you have put that money to work," said Andrew Sullivan, sales trader with MainFirst Securities.
China's 4 trillion yuan ($585.5 billion) stimulus package, unprecedented lending growth and stabilising economy have helped to propel a more than doubling of the Shanghai index from last October's two-year low and fuelled a 43 percent surge in Hong Kong shares.
Power companies, which have lagged the market rally this year, jumped on Friday, after Datang International Power Generation (
Datang jumped its 10 percent daily limit to 10.47 yuan in Shanghai, while its Hong Kong-listed shares (
) climbed 5.5 percent in Hong Kong. The country's fourth largest power producer plans to take a 25 percent stake in a 25 billion yuan ($3.66 billion) nuclear project in Hunan, China, chief financial officer Wang Xiaobin told Reuters on Thursday. [ID:nHKG283866]
finished up 339.25 points at 20,573.33 after scaling an 11-month high of 20,712.66 earlier amid strong corporate earnings forecasts and analyst upgrades.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, was up 1.1 percent at 12,123.59.
"The liquidity rush will continue to drive up Hong Kong asset prices and the performance of property stocks," said analysts with Morgan Stanley led by Derek Kwong.
) jumped 5.8 percent, while Hysan Development (
) vaulted 10.1 percent, after both stocks were raised to an overweight rating by the investment house.
rose 2.72 percent on Friday, the most in two months, to end at 3,412.062 points. The index scored a 15 percent gain in July for its biggest monthly rise in two years.
The People's Bank of China pledged to maintain a loose monetary policy to support the economy and said it would ensure sustainable credit growth without resorting to heavy-handed quotas to rein in lending.
The central bank statement was released after Wednesday's 5 percent stock market tumble, its biggest daily drop in eight months in record volume, triggered by fears of loan curbs.
"Yes, stock valuations are not cheap, but as long as the loose monetary policy is not reversed, liquidity will remain ample and there are always good stories to tell in a bullish market," said Chen Daqing, analyst at First-Trust Fund Management Co.
Gaining Shanghai A shares overwhelmed losers by 862 to 29. Turnover in Shanghai A shares rose slightly to 223 billion yuan ($32 billion) from Thursday's 219 billion yuan.
Steel companies rose on prospects of rising demand and after the China Iron and Steel Association vowed on Friday to keep pressing for favourable results in annual iron ore price negotiations, raising hopes that costs could be lowered.
) rose 2.18 percent to 17.35 yuan, while Wuhan Steel (
Brokerage shares rose as China Everbright Securities prepared to set the price range for its pending initial public offering in Shanghai, the second IPO by a Chinese securities company. CITIC Securities Co (
), the biggest listed brokerage, rose 2.87 percent to 38.03 yuan. (Editing by Edmund Klamann and Chris Lewis)
