TOPWRAP 1-Markets fizz on earnings but Japan deflation haunts
2009-07-31 03:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan unveiled a record deflation figure on Friday, complicating the outlook for global recovery just as stockmarkets racked up their best performance in months, driven by better corporate results and economic data.
The Nikkei index rose to a its highest close in ten months, but the fall of 1.7 percent in core consumer prices for the year to June stoked investor foreboding over consumer demand in the world's second-biggest economy as job losses grow and wages fall.
Faced with the spectre of a 1930s style-depression after credit and housing markets imploded last year, governments and central banks have since pumped trillions of dollars of stimulus into the world economy.
The strategy seems to have worked, with evidence that activity is picking up after a sharp contraction, but doubts remain whether the fragile recovery can continue on its own.
Investors will try to glean more clues to the speed of that recovery from U.S. second-quarter GDP figure to be released later in the day. Some economists believe it could mark the end of the sharp recession, as signs pointing to growth have resumed in the second half of the year.
In Asia, stocks appeared poised for double-digit gains in July as investor funds poured in on bets the region's growth engine would lead the global economy out of recession, pushing South Korea's benchmark index to a one-year high. [ID:nSP485652]
"Earnings for the April-June quarter have been stronger than expected and there has been a fair number of upward forecast revisions, all of which is improving sentiment and keeping the market supported," said Yumi Nishimura, deputy general manager in the investment advisory section at Daiwa Securities SMBC in Tokyo.
In Japan, a slew of solid earnings buoyed investor confidence, with Sony Corp (
) posting a loss smaller than expected, though Mizuho Financial Group (
), one of the few Japanese banks to invest in toxic assets backed by U.S. subprime mortgages, reported an unexpected fourth straight quarterly loss.
), the country's biggest bank, is expected to post a profit when it releases results later on Friday. [ID:nT64334]
Shares in Seoul posted a gain of 12 percent on the month after foreign investors bought a net 5.8 trillion won for their biggest monthly net purchase ever, with Samsung Electronics (
) rallying on hopes its third-quarter earnings would surpass the second quarter, in which it posted its best quarterly profits in 2-? years. [ID:nSEO372304]
In the United States, the number of Americans getting long-term unemployment aid shrank to its smallest in three months in mid-July, according to U.S. government data that implied a slowing pace of layoffs as the economy stabilises. [ID:NN30613836]
The weekly jobs data, together with a string of stronger-than-expected quarterly corporate profits, sparked a further rally in U.S. stocks, with the benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 stock index
Oil prices extended gains along with other commodities, giving a boost to energy shares such as Sinopec Corp (
). The dollar and government bonds lost ground as investors favoured risky assets, such as higher-yielding currencies and equities.
In China, new lending in July could be less than 500 billion yuan ($73 billion), an official newspaper cited an unnamed source as saying on Friday, making for a big drop from average monthly levels of 1.23 trillion in the first half.
Beijing has allowed the rampant bank lending to continue unhindered until now in the belief that easy money was needed to fuel economic recovery, but in recent weeks officials have voiced concern that the lending could also fuel stock and property market bubbles. [ID:nPEK98842] (Writing by Clarence Fernandez; Editing by David Fox)
