UPDAT 1-Brazil's Vale sees metals markets rebound in 2009
2009-07-30 16:08:00.0
UPDAT 1-Brazil's Vale sees metals markets rebound in 2009 | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
UPDAT 1-Brazil's Vale sees metals markets rebound in 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
Thu, Jul 30 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Thu  EDT
(Adds comments on China, details, background)
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 30
), the world's largest iron ore producer, said on Thursday it expected metals markets to continue recovering as the world economy emerges from the financial crisis.
"Global industrial production has started to recover, that's clear, and our business is deeply connected to industrial production," Vale CFO Fabio Barbosa said in an investor conference call.
Barbosa and other company officials on the call pointed to iron ore spot market prices in China, which are now above $90 per tonne, and demand recovery for both non-ferrous metals, such as nickel, as well as stainless steel as signs of improvement.
Vale's share price was up 1.95 percent on Brazil's Bovespa stock exchange in morning trading, tracking a broad increase in commodities and equities prices around the world on Thursday.
The officials did not provide specific guidance on possible ore prices later this year or how much Vale's production could increase following earlier moves to idle capacity.
Ferrous Minerals Director Jose Carlos Martins said Vale is now selling around 70 percent of its ore to China on a cost and freight basis, meaning the sender covers shipping, in efforts to ensure space in the growing Chinese market.
Previously Vale had said it sold only free on board, or FOB, in which the buyer paid the shipping costs.
When markets collapsed after the economic crisis Vale had to change its usual procedure of waiting for Asian clients to pick up ore in Brazil and began building up its own fleet as shipping rates rose to almost $40 per tonne, Martins said later in a press conference.
With the soaring spot market price of ore in China, Asian clients are again sending ships to pick up ore on an FOB basis -- but Martins said the company was now much less dependent on spot market shipping rates.
The spot price for Vale's ore in China is now above the benchmark sale price agreed on last year, he said.
When asked about talks with China, Martins said Vale was waiting for Australia's BHP Billiton (
"The Chinese are accepting neither 33 percent nor 28 percent," said Martins.
) on charges of espionage, adding additional tensions to talks with the two Australian giants.
