Global-tracked equity fund weekly inflows hit 1-year high-EPFR
2009-07-31 12:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Investors put their money to work this week, pouring $9.5 billion into equity funds around the world, the highest weekly inflow since June 2008, EPFR Global said on Friday.
Bond funds saw a net $4.36 billion in fresh money, with global and emerging market fixed income funds enjoying their 16th consecutive week of inflows for the week ending July 29, the fund tracker said in a release.
Funds focussed on Asia ex-Japan equities, high yield bonds and U.S. bonds all absorbed a net $1 billion.
Commodity sector funds also saw fresh inflows, lifting year-to-date inflows to $6.5 billion. Energy sector and telecom funds were the only two sector fund groups to see outflows last week.
Indeed, money market funds had net outflows of $18 billion for the week, bringing year-to-date to near $200 billion.
Emerging markets continued to be the darling of investors, with dedicated BRIC equity funds seeing net inflows for a 19th straight week.
India equity funds took in a year-to-date high of $211 million in the most recent week, while China and Greater China stock funds saw $711 million in fresh money.
China's stock market
has surged 85 percent this year, and hefty gains for some other emerging markets are fueling some concerns that asset bubbles may be emerging.
With the U.S. economy expected to emerge from a recession in the second half of 2009, fund managers have been steadily chipping away at their cash piles and choosing financials, technology, consumer-related and real estate stocks.
The latest Reuters asset allocation polls released on Thursday showed leading investors in the United States, Japan, continental Europe and Britain have increased their holdings of equities to levels last seen just before the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September. [ID:nLAG003614]
Safe-haven cash holdings have also hit their lowest level since May 2007, the survey showed. (Reporting by Kevin Plumberg; Editing by Kim Coghill)
