Stocks rise on recovery hopes but concerns linger
2009-07-30 16:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Economic recovery hopes, buoyed by a drop in the number of Americans staying on jobless benefits and good company earnings, lifted world stock prices on Thursday, despite concerns any upturn will be slow.
) added to the positive market tone on Wall Street, where the benchmark S&P 500 index rose to its highest intraday level in about nine months. Oil prices also firmed after dropping sharply on Wednesday .
Companies with solid results on Thursday included mobile phone maker Motorola Inc MOT.N, whose shares ended 9.4 percent higher; industrial conglomerate Tyco International Ltd (
), up 2.9 percent; and MasterCard Inc (
), up about 3 percent.
U.S. jobless claims for the latest week rose slightly more than expected, but the number of workers staying on jobless rolls was the lowest in three months, and the four-week moving average for new claims, considered to be a better gauge of underlying trends, also dropped.
"The headline number in the jobless claims report was slightly worse than expected, but the continuing claims component was getting better, so that bodes well for the U.S. economy going forward," said Matthew Strauss, senior currency strategist at RBC Capital in Toronto.
But updates from engineering, oil, chemical and car groups revealed few signs the economy was improving and executives spoke of tough conditions with little light in sight.
), the world's largest publicly traded oil company, reported a 66 percent drop in quarterly profit as natural gas and crude oil prices slid from a year ago and the global recession hurt demand for fuel.
"It looks disappointing," said Phil Weiss, an analyst at Argus Research. "They missed on margins and production."
"The only conclusion you can draw from the earnings season so far is that the recovery people were expecting by the fourth quarter is looking elusive," said Philippe Gijsels, strategist at Fortis in Brussels.
), a bellwether for the euro zone's leading economy, suffered a steep decline in earnings and analysts predicted worse to come.
"We are not banking on a quick recovery," Royal Dutch Shell (
Analysts said the promise of an early economic rebound, which has driven a rise in global stock prices over the past four months, was beginning to fade in most sectors.
German unemployment unexpectedly fell in July but would have jumped if one-off effects were ignored, data showed.
"Until we have a real recovery in employment there is going to be no recovery in the economy, given that 70 percent of the economy is consumer-driven," Gijsels said.
But with investors still apparently upbeat, the Dow Jones industrial average
rose 83.74 points or about 0.92 percent to end unofficially at 9,154.46, off its highs for the session after topping the 9,200 level for the first time since November. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 11.60 points, or 1.19 percent, to finish unofficially at 986.75, after two days of losses.
In Europe, equities hit their highest closing levels in nearly nine months. Britain's FTSE 100 closed up 1.85 percent, or 84.08 points at 4,631.61 points, its highest since January 6.
Japan's Nikkei average also hit its best close in nine months, lifted by a surge in Honda Motor (
Oil prices surged more than 5 percent to near $67 a barrel, nearly erasing a 5.8 percent drop on Wednesday after U.S. data showed a steep build in the top consumer's crude inventories. U.S. light crude oil futures were up $3.57 at $66.92.
U.S. Treasury prices rose, after solid demand for an auction of $28 billion in seven-year notes allayed fears over waning appetite for U.S. government debt.
Euro zone economic sentiment improved in July, data showed, signaling the economy is bottoming out but not yet growing.
Europe's second-quarter earnings season gathered pace with its biggest day so far, and companies promised investors they would slash costs as they struggle to maintain dividend payouts in the face of sluggish sales.
BASF BASF.DE, the world's biggest chemicals group, posted sharply lower profit and said it might cut its dividend. It is a good barometer of consumer demand because it supplies a range of industries from electronics to construction.
"There are no signs of an early economic recovery. The outlook looks bleak," it said in a statement.
Across the world, companies have managed to squeeze out profits by slashing costs, cutting jobs and closing plants.
Fortis' Gijsels said cost-cutting was playing a disproportionate role in company earnings.
"It's all coming from cost-cutting on a low revenue base. But cost-cutting is actually adding to losses in revenue across the economy -- if you cut costs, you're cutting somebody else's revenues," he said.
China's central bank vowed to maintain a loose monetary policy and use market tools, not quota-style controls, to ensure sustainable credit growth to support economic recovery in a statement that analysts said was intended to calm investors.
