UPDATE 4-China's wind industry boosts American Superconductor
2009-07-30 15:25:00.0
(Reuters) - A strong wind industry in China and an even stronger outlook for the sector helped American Superconductor Corp (
"China, in particular the China wind industry, is the primary driver for our growth today," CEO Greg Yurek said in a conference call with analysts.
In 2008, China grew the installed based of wind turbines to about 12 GW and early this year declared that they intended to add another 10 GW or more in 2009, Yurek noted.
According to the Global Wind Energy Council, China could well be the leader in wind energy development.
Broadpoint Amtech analyst John Hardy said American Superconductor will continue to benefit from the Chinese government's increasing commitment towards wind energy and new customers in China.
Hardy, who has a "neutral" rating on the stock, expects continued strong results at the company.
He said the country will continue to generate most of the company's revenue in the next few quarters.
"But the reality is, looking further, as other economies continue to rebound, we would expect our percentage of revenue from China to gradually decline," Fredette said.
Analysts cited continued strong orders from American Superconductor's largest customer - Sinovel Wind - for the company's better-than-expected results and outlook raise.
Sinovel Wind, which started manufacturing wind turbines less than four years ago, is China's largest wind turbine maker and one of the top 10 in the world, and accounts for nearly 70 percent of the company's revenue.
On Wednesday, American Superconductor said it has accelerated shipment of wind turbine components to Sinovel Wind, increasing the overall contract value by $20 million to $470 million.
Analyst Hardy said American Superconductor's customer concentration problem will dissipate though this year and 2010.
"It is obviously a very good problem to have when your largest customer continues to accelerate orders," he said.
For 2009, the company now sees adjusted earnings of 41 cents to 47 cents a share on revenue of $260 million to $270 million.
For the first quarter, the company posted net income of $1.8 million, or 4 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $6.1 million, or 14 cents a share, a year ago. Excluding items, it earned 12 cents a share. Revenue grew 83 percent to $73 million.
Analysts were expecting it to break even and post revenue of $58.1 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
American Superconductor shares were up $6.41 at $32.69 in afternoon trade Thursday. They touched a high of $36.47 earlier in the session and were among the top percentage gainers on Nasdaq. (Editing by Jarshad Kakkrakandy, Vinu Pilakkott)
