Casino shares surge, slip after Sands results
2009-07-30 18:49:00.0
Casino shares surge, slip after Sands results | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Casino shares surge, slip after Sands results
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Thu  EDT
) post better-than-expected earnings on Thursday, but rival Las Vegas Sands Corp (
) came up short in Las Vegas, putting an end to the latest rally in the volatile sector.
Wynn shares ended the day up 13 percent, but lost 2 percent after the close, while Sands, which reported after the close, ended the day 9 percent higher, fell 11 percent in post-market trading.
"Sands had very weak property results in Las Vegas," said Susquehanna Financial analyst Robert LaFleur.
), which operates nine Las Vegas Strip casino-hotels and will report quarterly earnings on Monday, gained 7 percent on the day, but slipped nearly 3 percent after hours.
All three companies are expected to struggle in Las Vegas with the opening later this year by MGM, and partner Dubai World, of the multi-tower CityCenter project on the Las Vegas Strip.
"We continue to worry about supply in Las Vegas," said Sanford Bernstein analyst Janet Brashear, noting that Wynn's average hotel rate fell 36 percent year-over-year in the second quarter, compared with a 30 percent drop in the first quarter.
Wynn said Las Vegas net casino revenue rose to $124.3 million from $120.7 million a year earlier and non-casino revenue increased 9.4 percent to $231.9 million, mainly due to the opening in December of its Encore resort.
Total net revenue fell 12 percent to $723.3 million, missing the $733.6 million forecast by analysts.
But Wynn reported an adjusted profit of 9 cents per share, handily beating analysts' average forecast of a 1-cent-per- share loss, according to Reuters Estimates.
The company filed earlier this month in Hong Kong for an initial public offering of its assets in Macau, where it operates one casino and will open a second next year.
Both MGM and Sands have come close to violating loan covenants dictating the level at which earnings as a ratio of debt must be maintained. Sands said it is continuing to talk with its Macau lenders about options, including a public offering of its Macau assets.
"We hope to decide on which route to take within the next 30 days," said Chief Executive Sheldon Adelson.
In addition to a potential IPO, Adelson said Sands is exploring whether to access money from construction companies interested in restarting its stalled Macau projects, private equity financing, or raising cash in Macau through a bond offering.
"The terms are looking better as each day goes by," he said.
Macau is also facing the prospect of new casino supply, but the advent of a new chief executive for the Chinese gambling enclave is leading to talk China could begin to ease Macau visa restrictions put in place last year.
"Clearly that represents our next move in China," said CEO Steve Wynn. "There is no other jurisdiction in Asia that would warrant a Wynn Resorts focus."
In the United States, Wynn said the company is bidding, along with six or seven others, to operate a planned gambling complex at New York's Aqueduct racetrack.
For the second quarter, the company reported an adjusted profit of 1 cent per share, higher than the average Wall Street estimate of a 1 cent per share loss.
Revenue fell 4.8 percent to $1.06 billion, missing the $1.09 billion forecast by analysts.
LaFleur expected Sands' Las Vegas units to post EBITDAR of $112 million, but the total came in at just $78 million. The miss in Macau was a much smaller $10 million.
"Overall, we're still concerned about Las Vegas, but we look at Las Vegas Sands as a play on Asia," said Sterne, Agee & Leach analyst David Bain.
On the New York Stock Exchange, Sands' shares closed at $11.15 and MGM's at $7.40. Wynn shares closed at $50.15 on Nasdaq.
(Reporting by Deena Beasley; editing by Andre Grenon)
