INSTANT VIEW: Moldova's pro-Western parties plan coalition
2009-07-30 09:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Moldova's pro-Western opposition planned on Thursday to form a coalition after beating the ruling Communists in an election that could decide whether the former Soviet republic swings away from Russia to Europe.
SABINE FREIZER, EUROPE PROGRAMME DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL
"The question is how well the opposition can unify itself. And there will be worries in Russia about Moldova moving closer to the European Union and NATO, but so far the EU has shown little interest in Moldova so the worries are largely groundless.
NATALIA LESHCHENKO, ANALYST AT IHS GLOBAL INSIGHT:
"A liberal government is highly likely, which means more cooperation with Europe (Romania in particular), and market-economy reform.
"Relations with Russia may not suffer too much, in particular if Lupu is elected as president as he is an acceptable partner for Moscow to deal with, and negotiations will be necessary to move forward the resolution of separatist conflict in Transdniestria and the question of a Russian military presence in the region.
"Another question is whether Moldova's smooth regime change is a one-off event or a signal of a turning point in CIS politics which could challenge autocratic regimes across the bloc; as things stand now, it is rather the former than the latter.
"Even if Moldova's current election is not a start of a new wave in the CIS, it is still a useful reminder to post-Soviet voters that the inspiring political changes of the 1990s are not merely a part of history but of everyday life."
CHRISTOPHER GRANVILLE, TRUSTED SOURCES RESEARCH, LONDON
"The very large scale financing from China that was announced last week, has the effect of almost transcending the domestic political world because the traditional competition between Russian and Euro-Atlantic-oriented forces seems irrelevant when there's a third outside party that's prepared to come in and support the country on a scale undreamt of in Moscow, Brussels or Washington to date."
ALEXEI VLASOV, POLITICAL ANALYST, MOSCOW STATE UNIVERSITY
"Moscow was interested in Voronin's victory as a factor in maintaining stability. Voronin in recent months showed he was open to a political direction favorable to Russia.
But as long as the Communists are not completely defeated, I think Moscow will be interested in Moldova's quick escape from this political crisis. In principle, if a coalition between the Communists and the opposition were formed, I don't think Moscow would view this too negatively."
BOGDAN TIRDEA, INDEPENDENT POLITICAL ANALYST, CHISINAU:
"The main result of this election is that the Communists were finally defeated by the liberal opposition. One can hardly overestimate the importance of this -- despite all of the Communists' clamorous statements and this open support by Russia, they still received less votes than in April.
"Second, a 'purely democratic government' may be formed. But the liberals still won't be able to elect their own president. In conditions of crisis, when the budget coffers are empty and it is far from clear if Moldova gets the promised Chinese and Russian loans, the situation will simply become precarious.
"We may have a new early election, and its results will really be unpredictable, because democrats may have already discredited themselves by this time."
SAM GREENE, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CARNEGIE MOSCOW CENTER
"The communists clearly remain the single biggest party in parliament and the most powerful political force in the country and even if they lose domination of parliament, and the presidency, their networks and their mastery of the apparatus of the State means they would be a formidable opposition force.
"It would not be their first time in opposition. The reality is that anybody who comes to power, any coalition, is going to have to find some kind of accommodation with the communists and that will, to a certain extent, shape how the coalition is formed.
"With the initial round of elections that went haywire, (Vladimir) Voronin wanted to create a system where he could rule without being formally in power. The chances are that now he will not have the degree of influence and power he wanted to have."
VITALIE ANDRIEVSCHI, DIRECTOR OF AVE.MD THINKTANK:
"The main outcome of this election is that Voronin is finally going. During his eight years in power, he was still doing something at an earlier stage but then he turned into a factor hampering Moldova's development. Voronin had long become a figure of yesterday. Yesterday he was still able to do something, today -- not.
"Under Voronin, we all slept through a chance to become an innovative economy. We instead have built a fiscal type of economy which survives only thanks to the police squeezing cash from businesses.
"As for Moldova's policy, I do not see any sharp turns in it. Yes, the policy of European integration will be activated, but at the same time ties with Russia will be developed as well. But those will be more pragmatic, economic relations rather than sheer politics. And of course, ties with Romania will only be improving."
STELIAN TANASE, POLITICAL COMMENTATOR, BUCHAREST
"The opposition was wrong to not be more determined in this election, they did not collaborate and it shows."
"As it is, the result is a success but not as big as would have been preferred."
"It matters very much to pay attention to Moscow's and Kiev's reaction. Bucharest's reaction matters less because there are all these suspicions."
(Reporting by Conor Sweeney in Moscow, Peter Apps in London and Dmitry Solovyov in Chisinau; Editing by Janet McBride and Ingrid Melander)
