China says no to foreign rights monitors for Tibet
2012-11-09 07:12:00.0
(Reuters) - China will not allow foreign observers into restive Tibet to probe human rights abuses, an official said on Friday, dismissing mounting international pressure for an independent investigation in the troubled mountainous region.
Some 68 Tibetans have set themselves on fire since March 2011 in protest against Chinese rule over Tibetan regions. At least 56 have died, according to Tibetan rights groups.
At least eight of the self-immolations had been reported in the Tibet Autonomous Region, a province-level administrative area under the central government. The rest occurred in Tibetan-populated areas of other provinces in southwestern China.
The United Nations' most senior human rights official, Navi Pillay, urged China last week to allow independent human rights monitors to visit Tibet and address deep-rooted frustrations.
"We hope that (people) from all fields within the country and outside go to Tibet often to look around, study and travel, but as to some other aspects, we are not that welcoming," said Qiangba Puncog, chairman of Tibet's rubber stamp regional assembly.
"(Those) who think there are any problems in Tibet, human rights problems, arrogantly wanting to pursue investigations, to use these situations to propose entering Tibet, (I'm) afraid we feel it's inappropriate," he told reporters on the sidelines of a Communist Party congress.
A total of seven Tibetans have set fire to themselves in the past six days, according to Tibetan rights group International Campaign for Tibet, the highest frequency of self-immolations since the wave of anti-China demonstrations began.
China has barred foreign journalists from Tibet and prevented many others from travelling to surrounding Tibetan regions, making independent verification difficult.
Qiangba Puncog, however, told a room packed with reporters that "(we) welcome all of you to go to Tibet to see Tibet's real situation. Listening is false, seeing is believing." He did not say when foreign reporters may be allowed back in.
China has branded the self-immolators "terrorists" and criminals and has blamed exiled Tibetans and the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, for inciting them, charges he denies.
"The so-called Tibetan self-immolation problem was blown up in other countries, (they) say Tibet is burning, Tibet is not burning," Qiangba Puncog said, adding that the self-immolators in the regional capital, Lhasa, were "imported" from other Tibetan areas and that the incidents were planned.
The self-immolations have been concentrated around six to seven monasteries out of more than 10,000 in the region, Qiangba Puncog said.
"External Tibetan separatist forces and the Dalai clique are sacrificing the lives of others to achieve ulterior political motives," Lobsang Gyaltsen, Tibet's deputy governor, said.
"We believe that this is contrary to humanity's common conscience and morality, (they) will never achieve their evil purposes and will also suffer intense condemnation," he said.
Beijing considers Nobel peace laureate the Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in India in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Chinese rule, a separatist. The Dalai Lama says he merely seeks greater autonomy for his Himalayan homeland.
(Additional reporting by Hui Li; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
FREE TIBET!!!
Nov 09, 201212:06pm EST--
¡°(Those) who think there are any problems in Tibet, human rights problems, arrogantly wanting to pursue investigations, to use these situations to propose entering Tibet, (I¡¯m) afraid we feel it¡¯s inappropriate,¡± he told reporters on the sidelines of a Communist Party congress. You need only look at the hypocrisy of their government towards the people of China to understand that all they are is a bunch of thugs. They do not believe that their people deserve anything better than a dictatorship against the proletariat. The leadership of China believe they are free even if their people are not, yet in actuality they are captive to their own corruption. Sad really ¨C just pathetic.
Nov 09, 201212:10pm EST--
The murderous and illegal annexation by Red China of peaceful Tibet has its earlier example in Hitler¡¯s unlawful and murderous annexation of Poland and Czechoslovakia prior to WWII. China¡¯s shameful imperialism which it condemns in every other major power except itself will long go down as one of the worst and murderous travesties of justice for year to come.
Nov 09, 20122:46pm EST--
