FACTBOX-European firms see no quick fix for global economy
2009-07-30 11:24:00.0
(Reuters) - A string of major European companies unveiled better than expected results on Thursday, prompting a strong stock market rally, but hardly any of them had a good word to say about the broader economy. [ID:nLU417560]
Below are quotes on the prospects for economic recovery from companies. Click on the link in brackets for the company's results story
"The crisis is still there, the average level of production is more or less the same ... For the mid-term we remain optimistic but short-term we remain prudent."
"Looking forward, market conditions remain difficult and operators continue to be selective about their investments. We reiterate our view that our addressable market should be down between 8 percent and 12 percent at constant currency in 2009."
"Our business performance, in the context of tough global economic conditions, has been better than we anticipated."
"Overall, we think that the downturn seems to have bottomed out and there seems to be stabilization at a low level. The trough appears to have been reached in North America, and China is again growing faster. But we see no signs of a sustained upturn. There is still the danger of another painful setback due to overcapacities, bankruptcies and growing unemployment."
"We expect the overall economic backdrop to remain difficult over the next 12 months but we think we're well placed to meet the challenges ahead."
"We are a bit more cautious than others. The second quarter was bit tougher than we expected ... There are signs activity is stabilising in North America and sectors such as financials are improving but we can't say these recovery signs are widespread."
"The current crisis is likely to continue until well into 2011. I don't think there will be a quick economic recovery."
"The economic trend and its impact on the luxury and premium goods sector in the next two years are difficult to estimate ... 2009 will be an extremely difficult year with regard to the overall economic situation. Especially, the default risk is difficult to assess until the end of 2009."
"The difficult macroeconomic conditions, together with the downturn in consumer electronics markets, have been exacerbated by destocking in the global supply chain. Although demand has stabilised since the start of the year, we have yet to see any signs of a sustained recovery."
"Low demand and new refining capacity coming on stream in 2009 are likely to keep refining margins below those seen in recent years, unless serious disruptions occur on the supply side."
"The depth and length of the downturn is ... having some effect on even our most resilient businesses," the company says. "We see current trends broadly continuing with overall underlying revenue and operating profit remaining under pressure particularly in advertising and promotion markets."
Chief Operating Officer Patrick Pelata says scrapping schemes designed to help boost flagging demand for cars had helped, giving the industry a "transition year".
"However, the crisis is still there -- scrapping incentives can't wipe out a structural crisis," he said.
"Energy demand is weak ... Conditions are likely to remain challenging for some time, and we are not banking on a quick recovery."
"We think things are gradually settling down into the trough. However, we don't think that we're going to see any significant recovery until probably the end of next year," Chief Executive Geoff Cooper tells Reuters.
"The economic environment in which we are working was extremely difficult in 2008, with pressure coming from all sides and the consumer down-trading across the board. In 2009 this pressure has not abated, however, overall the position has not deteriorated."
