CORRECTED - FOREX-Dollar falls as firmer equities lift sentiment
2009-07-30 08:07:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell broadly on Thursday as firmer equity markets helped the euro and perceived higher risk currencies to recoup some of the previous day's sharp losses.
European stocks suggested risk appetite was healthy, with the FTSEurofirst 300 index
gaining 1.2 percent, while U.S. S&P 500 futures SPc1 rose by 0.7 percent.
The euro was also helped higher by data showing an improvement in euro zone economic sentiment in July, as well as an unexpected fall in German unemployment, which were seen as an encouraging sign for the region's recovery prospects. [ID:nLT1519] [ID:nLU456250].
Its gains were limited, however, with trade relatively quiet as many investors stayed on the sidelines ahead of key U.S. gross domestic product data for the second quarter on Friday.
"We are seeing a bit of a bounce today after the dollar's gains yesterday, but I don't see currencies moving much further than this ahead of tomorrow's U.S. GDP data," said nabCapital currency strategist Gavin Friend.
At 1132 GMT, the dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six other major currencies, fell 0.4 percent to 79.314 .DXY. It hit a seven-month low of 78.315 on Tuesday before staging a strong rebound on Wednesday.
, up 0.2 percent on the day. It had slid to $1.4007 on trading platform EBS on Wednesday, the lowest since July 15, after rising to $1.4305 the day before.
Perceived higher risk and commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian and Canadian dollars recovered some of the losses suffered on Wednesday, with sentiment buoyed by gains in Chinese shares and a recovery in oil prices CLc1.
China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
ended 1.7 percent higher, recapturing some of the previous day's five-percent loss after a senior central banker reiterated loose monetary policies would not be reversed.
"There is a general bid tone to high yielders such as the Australian dollar," said Christian Lawrence, currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets, also pointing to rises in U.S. stock market futures.
"The Chinese stock market is almost acting as a leading indicator for U.S. markets," he added.
The New Zealand dollar also rose, but underperformed other commodity-linked currencies after its central bank kept interest rates at a record low of 2.5 percent but left the door open to further cuts while warning that a strong currency was adding to the risks to an economic recovery. [ID:nWEL467297].
Elsewhere, a survey by Nationwide showing UK house prices rose 1.3 percent this month boosted sterling, which rose 0.7 percent against the dollar
Market players will keep an eye on the U.S. Treasury's record $28 billion sale of seven-year notes later in the day, following a tepid reception, especially from foreign investors, to auctions of two- and five-year paper earlier in the week.
The key focus for the week, however, is on the U.S. GDP data for clues on the extent to which the world's largest economy is recovering from a deep downturn.
The economy is forecast to have contracted by 1.50 percent in the second quarter after a fall of 5.5 percent in the first quarter. ECON. (Additional reporting by Nick Vinocur and Tamawa Desai in London; editing by Stephen Nisbet)
