FOREX-Dollar falls as stock advance lifts risk appetite
2009-07-30 09:30:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar fell against a basket of currencies on Thursday as a firmer tone in world equity and commodity markets eroded demand for the greenback as a safe haven.
U.S. stock futures SPc1 pointed to a higher open, while European shares
That boosted investors' appetite for risk and helped the euro and perceived higher-risk currencies to recoup some of the previous day's sharp losses.
"(Stock) futures are looking good," said Ronald Simpson, managing director of global currency analysis at Action Economics in Tampa, Florida. "It's generally the risk appetite scenario once again."
Moves in major currencies were limited, however, with many investors staying on the sidelines ahead of key U.S. gross domestic product data for the second quarter on Friday.
"Traders are holding back a little bit until we see the U.S. GDP number tomorrow. That's going to be quite important for overall sentiment," Simpson said.
In early New York trading, the ICE Futures U.S. dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six major currencies, fell 0.4 percent to 79.327 .DXY. It hit a 2009 low of 78.315 on Tuesday, before staging a strong rebound on Wednesday.
, up 0.2 percent on the day. It fell to a two-week low against the dollar on Wednesday.
The euro was also helped higher by data showing an improvement in euro zone economic sentiment in July, as well as an unexpected fall in German unemployment, which were seen as an encouraging sign for the region's recovery prospects. [ID:nLT1519] [ID:nLU456250].
The dollar rose 0.6 percent to 95.60 yen, extending gains after government data showing a drop in continuing claims boosted optimism about the U.S. labor market.
The number of U.S. workers filing new claims for jobless benefits rose slightly more than expected last week, but a gauge of underlying labor trends fell for a fifth straight week, the Labor Department said on Thursday. [ID:nN30338472].
"The continuing claims component was getting better so that bodes well for the U.S. economy going forward," said Matthew Strauss, senior currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets in Toronto. "That has provided support for the dollar against the yen."
Perceived higher risk and commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian and Canadian dollars rallied, with sentiment buoyed by gains in Chinese shares and a recovery in oil prices CLc1.
China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
Elsewhere, a survey by Nationwide Building Society showing UK house prices rose 1.3 percent this month boosted sterling, which rose 0.7 percent against the dollar
(Additional reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss and Jessica Mortimer in London) (Editing by Theodore d'Afflisio)
