UPDATE 2-Air Liquide H1 profit dips, keeps financial targets
2009-07-30 08:05:00.0
(Reuters) - French industrial gases group Air Liquide (
) posted in line first-half earnings but said the economic downturn was still hitting certain sectors, and would prompt it to be "prudent" throughout this year and next.
However, demand varied per business. A pick-up showed in emerging economies, in chemicals in the United States and electronics in Asia. Demand for gases from industrial merchants -- the car, technology and food sectors -- had stablised but at low volumes.
"The crisis is still there, the average level of production is more or less the same," Chairman and Chief Executive Benoit Potier said at a news conference on Thursday. "For the mid-term we remain optimistic but short-term we remain prudent."
Air Liquide, whose gas activities range from putting fizz in soft drinks to providing hydrogen to oil refineries and health care gases to hospitals, made a net profit of 596 million euros in the first half, little changed against the 2008 period.
Sales fell 6.8 percent, or 5.8 percent on a comparable basis, to 5.94 billion euros ($8.37 billion), partly due to falling gas prices, and compared with a strong 2008 first half.
In the second quarter, sales adjusted for natural gas prices and currency fluctuations rose 1 percent versus the first quarter of 2009.
"A solid set of first half results," Cazenove analyst Martin Evans said in a research note, rating Air Liquide shares "underperform". He cautioned that, in the short term, customers would keep a lid on spending, including holding off on big projects like commissioning the building of new gas plants.
While sales volumes had stabilised at low levels in mature markets, activities in China were taking off, Air Liquide said.
Demand for oxygen in China was still strong for traditional markets like metals and petrochemicals, and was booming for the gasification of carbon products. Through gasification low-valued products like high sulfur fuel oils or coal can be converted into more valuable products.
"China is no longer just about steel, it is also about energy issues, converting carbon into value added products requires a lot of oxygen," Potier pointed out.
Air Liquide's earnings follow a reported drop in second-quarter earnings by U.S. rivals Airgas (
), while while German rival Linde (
Air Liquide will have invested more than 900 million euros in China this year and, as of 2010, expects to raise its investments in the country to 500 million euros annually, from 300 million.
Air liquide cut costs by 153 millions euros in the first half. The company earlier this year raised its cost savings goal to 300 million euros, from 250 million euros this year, as part of a three-year efficiency plan, dubbed ALMA, which will end in 2010. Savings would exceed the overall 600 million euro target.
Air Liquide shares were little changed at 72.30 euros by in early afternoon trade, broadly in line with the DJ chemical index .SX4P.
Air Liquide remained confident that gases used in the energy, environment, health and high-tech markets, such as solar panels, as well as growing emerging economies, would support its growth. ($1=.7095 Euro) (Editing by Marcel Michelson and Simon Jessop)
