Monster Worldwide exploring China business sale; shares rise
2012-11-08 11:36:00.0
Monster Worldwide exploring China business sale; shares rise | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Monster Worldwide exploring China business sale; shares rise
Thu, Nov 8 2012
Tue, Nov 6 2012
Thu  EST
Monster's stock jumped 20 percent to $6.86 in morning trade on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday as the company also said it was reviewing options for its developing markets businesses. The stock had fallen by nearly a third this year until Wednesday.
In March, the parent of Monster.com had retained Stone Key Partners and Bank of America Merrill Lynch to review strategic alternatives, including selling all or part of the company.
A number of potential suitors for Monster have been contacted and extensive due diligence conducted, Executive Vice President Tim Yates said on a post-earnings conference call.
The staffing sector -- a barometer of overall economic health -- has seen a slowdown in Europe and an uncertain recovery in the United States, where unemployment currently stands at 7.9 percent.
Monster said the restructuring, including the sale of its Chinese business, China HR.com Holdings Ltd, and planned changes at its other developing markets businesses, will allow it to focus on North America and Europe that generate the lion's share of its profit.
The current approximate run rate of the China and developing markets businesses is $50 million of revenue and $85 million of operating expenses, Yates said.
"Between now and the year-end, we will review our options for our other developing markets," he added, without saying if Monster would pursue a sale of those businesses.
The company had taken control of the Chinese job site in 2008, when it paid $174 million to acquire the 55 percent of the business it did not already own.
Excluding the China operations from current and prior period results, the company's profit from continuing operations rose to $39.0 million, or 35 cents per share in the third quarter, from $18.5 million, or 15 cents per share, a year earlier.
Excluding other one-time items, the company earned 9 cents per share, on revenue that fell 10 percent to $221.7 million.
(Reporting by Sagarika Jaisinghani in Bangalore; Editing by Joyjeet Das, Sriraj Kalluvila)
