Weakened Communists still dominant Moldova force
2009-07-30 07:09:00.0
(Reuters) - A parliamentary election in Moldova has boosted the fortunes of the liberal opposition but the Communists will likely continue as the country's dominant political force -- without outgoing President Vladimir Voronin.
With loans from China and Russia hanging in the balance, the question was who would be able to sort out a viable coalition -- pro-Western parties seeking closer ties with Romania and Europe, or the Communists allied with recent defector Marian Lupu.
Though the Communists remain Moldova's biggest party, most analysts agreed they will no longer hold unfettered power and outgoing Voronin was probably a spent force.
"One can hardly overestimate the importance of this -- despite all of the Communists' clamorous statements and this open support by Russia, they still received fewer votes than (in the first parliamentary election) April," said independent analyst Bogdan Tirdea.
The loans are crucial to the ex-Soviet state, whose economy has been devastated by reduced remittances from hundreds of thousands of Moldovans working abroad who have been hit by the global financial crisis.
"In conditions of crisis, when the budget coffers are empty and it is far from clear if Moldova gets the promised Chinese and Russian loans, the situation will simply become precarious."
Analysts played down suggestions of a coalition made up purely of liberal opposition parties -- the Liberals, Liberal Democrats, Our Moldova and the centrist Democratic Party -- who have won over just half the votes with nearly all the ballots counted.
A more likely deal, they said, would see the Communists join Lupu's Democratic Party.
The Communists are on course to win 48 seats and the Democratic Party 13 seats. Together they would hold 61, the minimum required to elect a new president in the 101-seat chamber.
Sam Greene, deputy director of the Carnegie Moscow Center, said the Communists remained the dominant force.
"The reality is that anybody who comes to power, any coalition, is going to have to find some kind of accommodation with the Communists and that will, to a certain extent, shape how the coalition is formed," he said.
A Communist-Democratic Party coalition could be bolstered by the addition of the Our Moldova party. That arrangement could enable Lupu to become president and even leave the door open for Voronin to remain as prime minister, though with reduced powers.
"Under Voronin, we all slept through a chance to become an innovative economy," said Vitalie Andrievschi, director of the AVE.MD think tank.
Analysts in Romania, where President Traian Basescu was in open conflict with Voronin and backed the opposition, applauded the liberals' improved score, but warned of tough talks ahead.
"As it is, the result is a success but not as big as would have been preferred," said analyst Stelian Tanase in Bucharest.
(Writing by Ron Popeski; Editing by Sonya Hepinstall)
