REFILE-UPDATE 1-BASF says unlikely to earn cost of capital
2009-07-30 02:10:00.0
(Reuters) - BASF BASF.DE said it was unlikely to earn its cost of capital this year, dashing hopes the world's biggest chemicals maker could keep its dividend steady after reporting a slump in second-quarter earnings.
BASF said second-quarter earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) excluding one-off items slumped 53 percent to 1.14 billion euros ($1.61 billion), just above the average estimate of 1.07 billion euros in a Reuters poll of 14 analysts.
Sales at the maker of coatings for cars, catalytic converters and insulation foams almost matched expectations, falling 23.3 percent to 12.5 billion euros, compared with an average forecast of 12.4 billion.
In line with major rivals, BASF's reliance on hard-hit industries such as electronics, carmakers and builders make it particularly vulnerable to the downturn, while massive overhead costs typical for the chemical industry continue to weigh.
BASF said it anticipated a significant decline in sales and earnings in 2009, even when taking into account Ciba, the Swiss rival it bought for more than $3 billion just months before global chemical demand collapsed last year.
"In North America the slump appears to be bottoming out and China is again beginning to see stronger growth. Nevertheless, a sustained upturn is not yet in sight," the company said.
Overall, the group said it expected the global downturn to have bottomed out and it saw demand stabilising at low levels.
Earning the cost of capital was a precondition set by Chief Executive Juergen Hambrecht for keeping next year's dividend at this year's level of 1.95 euros per share.
BASF previously said it would need to make about 3.5 billion euros in EBIT this year to service its debt and meet shareholders' dividend expectations.
According to StarMine, which weighs estimates according to analysts' track record, shares in BASF trade at about 18 times estimated 12-month forward earnings, above the average multiple of 15 of its global chemical peers, as BASF's oil and gas business is seen benefiting from a rebound in fuel prices.
(Reporting by Ludwig Burger, editing by Knut Engelmann and Erica Billingham)
