FOREX-Dollar falls after China 'loose policy' comment
2009-07-29 23:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell against a basket of currencies on Thursday after China's central bank said it would stick to a loose monetary policy to consolidate its economic recovery, easing market worries about its growth.
, though in volatile trade, and encouraged some investors to crawl back to riskier and higher-yielding currencies such as the Australian dollar.
The Chinese central bank's vice governor, Su Ning, was reported as saying it would also use market tools instead of quota-style controls to ensure credit growth is appropriate. [ID:nPEK357846]
"I quit my trades yesterday, scared by the Chinese stock fall. But seeing this firmness in stocks (today), a trend of a falling dollar and yen may persist," said a trader for a Japanese trust bank.
"But it remains a tough call given high stock-price volatility," the trader said.
Other traders said investors' profit-taking from a recent rally in stocks before taking their summer vacations was another reason behind Wednesday's sharp fall in Chinese stocks.
The dollar could regain ground versus other currencies as the closing of long positions in stocks and commodities is expected to continue for now and help flows back into the greenback, traders said.
Indeed, the dollar's fall was limited on Thursday and it stayed in sight of a two-week high against the euro.
"I personally feel that the market will see further corrective moves before more clues emerge on how the economy will fare after this summer, with the dollar broadly rising and commodities falling," said Kosuke Hanao, head of treasury product sales for HSBC in Tokyo.
The dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's performance against other six major currencies, fell 0.2 percent to 79.439 .DXY, sliding back towards a seven-month low of 78.315 struck on Tuesday.
It slid as low as $1.4007 on trading platform EBS the day before, the lowest since July 15 after concerns about Chinese growth hurt commodity prices and hit U.S. stocks, sparking a rush to the safe-haven greenback.
The yen earlier fell broadly after the remarks by the Chinese central bank official, but quickly recovered as traders felt uneasy about keeping risky yen-selling positions as Shanghai stocks remained volatile and were moving in and out of positive territory.
The euro fell 0.1 percent to 133.33 yen EURJPY=R. The dollar also dipped 0.1 percent, to 94.90 yen after rising near a three-week high of 95.39 yen hit on Monday.
, nearly flat on the day. It had earlier fallen as low as $0.6477 on the Reuters dealing system, below a near 10-month high of $0.6635 hit earlier this week.
