Nikkei seen rising, weaker yen to help exporters
2009-07-29 19:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei stock average is likely to rise on Thursday and may test a nine-month high, with exporters expected to benefit from a weaker yen, although the market will also take its cues from output data due before the open.
) are likely to be in focus after they surprised markets on Tuesday by eking out small profits last quarter, helped by cost cuts.
Wall Street fell on worries that China might be ready to hit the brakes on lending, a move that could curb demand and hinder a global economic recovery, with commodity prices and shares in the energy and raw materials sectors hit hard.
"There's a little concern about possible overheating in the Nikkei, but futures in Chicago rose and the yen's a bit weaker, which should help," said Hiroichi Nishi, general manager at the equity division of Nikko Cordial Securities.
Analysts polled by Reuters predict a rise of 2.4 percent in industrial output for June, following a 5.7 percent rise in May.
is likely to trade between 10,000 and 10,200, analysts said.
It closed at 10,113.24 on Wednesday. If it rises above 10,179.59, the year's high touched on Monday, it will hit levels unseen since last October.
Nikkei futures traded in Chicago rose 0.7 percent from the Osaka close of 10,110.
Nomura, Japan's largest brokerage, posted its first profit in six quarters as it cashed in on a market rebound and began to leverage on its acquisition of parts of Lehman Brothers.
Sumitomo Corp plans to invest about 100 billion yen over the next decade to develop real estate in Tokyo's Kanda district, which has a major train station, the Nikkei business daily reported on Thursday.
The trading house plans to build high-rise office towers and other buildings at six to 10 sites, the Nikkei said.
Toshiba, Japan's biggest chipmaker, expects its chip operations to turn profitable in July-September on cost cuts, but warned of a possible year-end dip on fears of increased spending by rivals.
-- Sompo Japan Insurance 8755.T, Nippon Koa Insurance 8754.T
Sompo Japan will take over smaller rival Nipponkoa Insurance in a share swap valued at $4.7 billion, according to terms of the planned deal announced on Wednesday.
) to transport 1.3 million tonnes of iron ore a year from Brazil to China from 2012, the Nikkei business daily said on Thursday.
Nippon Yusen will order a new 300,000-tonne carrier to handle the contract, the Nikkei said.
), Softbank Corp (
Japan Petroleum Exploration Co has entered into negotiations with Iraqi authorities to develop a giant oil field in the Middle Eastern country, the Nikkei business daily said.
Fujifilm, a top photofilm manufacturer, is seen swinging to a 2 billion yen pretax profit in the April-June quarter, though sales are seen down 24 percent for the same period, the Nikkei business daily said.
(Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
