C.bank reassurance helps China, HK shares rebound
2009-07-30 05:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China and Hong Kong shares clawed back some lost ground following the sharp sell-off in the previous session, but concerns lingered that this year's blazing market rally had outstripped corporate earnings prospects.
But analysts ruled out a sustained sharp correction in the near term, despite a record rally in Chinese stocks this year.
"I don't think the upward trend has ended," said Liu Lifeng, strategist at Lombarda China Fund Management Co. "There will be ample market liquidity as long as China doesn't tighten monetary policy."
Following the biggest plunge on the Shanghai market this year on Wednesday, which had a ripple effect across markets, the Chinese central bank stepped in to calm investors, with vice-governor Su Ning reinforcing its commitment to "unswervingly" stick to appropriately loose monetary policy.
"What happened yesterday actually sends us a message from the market rather than from the PBOC," said Merrill Lynch economists in a report. "Now that the market believes China is the first major economy recovering from this global crisis, it also expects China to lead the charge in carrying out an exit strategy."
The main gauge in Shanghai has risen more than 82 percent this year while Hong Kong's main index has notched up a 41 percent gain.
For graphic on the latest valuations of Shanghai, Shenzhen and Hong Kong stocks, click
closed up 1.7 percent at 3,321.56 points, rebounding from a loss earlier in the session with a boost from financial stocks. The index fell as much as 1.6 percent to 3,215.753 points intraday.
Rising Shanghai A shares outnumbered losers by 570 to 307. Turnover in Shanghai A shares fell to 219 billion yuan ($32 billion), still heavy but down from the previous day's record 296 billion yuan.
The gauge has doubled from its bottom hit last October, reigniting fears that fresh bubbles may be forming in the market and leading some analysts to predict a sudden downturn.
"Yesterday's tumble is a warning that the market is already dangerously high. I don't think there's much room for stocks to rise further," said Wu Binhua, strategist at Debon Securities Co in Shanghai.
He added that a major correction might already be under way which could push the Shanghai index as low as 3,000 points in the near term.
Banking stocks were strong on Thursday, with Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
), the biggest lender, rising 3.29 percent to 5.34 yuan. Shenzhen Development Bank (
), partly owned by U.S. private equity firm TPG, jumped by its 10 percent daily limit.
Steelmakers rose after an industry group said China's 71 large and medium-sized steel mills achieved a combined profit of 3.55 billion yuan in June, following a move into the black in May that was preceded by seven months of losses.
), China's biggest listed steelmaker, rose 4.54 percent to 9.45 yuan. Angang Steel (
In Hong Kong, offshore oil specialist CNOOC (
) shed 1.5 percent after crude oil prices pulled back further on Thursday, following the biggest single-day percentage loss since April in the previous session as U.S. crude stockpiles jumped.
was up 0.5 percent at 20,234.08, after touching an earlier low of 19,955.32.
The index set a blazing 20 percent rally in the two weeks to Monday, scaling a nearly 11-month peak.
"Short selling is still well-below 10 percent of the total turnover; there is no panic in the market," said Linus Yip, strategist with First Shanghai Securities.
Yip expects the index to find support at the June high of 19,162 points.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, was barely changed at 11,991.60 points.
Defensive stocks including the city's subway operator MTR (
) found favour with investors. (Additional reporting by Eric Burroughs; Editing by Edmund Klamann and Chris Lewis)
