Nikkei hits 9-mth closing high on Honda, Nissan
2009-07-30 03:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average hit its highest close in nine months on Thursday, lifted by a surge in Honda Motor (
) on surprise quarterly profits, though caution after a Chinese stock tumble weighed on gains.
) closed more than 6 percent higher before it announced its earnings results for the April-June quarter. After the close, it posted a smaller-than-expected operating loss as a stronger yen and weakness in its TV business countered the impact of cost cuts. [ID:nT140138]
) and shares of other raw materials and energy firms fell after commodity prices declined on concerns that China might be ready to hit the brakes on lending, a move that could curb demand and hinder a global economic recovery. [ID:nHKG282068]
"The Nikkei is already above 10,000 and although we have had some good results, it's not as if there's been a whole wave of positive surprises, and this is limiting gains," said Junichi Misawa, a senior fund manager at STB Asset Management.
"The tumble in Chinese stocks is weighing on the market psychologically, but I don't think China will start tightening lending to the extent that it would damage the economy."
lost 5 percent on Wednesday, its biggest daily decline in eight months, and remained soft on Thursday.
It had surged nearly 90 percent this year before Wednesday's tumble on worries that share valuations had grown excessive.
But market players said the fall was most likely due to profit-taking, with some saying it was unlikely to drag the global market down with it.
In comments reported on Thursday, the vice governor of China's central bank said the bank will "unswervingly" stick to an appropriately loose monetary policy and will use market tools not quota controls. [nPEK348322].
In thin trade, the benchmark Nikkei
rose 0.5 percent or 51.97 points to 10,165.21, its highest finish since Oct. 6.
The Nikkei, along with the global stock market, has rallied since its March lows, recovering more than 40 percent so far, propelled by stronger-than-expected U.S. earnings and optimism about the economy.
Market players are now focused on domestic earnings, which peak on Thursday and Friday.
AUTOS SHINE, SONY GAINS
Honda shot up 8.7 percent to 3,010 yen and Nissan soared 10 percent to 694 yen after both made surprise if small profits last quarter, though a sustained recovery appeared elusive with demand largely reliant on government stimulus. [ID:nT188181]
The news helped boost industry leader Toyota Motor Corp's (
) shares by 3.4 percent to 3,930 yen. The transport equipment subindex .ITEQP.T climbed 4.7 percent to become the biggest gainer among the subindexes.
Shares of Sony jumped 6.8 percent to 2,505 yen. The electronics maker kept its forecast for a second straight annual loss.
Commodities-linked shares fell as oil dipped towards $63 a barrel CLc1 and base metals slumped on Wednesday following a 5 percent slide in Chinese stocks, although metals regained some ground on Thursday.
Sumitomo Metal Mining slid 3.9 percent to 1,392 yen, while oil and gas field developer Inpex (
) fell 1 percent to 707,000 yen.
Investors picked up stocks of companies reporting stronger-than-expected earnings, while they dumped those that disappointed.
) powered higher by 14.7 percent to 710 yen after the company, a comprehensive electrical machinery maker, announced first-quarter operating profit that beat forecasts.
But Sumitomo Metal Industries 5405.T fell 3.6 percent to 244 yen after the steelmaker cut its full-year profit forecast, saying demand had not recovered as well as expected.
), an industrial robot maker, gave up 2.2 percent to 7,640 yen after it reported on Wednesday a tumble in quarterly operating profit, as demand at home and in other countries was weak except for China.
Some 1.9 billion shares changed hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, below last week's daily average of 2.3 billion.
