Nikkei flat despite Honda, China caution weighs
2009-07-29 21:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei stock average was flat on Thursday, with caution in the wake of a Chinese stock tumble offsetting a surge in auto shares after Honda Motor Co (
fell 5 percent on Wednesday, their biggest daily decline in eight months, on concerns that authorities might take measures to cool the 80-percent gain in Shanghai shares this year [ID:nHKG282068].
"Though the market initially jumped a bit in response to a weaker yen, yesterday's falls in Asian shares as well as Wall Street are definitely a concern," said Yutaka Miura, chief technical analyst at Mizuho Securities.
"There's a sense that perhaps the July rally in global stocks may be coming to an end."
Wall Street fell on worries that China might be ready to hit the brakes on lending, a move that could curb demand and hinder a global economic recovery, with commodity prices and shares in the energy and raw materials sectors hit hard. [.N]
In comments reported on Thursday, the vice governor of China's central bank said the bank will "unswervingly" stick to an appropriately loose monetary policy and will use market tools not quota controls. [nPEK348322]. Investors remained wary, with Miura saying that the mention of "market tools" did not appear to completely rule out the possibility of some monetary tightening by other means.
gained 4.3 points to 10,117.58, while the broader Topix
Honda shot up 7.8 percent to 2,980 yen and Nissan advanced 7.3 percent to 676 yen after both made small surprise profits last quarter, though a sustained recovery appeared elusive with demand relying largely on government stimulus. [ID:nT188181]
The news helped boost industry leader Toyota Motor Corp's (
) shares by 3.4 percent to 3,930 yen. The transport equipment subindex .ITEQP.T climbed 4 percent to become the biggest gainer among the subindexes.
Investor wariness ahead of a flood of corporate earnings later on Thursday and on Friday was also inhibiting gains, market players said.
), Japan's biggest securities firm, rose 2.2 percent to 827 yen after making its first profit in six quarters as it cashed in on a market rebound and began to leverage on its acquisition of parts of Lehman Brothers. [ID:nT270666] (Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
