TOPWRAP 1-Asia c.banks soothe skittish investors; markets firm
2009-07-30 04:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian officials on Thursday reiterated their commitments to expansionary policies, comforting investors a day after a steep sell off in Chinese shares on fears that Beijing would clamp-down on credit availability alarmed markets globally.
After slumping 5 percent on Wednesday, the Shanghai market rebounded 1.7 percent on Thursday following reassurance from the People's Bank of China it would "unswervingly continue to apply appropriately loose monetary policy".
Other markets were steady or firmer after being rattled by speculation that Chinese policy makers might tap on the brakes and so hinder a revival in world trade. The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific shares excluding Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS was up 0.7 percent and Japan's Nikkei
China has provided one of the rare pockets of economic growth in the world, acting as a pillar of support to other countries mired in recession, so suggestions it might restrict expansion sounded alarm bells in global markets.
But equally, rapidly rising stock markets worldwide have raised concerns that fresh asset bubbles are forming just months after the near collapse of the world financial system sent the global economy into a spin.
In the latest sign that the world economy was healing, Japan said industrial output rose in June for the fourth month running and manufacturers forecast more gains to come. [ID:nT258328]
The country's third-largest bank by assets, Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group (
), reported that it had returned to profit and electronics giant Sony Corp (
Still, Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry was cautious about the outlook for industrial production. It said production was picking up but output was still lower than before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, which triggered the global economic downturn.
Rises in output of flat-screen TVs and automobiles suggested stimulus efforts by governments were having an effect on demand, but worsening job conditions and weak capital spending meant the outlook was highly uncertain, a ministry official told a briefing.
In Taiwan, the world's largest contract chip maker TSMC (
China's central bank vowed to maintain a loose monetary policy and use market tools, not quota-style controls, to ensure sustainable credit growth to support economic recovery in a statement that analysts said was intended to calm investors. [ID:nPEK357846]
Chinese stocks had been on a tear as Beijing's stimulus spending took effect, with the main Shanghai index rising 59 percent since the start of March.
South Korea reaffirmed it was sticking with an expansionary economic policy until the private-sector revives, and warned against a premature shift towards tightening as global economic prospects remained uncertain. [ID:nSEO354010]
"We are all aware of the troubles that a hasty exit from loose policy brought about during the Great Depression in the United States and during the 1990s in Japan," Vice Finance Minister Hur Kyung-wook said on state radio.
In Japan, a central bank policy board member said he was not optimistic about corporate financing conditions, suggesting that the authority should not exit its current policies hastily.
"Japan's financial conditions, in a word, remain tight but continue to improve," Tadao Noda said at a meeting with business leaders in central Japan. [ID:nT363083]
He said timing was the most important issue for the Bank of Japan when it seeks ways to exit its support measures, adding that keeping them in place longer than needed could cause big swings in prices and hence in the economy, while changing policy too early could also cause problems in financial markets.
New Zealand's central bank surprised financial markets by signalling another rate cut if the soaring New Zealand dollar did not retreat.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Governor Alan Bollard said the strong currency, up 30 percent since March against the U.S. dollar, puts any economic recovery at risk. The comment sent the New Zealand dollar
On Wednesday, a Federal Reserve survey said the pace of the U.S. economic recession slowed or stabilised in most areas of the country but the report pointed to protracted job market weakness and a possible threat to consumer spending.
Wages and compensation were steady or falling in most areas, said the U.S. central bank in its Beige Book survey of economic conditions through July 20. (Writing by Tony Munroe; Editing by Neil Fullick)
