Brazil stocks dragged lower by commodities, China
2009-07-29 17:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks closed lower on Wednesday, rebounding from the day's low point but still in the red after a tumble in commodities prices and a stocks selloff in China, the country's leading trade partner.
shed 1.35 percent to 53,734.53 points, losing ground for the second straight day after nearly two weeks of uninterrupted gains through Monday.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 1.22 percent to 1.905 reais per dollar.
"People have been looking for a reason to take profits," said Christopher Edwards, a fund manager and partner at Fabien Pictet & Partners Ltd.
The 5-percent slump in Chinese shares in the hours before Brazil's markets opened provided investors with a reason to dump stocks, Edwards said, prompting caution among investors globally.
China in April surpassed the United States as Brazil's biggest trading partner for the first time, fueled by voracious demand for the Latin American country's commodities such as iron ore and farm products like soy.
Given the "significant empirical correlation" between global commodity prices and Brazil's economic performance, local investors also keep tabs on Chinese assets, according to Morgan Stanley's Brazil senior economist Marcelo Carvalho.
Commodities, which have a strong influence on the Bovespa index, also fell. The 19-commodity Reuters Jeffries index .CRB sank 2.66 percent. Crude oil CLc1 plummeted 5.77 percent after data showed a surge in U.S. crude inventories on higher imports and lower refinery activity.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, fell 1.7 percent to 31.85 reais. The company is expected to release its second-quarter earnings report after the bell on Wednesday. Analysts polled by Reuters expect the company's second-quarter earnings will tumble nearly 70 percent from last year due to lower iron ore prices.
Petrobras and Vale have the index's largest weighting.
), which had risen about 15 percent over the past three sessions on regulator approval of new tariff methodology. The stock fell 1.83 percent to 31.12 reais.
) shed 1.33 percent to 33.45 reais, and Banco do Brasil (
) slid 1.7 percent to 23.15 reais. Numbers released on Tuesday by the central bank showed that bank lending rose in June, but defaults climbed to a record. [ID:nN28134264]
"Credit quality indicators are still deteriorating, probably reaching the worst level only in the 3Q09 as pointed by some banks, although this indicator's behavior in government-controlled banks brings encouraging prospects for Banco do Brasil," read a Bradesco note dated Tuesday. Bradesco reiterated its underperform rating for Itau Unibanco and market perform for Banco do Brasil.
The central bank will release on Thursday minutes from last week's monetary policy committee meeting, when policymakers cut the benchmark interest rate to a record-low 8.75 percent.
