UPDATE 1-CapitaLand posts first quarterly loss since 2003
2009-07-29 20:36:00.0
(Reuters) - CapitaLand (
), Southeast Asia's biggest developer, on Thursday posted its first quarterly loss since 2003 due to writedowns on investments and said the outlook for 2009 was uncertain.
Although CapitaLand is benefitting from soaring home sales in Singapore and China, its two biggest markets, it has suffered from the drop in the value of its investment properties in Singapore, Australia and elsewhere in the region.
The firm reported a 45 percent increase in China home sales to S$158.2 million during the second quarter, but booked a net S$280.9 million in revaluation and impairment losses due mainly to a drop in the value of its commercial and Australian properties.
"Although some stability has been restored in the financial markets, the outlook for 2009 remains uncertain," CapitaLand Chairman Richard Hu said in a statement.
CapitaLand CEO Liew Mun Leong said that excluding writedowns, operating profit was higher in the second quarter compared with the first, and that the improvement will likely continue in subsequent quarters due to an improvement in market sentiment.
CapitaLand, which is 40 percent owned by Singapore state investor Temasek [TEM.UL], reported an April-June net loss of S$156.9 million ($108.4 million) compared with a net profit of S$515.2 million a year earlier.
The company's bottom-line was hit by writedowns and impairment charges at Australian unit Australand (
), a residential development in Singapore, as well as the drop in the value of real estate held by CapitaCommercial Trust (
), a Singapore-listed real estate investment trust.
Excluding revaluations and impairments, CapitaLand said it made a net profit of S$124 million for the quarter.
The volume of home sales in China, Hong Kong and Singapore has increased sharply since the start of February, triggering fears of a new asset bubble. But office rents across Asia remain weak due to the global financial crisis. (Reporting by Kevin Lim; Editing by Dhara Ranasinghe)
