UPDATE 2-Brazil's Vale Q2 profit tumbles 84 pct on ore price
2009-07-29 19:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian miner Vale on Wednesday said second-quarter profits tumbled 84 percent versus the year earlier period as lower iron ore production and prices pushed earnings to around half of what analysts had projected.
Demand for iron ore remained weak during the quarter as the global economy struggled to recover from the 2008 financial meltdown, lumbering Vale with lower prices for its main product and fewer places to sell it.
), the world's biggest iron ore producer, posted net profits of $790 million compared with $5.01 billion at the height of the commodities boom a year earlier, reflecting the effects of the financial crisis.
The company said earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, fell to $1.73 billion from $6.22 billion a year earlier under U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (US GAAP).
Analysts had predicted Vale would post a net profit of $1.68 billion and EBITDA of $1.90 billion for the quarter, according to the average forecasts provided for a Reuters poll.
"The global economy is slowly recovering from its very low level of activity after the demand shock," Vale said in an operations report. "A gradual recovery of demand for minerals and metals is expected to continue over the next six months."
Revenues from non-ferrous minerals reached $1.91 billion, mostly on higher nickel and copper prices, providing 38 percent of operating revenues compared to 33 percent a year earlier.
The average sale price for iron ore dropped 32 percent to $47.82 per tonne from the second quarter last year, while iron ore production slumped 26 percent to 57.7 million tonnes compared to the year earlier period.
Iron ore production recovered in the second quarter compared to the first three months of this year, rising 23 percent.
The company brought some of its pellet capacity back online, boosting pellet output by 55 percent from the first quarter -- though production was still down 70 percent from the year earlier period.
In June it cut iron prices for clients in Europe and Asia by as much as 48 percent under the increasingly strained benchmarking system, but has not yet reached a deal with steel mills in China that have demanded at least a 40 percent cut.
Talks have been complicated by China's arrest of executives from Australia's Rio Tinto (
) on charges of espionage, but China continues to be a key client for Vale.
"Our shipments to China reached another all-time high quarterly figure, totaling 35.611 million metric tons, representing 66.2 percent of total (iron) shipments," the company said.
A Vale executive this week told a Brazilian newspaper about half its iron sales to China were being sold on the spot market and the other half under benchmark prices, though it was not clear what discounts if any were being applied.
Iron ore markets still use a benchmarking system in which the three principal miners, Vale, Rio and BHP Billiton (
), negotiate ore prices each year with steel mills.
