FOREX-Dollar rises on China stocks slide, U.S. data
2009-07-29 00:41:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar rose broadly on Wednesday, as a sell-off in Shanghai's stock market and a weaker-than-expected U.S. durable goods report revived safe-haven demand for the greenback.
Falls in U.S. equities and a 5 percent slide in China's benchmark stock market, the Shanghai Composite Index
, cut investors' appetite for risk. That helped the dollar recover from its lowest level of 2009 and pushed the euro to a two-week low near $1.40.
"There's an awful lot of focus on what's happened in China overnight in terms of equities being lower due to some new restrictions, which looks like may limit some growth potential," said Camilla Sutton, senior currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto.
"We've had a tremendous run across many asset classes. I think the market is taking a healthy breather," she added.
In midday trading in New York, the dollar index, which measures its performance against a basket of currencies, rose 0.8 percent to 79.487 .DXY, rebounding from a 2009 low of 78.315 set the previous day.
after hitting $1.4016, its lowest since July 15. On Tuesday, the single currency rose as high as $1.4303, its highest since early June, according to Reuters data.
Adding to the dollar's strength was a government report showing new orders for long-lasting U.S. manufactured goods fell more sharply than expected in June, which further weighed on risk sentiment.
"This has translated into a weak equity market and a pullback from dollar shorts in the currency markets with the risk-off scenario playing out," said Andrew Busch, global FX strategist at BMO Capital Markets in Chicago.
The euro was last down 0.3 percent at 133.54 yen EURJPY=R, while the dollar rose 0.6 percent to 95.12 yen
The Commerce Department earlier said U.S. durable goods orders fell 2.5 percent in June, the largest drop since January. This was worse than market expectations for a 0.6 percent decline. [ID:nN29173590]
Growing optimism about the global economic outlook had pressured the U.S. currency in recent weeks and fueled a rally in stocks, commodities and higher-yielding currencies.
But hopes the global economy was recovering were dented on Tuesday after data showed a drop in U.S. consumer confidence, while a sharp drop in oil prices weighed on commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian and Canadian dollars.
, while the New Zealand dollar declined 0.6 percent to US$0.6539
The Canadian dollar, which is particularly sensitive to oil prices, also fell with the U.S. dollar up 0.8 percent at C$1.0884
Investors awaited the Federal Reserve's release of its Beige Book, an anecdotal report on economic conditions, later on Wednesday, while this week's focus remains on U.S. second-quarter gross domestic product figures on Friday.
The market also awaited the results of a Treasury auction of $39 billion in five-year notes later on Wednesday as part of a record $115 billion of issuance this week. This follows Tuesday's auction of $42 billion of two-year notes which did not meet strong demand.
