Brazil stocks fall on commodities, China tumble
2009-07-29 11:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks posted their biggest intraday plunge in two weeks on Wednesday, weighed by a slump in commodities and a tumble in stocks in China, the country's biggest trading partner.
fell 2.21 percent to 53,277.88 in early trading, losing ground for the second straight day after nearly uninterrupted gains from July 15 through Monday.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 0.85 percent to 1.898 reais per dollar.
"People have been looking for a reason to take profits," said Christopher Edwards, a fund manager and partner at Fabien Pictet & Partners Ltd. Investor enthusiasm over relatively strong corporate earnings and economic indicators in Brazil and the United States had lifted the Bovespa by about 12 percent from mid-month through Monday.
Providing investors with a reason to dump stocks, he said, was the 5 percent slump in Chinese shares overnight, prompting caution among investors globally.
China in April surpassed the United States as Brazil's biggest trading partner for the first time, fueled by voracious Chinese demand for Brazilian commodities such as iron ore and farm products like soy.
Given the "significant empirical correlation" between global commodity prices and Brazil's economic performance, local investors also keep tabs on Chinese assets, according to Morgan Stanley's Brazil senior economist Marcelo Carvalho.
Commodities, which have a strong influence on the Bovespa index, also fell. The 19-commodity Reuters Jeffries index .CRB shed 2.32 percent and crude oil prices prices CLc1 plummeted 5.8 percent.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, fell 2.38 percent to 31.63 reais. The company is expected to release its second-quarter earnings report after the bell on Wednesday. Analysts polled by Reuters expect the company's second-quarter earnings will tumble nearly 70 percent from last year on lower iron ore prices.
), which had risen about 15 percent over the past three sessions on regulator approval of new tariff methodology. The stock fell 3.34 percent to 30.64 reais.
) shed 2.24 percent to 33.14 reais, and Banco do Brasil (
) slid 3.23 percent to 22.79 reais. Numbers released on Tuesday by the central bank showed that bank lending rose in June, but defaults climbed to a record. [ID:nN28134264]
"Credit quality indicators are still deteriorating, probably reaching the worst level only in the 3Q09 as pointed by some banks, although this indicator's behavior in government-controlled banks brings encouraging prospects for Banco do Brasil," read a Bradesco note dated Tuesday. Bradesco reiterated its underperform rating for Itau Unibanco and market perform for Banco do Brasil.
Changes in yields on Brazilian interest rate futures <0#DIJ:> contracts were mixed, with yields through January 2011 down or remaining flat.
The central bank will release on Thursday minutes from last week's monetary policy committee meeting, when policymakers cut the benchmark interest rate to a record-low 8.75 percent.
(Reporting by Luciana Lopez, Editing by W Simon)
