GLOBAL MARKETS-Shanghai surprise fails to quash Europe gains
2009-07-29 07:44:00.0
(Reuters) - A late sell-off on Shanghai's stock market depressed emerging market stocks on Wednesday and took Asian shares off multi-month peaks, but the mood failed to carry over into Europe which rose sharply on corporate earnings.
European shares were up more than 1 percent, bucking the global trend, after positive earnings news from Spain's biggest bank Santander (
) and chemical group Bayer BAYG.DE. This came despite losses in China, which have sometimes heralded a global stock market retreat although the market tends to be highly volatile and can recover quickly.
fell 5.0 percent in heavy turnover, posting their biggest daily drop in eight months and ending a five-day liquidity-driven rally. At one point, stocks were close to 8 percent lower.
Investors were concerned that major Chinese banks may start to restrict lending to cool various booming markets. Chinese stocks, for example, had risen close to 89 percent this year before Wednesday's fall.
That led MSCI's broad emerging market stock index .MSCIEF down 1.2 percent, after it hit a 10-month high on Tuesday.
"Given the speed and strength of the recent rally, we are tending toward a wait and see approach before adding to our overall equity exposures," U.S.-based money manager GMO said in a note.
The dollar gained broadly on Wednesday, recovering from recent losses while investors took profits on currencies such as the euro and Australian dollar which have risen sharply recently.
As well as the fall in Shanghai, risk appetite was knocked by data showing a drop in U.S. consumer sentiment.
"The dollar is recovering as investors move out of riskier assets and into safe havens, while commodity-heavy currencies are all falling," said CMC Markets analyst James Hughes.
after rising as high as $1.4305 on trading platform EBS on Tuesday, its highest since early June.
The dollar index, which measures its performance against a basket of currencies, rose 0.4 percent to 79.141 .DXY.
The two-year Schatz yield EU2YT=RR was at 1.353 percent, off an early high of 1.393 percent, while the 10-year Bund yielded EU10YT=RR 3.429 percent, also off the session high of 3.511 percent. Bond yields move inversely to prices. (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer; Editing by Ruth Pitchford)
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
