UPDATE 3-SPX Corp cuts 2009 outlook, sees no quick recovery
2009-07-29 10:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Diversified U.S. manufacturer SPX Corp (
) cut its 2009 profit and revenue targets, saying it expects no pickup in demand this year for its cooling towers, automotive diagnostic tools and other industrial gear.
The company reported lower second-quarter profit, but topped estimates before one-time items.
That brought its outlook more in line with analysts' estimate of $4.17 per share.
"The global economy continues to be challenging ... the majority of our businesses have been impacted by the recession," said Chief Executive Chris Kearney on a call with investors and analysts. "We do not expect recovery to occur in 2009 for most of our end markets."
The Charlotte, North Carolina-based company has seen revenue and orders fall in the United States and Europe, while demand from developing markets in China, South Africa and Russia remained stronger, Kearney said.
"Weaker-than-expected third-quarter guidance of 75 cents to 90 cents implies a much more back-end loaded year than we had modeled," wrote Deutsche Bank analyst Nigel Coe in a note to clients.
SPX also said second-quarter profit fell to $33.4 million, or 68 cents per diluted share, from $94.8 million, or $1.73 per diluted share, a year earlier.
Factoring out restructuring charges, SPX, the maker of cooling towers for power plants, automotive diagnostic tools and other industrial equipment, earned $1.10 per share. The result was well above analysts' average expectations of 72 cents per share, according to Reuters Estimates.
Revenue fell 21 percent to $1.19 billion, shy of Wall Street's $1.24 billion view.
SPX shares fell $3.52 to $50.41 on the New York Stock Exchange. So far this year, they are up 33 percent, compared with the 3 percent decline of the Standard & Poor's Capital Goods industry index .GSPIC.
SPX's competitors include German engineering group GEA Group AG (
), U.S. conglomerate General Electric Co (
), Swiss engineering group ABB SA (
), and U.S. automotive toolmaker Snap-on Inc (
). (Reporting by Scott Malone; Editing by Derek Caney and Jeffrey Benkoe)
