China submarines to soon carry nukes, draft U.S. report says
2012-11-08 02:01:00.0
(Reuters) - China appears to be within two years of deploying submarine-launched nuclear weapons, adding a new leg to its nuclear arsenal that should lead to arms-reduction talks, a draft report by a congressionally mandated U.S. commission says.
China in the meantime remains "the most threatening" power in cyberspace and presents the largest challenge to U.S. supply chain integrity, the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission said in a draft of its 2012 report to the U.S. Congress.
China is alone among the original nuclear weapons states to be expanding its nuclear forces, the report said. The others are the United States, Russia, Britain and France.
Beijing is "on the cusp of attaining a credible nuclear triad of land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, submarine-launched ballistic missiles, and air-dropped nuclear bombs," the report says.
China has had a largely symbolic ballistic missile submarine capability for decades but is only now set to establish a "near-continuous at-sea strategic deterrent," the draft said.
Chinese President Hu Jintao has made it a priority to modernize the country's navy. China launched its first aircraft carrier, purchased from Ukraine and then refurbished, in September.
"Building strong national defense and powerful armed forces that are commensurate with China's international standing and meet the needs of its security and development interests is a strategic task of China's modernization drive," Hu said in a speech on Thursday at the opening of the Chinese Communist Party's once-every-five-years congress.
To address a wide variety of security threats, "we must make major progress in modernizing national defense and the armed forces," Hu said.
That means China must "complete military mechanization and make major progress in full military IT (information technology) application by 2020," he said.
The deployment of a hard-to-track, submarine-launched leg of China's nuclear arsenal could have significant consequences in East Asia and beyond. It also could add to tensions between the United States and China, the world's two biggest economies.
Any Chinese effort to ensure a retaliatory capability against a U.S. nuclear strike "would necessarily affect Indian and Russian perceptions about the potency of their own deterrent capabilities vis-角-vis China," the report said, for instance.
China is party to many major international pacts and regimes regarding nuclear weapons and materials. But it remains outside of key arms limitation and control conventions, such as the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty signed in April 2010 and the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. The United States historically has approached these bilaterally with Russia.
The U.S. Congress should require the U.S. State Department to spell out efforts to integrate China into nuclear arms reduction, limitation, and control discussions and agreements, the draft said.
In addition, Congress should "treat with caution" any proposal to unilaterally reduce operational U.S. nuclear forces without clearer information being made available to the public about China's nuclear stockpile and force posture, it said.
China is estimated by the Arms Control Association, a private nonpartisan group in Washington, to have 240 nuclear warheads. The United States, by contrast, has some 5,113, including tactical, strategic and nondeployed weapons.
Beijing already has deployed two of as many as five of a new class of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarine. The JIN-class boat is due to carry the JL-2 submarine-launched ballistic missile with an estimated range of about 7,400 km (4,600 miles).
The new submarines and the JL-2 missile will give Chinese forces its "first credible sea-based nuclear capability," the U.S. Defense Department said in its own 2012 annual report to Congress on military and security developments involving China.
The JL-2 program has faced repeated delays but may reach an initial operating capability within the next two years, according to the Pentagon report, released in May.
The Pentagon declined to comment directly on China's march toward creating a credible nuclear "triad" involving strategic bombers, intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
The final version of the report is to be released next Wednesday by the U.S.-China commission, a 12-member bipartisan group set up in 2000 to report to U.S. lawmakers on security implications of U.S.-China trade.
The draft, in its section on cyber-related issues, called on the Congress to develop a sanctions regime to penalize specific companies found to engage in, or otherwise benefit from, industrial espionage.
Congress should define industrial espionage as an illegal subsidy subject to countervailing duties, it added.
Lawmakers also should craft legislation to boost the security of critical supply chains, "particularly in the context of U.S. government and military procurement," the draft said.
(Additional Writing by Terril Yue Jones; Editing by Lisa Shumaker and Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The article reads, ※For instance, any Chinese effort to ensure a retaliatory capability against a notional U.S. nuclear strike ※would necessarily affect Indian and Russian perceptions about the potency of their own deterrent capabilities vis-角-vis China,§ the report said.§ In fact, Russia and China are allies, always have been, even during the fraudulent ※Sino/Soviet Split§ (1960-1989). The ※Sino-Soviet Split§ was a disinformation operation under the ※Long-Range Policy§, which is the ※new§ strategy all Communist nations signed onto in 1960, seen as the only workable way to defeat the West with. In order to understand the World Communist threat to our liberties, one must understand Communist strategy: ※Lenin advised the Communists that they must be prepared to ※resort to all sorts of stratagems, maneuvers, illegal methods, evasions and subterfuge§ to achieve their objectives. This advice was given on the eve of his reintroduction of limited capitalism in Russia, in his work Left Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder. ＃ Another speech of Lenin＊s ＃ in July 1921 is again highly relevant to understanding ※perestroika.§ ※Our only strategy at present,§ wrote Lenin, ※is to become stronger and, therefore, wiser, more reasonable, more opportunistic. The more opportunistic, the sooner will you again assemble the masses round you. When we have won over the masses by our reasonable approach, we shall then apply offensive tactics in the strictest sense of the word.§ If you examine the backgrounds of prominent Russian figures, you will find that they have long Communist Party/ KGB or Komsomol pedigrees. Yet for some inexplicable reason, the Western media have accepted their sudden, orchestrated, mass ※conversion§ to Western-style norms of behavior, their endless talk of ※democracy,§ and their acceptance of ※capitalism,§ as genuine. ※Scratch these new, instant Soviet ※democrats,§ ※anti-Communists,§ and ※nationalists§ who have sprouted out of nowhere, and underneath will be found secret Party members or KGB agents,§ Golitsyn writes on page 123 of his new book [The Perestroika Deception]. In accepting at face value the ※transformation§ of these Leninist revolutionary Communists into ※instant democrats,§ the West automatically accepts as genuine the false ※Break with the Past§ 〞 the single lie upon which the entire deception is based. In short, the ※former§ Soviet Union 〞 and the East European countries as well 〞 are all run by people who are steeped in the dialectical modus operandi of Lenin. Without exception, they are all active Leninist revolutionaries, working collectively towards the establishment of a world Communist government, which, by definition, will be a world dictatorship. It is difficult for the West to understand the Leninist Hegelian dialectical method 〞 the creation of competing or successive opposites in order to achieve an intended outcome. Equally difficult for us to comprehend is the fact that these Leninist revolutionaries plan their strategies over decades and generations. This extraordinary behavior is naturally alien to Western politicians, who can see no further than the next election. Western politicians usually react to events. Leninist revolutionaries create events, in order to control reactions to them and manipulate their outcomes.§ 〞 William F Jasper, Senior Editor for The New American magazine. You ask, what does Jasper mean when he says, ※Leninist Hegelian dialectical method 〞 the creation of competing or successive opposites in order to achieve an intended outcome§? Simply explained, and on a tactical level, it＊s called the ※Scissors Strategy§, where one blade represents (for example) Putin & Company, however the other blade of the scissors每the leadership of the political ※opposition§ to Putin & Company每is actually controlled by Putin & Company*, which leaves the genuine opposition in the middle wondering why political change isn＊t taking place. Understand this simple strategy? On a strategic level, from 1960 每 1989 the USSR and China played the ※Scissors Strategy§, by pretending to be enemies. This strategy allowed one side to play off against the other with the West, thereby gaining political advantages from the West, which neither Communist giant could have achieved if it was believed they were united. Clever, huh?
Nov 07, 20129:41pm EST--
The article reads, ※For instance, any Chinese effort to ensure a retaliatory capability against a notional U.S. nuclear strike ※would necessarily affect Indian and Russian perceptions about the potency of their own deterrent capabilities vis-角-vis China,§ the report said.§ Wrong. It is because India, Russia, US have nuclear triads that China is merely modernizing to reach deterrent parity.
Nov 07, 201210:08pm EST--
One thing about China becoming the next empire, or superpower or whatever we＊re supposed to call them, is that imperial powers always go bankrupt. Oh well, plus ?a change, plus c＊est la m那me chose＃
Nov 07, 201211:08pm EST--
