UPDATE 4-Akzo Nobel sees stabilisation as Q2 tops forecasts
2009-07-29 08:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Dutch chemical group Akzo Nobel NV (
However, the world's biggest paint group warned that its markets were at significantly lower levels than in 2008, and that with the exception of some emerging markets such as China, Brazil and Indonesia, it was seeing little significant growth recovery.
"Our view at the moment is that it's going to be a long slow recovery," Chief Financial Officer Keith Nichols told Reuters.
Akzo Nobel's business has been hard hit by the economic downturn as lower U.S. and European construction activity hurt its decorative paints sales, while its performance coatings business has been hit by lower demand from the car sector.
Akzo Nobel, which competes with PPG Industries (
), reported earnings before interest and taxes, (EBIT) excluding one-off items fell 12 percent to 370 million euros, which was above the average forecast of 267 million in a Reuters poll but below 422 million for the year-ago period.
The better-than-expected figure helped push Akzo shares 10.6 percent higher to 38.75 euros by 1215 GMT, outperforming a 3.3 percent rise in the DJ Stoxx European chemicals index .SX4P.
"Today's numbers ... show that margin management at Akzo (and at competition) works to almost sustain margins," Petercam analyst Jan Van den Bossche said. Akzo Nobel, which is targeting 540 million euros in cost cuts by the end of 2011, said its focus on savings was beginning to bear fruit. It has cut about 2,900 jobs from a targeted 3,500 and has cut costs by 370 million euros.
Akzo Nobel is seeing some relief from lower raw material prices, which had a positive impact on the company's improved margin, CFO Nichols told reporters, but he stressed that cost savings and margin management were the prime contributing factor in the margin development.
"It's nice to be away from that inflationary bubble that we experienced in the second half of 2008," Nichols said.
It is still a tough market, he said.
Sales volumes fell 16 percent. Turnover was down 10 percent to 3.67 billion euros, but beat the average estimate of 3.54 billion euros, supported by higher prices, especially at Specialty Chemicals.
Chief Executive Hans Wijers said the main challenge for the remainder of the year for Akzo, which has a market capitalisation of 8.2 billion euros, would be to maintain prices at current levels.
But Wijers said pricing pressure from customers was building up and, in some instances, they would succeed in forcing Akzo Nobel to cut prices.
Rival PPG Industries posted a forecast-beating second-quarter profit earlier this month after "aggressive cost-cutting", and also said there were signs markets had stabilised and that demand would modestly improve in the third quarter.
Akzo Nobel said it remained committed to achieving its medium-term target of an earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) margin of 14 percent by the end of 2011, up from 12.2 percent at end-2008.
Its EBITDA margin improved to 14.4 percent in the second quarter from 14.1 percent in the same period last year and 9 percent in the usually weaker first-quarter. (Editing by Will Waterman, Marie Maitre and Karen Foster)
