FEATURE-Tensions stir Islamist underground in Central Asia
2009-07-29 06:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Sipping tea in a dim, smoke-filled teahouse in the Kyrgyz city of Osh, Rakhmatillo Ibragimov says the goal of his life is to restore Islamic rule in former Soviet Central Asia.
"They call us terrorists. That's because they are afraid of us," he says with a bashful smile that contrasts with the sharpness of his words. "The more they oppress us the stronger we become. We don't want bloodshed. We want justice."
A member of Hizb ut-Tahrir, an outlawed Islamist group, he says ideas such as his are beginning to catch on in his native city of Osh in the Ferghana valley -- a cauldron of ethnic and tribal tension in the heart of Central Asia.
Its dusty skyline pierced by the occasional minaret, Osh has long been synonymous with a post-Soviet rise of radical Islamism in a largely agrarian, cotton-growing region shared by Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
With its treacherous mountainous terrain and complicated patchwork of clan alliances, Kyrgyzstan is of particular worry, and memories are still fresh of violent clashes between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz near Osh in 1990 that killed hundreds of people.
In the border town of Karasu, a scattering of white-washed huts divided between Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan by a small canal, residents said that growing frustration with poverty and unemployment have fuelled interest in radical forms of Islam.
"There are a lot of rumours and everyone is worried. They say some sort of war is coming," said Yusuf who sells pottery at a local bazaar, a maze of meandering lanes teeming with people, horses and police officers.
"You see many more women in headscarves these days, many more men going to Friday prayers. This town used to be much more secular," he added, as another vendor, clad in long robes, knelt down nearby to perform prayers behind a curtain.
Underlining global worries with stability in Central Asia, leaders of Russia, Afghanistan and Pakistan are to meet in Tajikistan this week. Russia's Dmitry Medvedev was due in Kyrgyzstan to attend a Moscow-backed security summit.
TALIBAN OR HOMEGROWN?
Security experts say some Taliban fighters of Central Asia origin, stirred by increased fighting in Afghanistan and Pakistan, may be seeping back into the region seeking safe haven among its high mountain passes and remote valleys.
A string of gun battles between security forces and gangs of armed attackers, which have killed about 20 militants across the region in past months, has reinforced these worries.
"My gut feeling is that this is happening," said Paul Quinn-Judge, head of the International Crisis Group in Central Asia. "If you look at those (attacks), it does seem to indicate that there is an activation of Jihadist guerilla movements. I would be however more inclined to connect this to the movement of the Taliban in the direction of the Tajik border."
"This is a perfect place for all sorts of (militants) to hide, rest or regroup," said one Western diplomat in the region. "It does not matter whether it's homegrown or if they are coming from Afghanistan. Either way it's a very worrying trend."
Ibragimov, who asked Reuters to use his pseudonym for fear of persecution, said Hizb ut-Tahrir, or Party of Liberation, employed only peaceful methods to achieve its primary goal of establishing a worldwide caliphate -- a theocratic Muslim state.
Keeping his voice down, he said membership was on the rise but refused to say how many people Hizb ut-Tahrir had in Central Asia or what their short-term plan was. That, he said, was a secret.
He denied any link to the Taliban but said some people were inspired by their cause. "We respect the Taliban because they are Muslim, they are our brothers but we don't support their methods," he said.
In the divided town of Karasu, guards on the Uzbek side looked visibly stirred as a Reuters crew approached the border from the Kyrgyz side. Some shook fists and their muffled shouts could be heard from across the river.
Security here has been tight since May when Uzbekistan blamed Islamist rebels for attacks in the nearby Uzbek town of Khanabad, saying the militants had come from Kyrgyzstan.
"No one knows what will happen next. It's people like us who are suffering," said Ilkhom who works at a local market.
Speaking in the white-stoned interior of as-Sarakhsi mosque in Karasu, Imam Rashod Kamalov said the authorities used the Islamist threat as an excuse to crack down on political dissent.
His father, Muhammadrafik Kamalov, served as imam at the mosque in the Kyrgyz section of Karasu for 20 years before he was shot dead by security forces in a special operation in 2006.
An ethnic Uzbek, he was accused of aiding anti-government rebels -- a charge his supporters deny. The authorities still view this mosque with suspicion and sometimes carry out raids.
"No one knows whom they will get next time. It just shows how paranoid, how afraid the authorities are," said Rashod, rows of Arabic language theology books lined in shelves behind him.
Rashod said the crackdown had only radicalised the people and made them more inclined to follow groups like the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan which is headed by Tahir Yuldashev, a rebel leader bent on toppling Uzbek President Islam Karimov.
"When my father was killed, a lot of people offered help," he said. "If I were like Yuldashev, I could have gathered a band of my own, a terrorist group, and marched against the government.
"But I decided not to do it. My faith doesn't allow me." (For a FACTBOX on recent attacks, click on [nLT472379] (Editing by Ralph Boulton)
