Banks, chemicals boost Europe shares; Bayer jumps
2009-07-29 07:24:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities rose for an eleventh day in 13 on Wednesday, with encouraging second-quarter earnings results from companies improving investor sentiment and boosting cyclical shares such as financials.
index of European top shares rose 1 percent to 912.23 points at 1108 GMT after closing lower in the previous session, when it hit its highest level in more than 8 months.
The benchmark index, which slumped 45 percent in 2008, has gained 40 percent since reaching a lifetime low in early March, and is up more than 9 percent for the year.
Financial stocks were among the top gainers, supported by better-than-expected profits from Santander (
). Spain's biggest bank reiterated its full-year net profit target for 8.88 billion euros. [ID:nLT38648]
Santander was up 0.2 percent, while Standard Chartered Bank (
), HSBC (
), Barclays (
), Lloyds (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), BNP Paribas (
"Longer term, the earnings that we have seen mean that we are potentially looking for analysts to upgrade their forecasts, which suggests that we could look for further equity gains during the course of this year," said Henk Potts, strategist at Barclays Stockbrokers.
), Linde (
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
, which fell 5 percent in heavy turnover, posting their biggest daily drop in eight months. Before Wednesday's slide, the market had risen 89 percent this year.
The Shanghai market came under pressure partly on concerns authorities will start pressing banks to restrict lending in order to avoid an asset price bubble. However, the pull-back does not necessarily signal the start of a downtrend or any dramatic worsening of the policy or economic outlook in China.
In the past few years, the highly speculative Chinese market has often seen such sharp one-day drops without suffering long-term damage.
In the basic resource sector, steel maker ArcelorMittal (
) fell 3.7 percent after it said it made a third consecutive net loss, of $792 million, with further inventory writedowns and provisions for job cuts. [ID:nLT648279]
), Rio Tinto (
), Xstrata XTA.L and Eurasian Natural Resources (
"We are now in an important transition period for these markets and the next few days will be pivotal to see if we can continue the recent strength. Earnings news may help to keep the pullback losses to a minimum," said Jimmy Yates, head of equities at CMC Markets.
Germany's SAP (
) was up 2.4 percent after it raised the outlook for its 2009 operating margin on solid second-quarter results, giving Europe's battered technology sector a glimmer of hope. [ID:nLT405285] (Additional reporting by Joanne Frearson; editing by Karen Foster)
