UPDATE 2-CSR upgrades Q3 sales view; shares jump
2009-07-29 06:12:00.0
(Reuters) - British wireless chip maker CSR (
) on Wednesday said customer restocking would help third-quarter sales beat analysts' expectations, boosting the group's shares more than 14 percent.
Chief Executive Joep van Beurden said destocking had largely ended which, combined with the normal seasonal uptick, meant third-quarter sales would be between $195 million and $215 million, beating market expectations of about $184 million.
"Looking ahead we see a brighter picture during the coming quarter," he said in a conference call with reporters. "(But) it's too early to speak of a recovery."
Shares in the group, whose chips are in Sony's PSP and Playstation 3, rose 14.7 percent to 399 pence to lead the mid-cap
gainers by 1011 GMT, as analysts said the sales consensus for 2009 could rise 5 to 7 percent.
Nicolas Gaudois at UBS said the outlook for the third quarter was strong, but he cautioned on over-extrapolation, saying investors should factor in some single digit quarter-on-quarter revenue decline in the fourth quarter.
"We believe (the revenue guidance) reflects de-stocking ending in non-handset markets, a healthier-than-expected PND (personal navigation device) market, normalised seasonality in handsets and market share gains (Samsung, LG, China cellphone OEMs)," he said in a note.
CSR, which won back Nokia (
) as a customer in February, posted second-quarter revenue of $113 million, including $2 million from its SiRF acquisition, broadly in line with expectations, and an underlying loss per share of $0.04, narrowing the $0.06 loss in the first quarter.
The company bought U.S location-based technology firm SiRF in a $136 million all-share deal in February in order to add navigation to its multifunction chips, and better compete with Broadcom (
"The combination with SiRF has significantly strengthened our market position and growth platform -- we now offer customers a comprehensive set of innovative GPS, bluetooth and embedded wi-fi solutions," he said.
"It is meeting with wide interest across the market," he said. "The design win with our leading tier one customer is completely on track, which means you will see the first phone with DC7 in the market in Q3." (Editing by Mike Nesbit)
