Gold slides as rising risk aversion boosts dollar
2009-07-29 10:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold fell to a two-week low in Europe on Wednesday as rising risk aversion boosted the dollar, prompting losses across commodities, with platinum reversing recent gains to slide more than 2 percent.
Spot gold hit a low of $929.60 an ounce and was bid at $930.10 an ounce at 1356 GMT (9:56 a.m. EST), against $936.65 late in New York on Tuesday.
The dollar .DXY extended gains against a currency basket on Wednesday after a U.S. government report showed new durable goods orders fell more than expected in June, weighing on risk appetite already battered by a fall in Chinese equities.
VTB Capital analyst Andrey Kryuchenkov said the weak durable goods numbers had depressed stock markets and pushed the dollar higher. "(Gold) trades on the dollar and equities," he said.
"There will be a moment of volatility because the end of the week sees more data coming out," he said. "I think we can hold on $925 -- there is pretty good support there -- and I think we will not get lower than $920."
Precious metals fell along with many other commodities, such as oil and copper, in early trade after a 5 percent slide in Chinese equities hit risk appetite and lifted the dollar versus a basket of currencies.
dropped by the most in eight months on Wednesday, ending a five-day rally, on concerns banks could restrict lending.
"There is some concern that the (Chinese) government could try to tighten up credit conditions in China, which could be negative for lots of stock markets and therefore positive for gold," Daniel Smith, an analyst at Standard Chartered, said.
Investment demand for gold remained lackluster, with a further 3.36-tonne outflow from the world's largest bullion-backed exchange-traded fund, the SPDR Gold Trust, adding to a recent retreat in ETF holdings.
Physical demand for gold remains soft overall, with seasonal weakness and high prices hurting consumption in the key Indian and Middle Eastern markets. This weakness in underlying demand makes gold vulnerable to a sell-off, analysts said.
"Given the recent build in speculative longs and ETF redemptions yesterday, combined with very limited physical interest, gold remains vulnerable to a deeper correction," James Moore, an analyst at TheBullionDesk.com, said in a note.
On the supply side, the World Gold Council said official sector sales under the Central Bank Gold Agreement currently stand at just 140 tonnes so far this year, well below the total 500 tonnes allowed under the pact.
Among other precious metals, platinum fell more than 2 percent to a low of $1,162, and was later at $1,167 an ounce against $1,192.50. Palladium was at $252 against $256.50.
The two metals climbed to multi-week highs earlier this week as firmer stocks boosted hopes demand for the autocatalyst materials would pick up. However, analysts say the uptick in the dollar is being used as an opportunity to take profits.
