Nippon Steel forecasts deeper H1 loss, shares fall
2009-07-29 04:30:00.0
Nippon Steel forecasts deeper H1 loss, shares fall | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Nippon Steel forecasts deeper H1 loss, shares fall
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed, Jul 29 2009
Wed  EDT
), the world's second-biggest steelmaker, booked a second-consecutive quarterly loss amid weak demand and inventory write-offs and widened its first-half loss forecast, pushing its shares down as much as 4 percent.
), which forecast on Tuesday that it would post a profit this year as its core steel business recovers, triggering a sharp rally in its stock.
Nippon Steel also warned that it may need to revise its full-year forecast for zero profit given weak demand at home and uncertainties in Asia's export market, citing rising capacities in South Korea and China.
"Ahead of the announcement, shares of Nippon Steel had risen following JFE's better-than-expected results, and investors were inevitably disappointed with the first-half downward revision," said Mitsuo Shimizu, deputy general manager of the equity department at Cosmo Securities.
Japanese blast furnace makers now appear to have put the worst behind them as orders and production are rising, helped by a recovery in demand for exports and cars, where the order contraction had been most severe.
Nippon Steel, which trails only ArcelorMittal (
) in the global steel market, plans to restart its biggest blast furnace in southern Japan next month, though it has taken a cautious tone on demand in the second-half.
"We saw domestic steel demand plunge 30 percent in the first quarter, year-to-year, with both manufacturing and construction sectors staying in the doldrums," Shinichi Taniguchi, executive vice president of Nippon Steel, said at a news conference.
He said the company's full-year forecast figures could prove temporary given the unclear environment in the second half.
Nippon Steel aims for crude steel output of about 7 million tons in October-December, slightly above the 6.6 million tons output it plans in July-September.
The company, which also competes with China's Baosteel (
) and South Korea's POSCO (
), said its recurring loss, which is before pretax and special items, for April-June came to 56.67 billion yen ($600 million) compared to a profit of 144.09 billion yen a year earlier.
It widened its loss forecast for the April-September first half by 10 billion yen to 110 billion yen, but kept its full-year outlook at nil, against a consensus estimate of a 3.4 billion yen loss from 17 analysts polled by Thomson Reuters.
JFE, which ranks fifth globally, forecast on Tuesday a 40 billion yen profit for the year to March 2010. Its stock closed up 4.2 percent, adding to Tuesday's 7 percent surge.
JFE is aggressively shifting its focus to the export market to tap recent spikes in export prices and the potential for stronger demand in China. It plans to generate nearly half of its revenues from export markets in Asia in the July-September quarter, compared to 40 percent at Nippon Steel.
JFE aims for crude steel output of 13 million tons in the second-half, against 11.6 million tons planned for the first half.
(Reporting by Yuko Inoue; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
