UPDATE 2-UMC's Q2 profit beats forecasts, outlook rosy
2009-07-29 03:16:00.0
(Reuters) - UMC (
), the world's No. 2 contract chipmaker, swung to a second-quarter profit after three straight quarters of losses and gave a robust outlook, underlining signs of a recovery in the chip foundry sector.
The manufacturer of chips that power many of the world's technology gadgets expects its profitability to rise modestly in the third quarter and average selling prices to keep rising through the year.
) have seen a recovery in recent months due to back-to-school demand and as the effects of China's massive stimulus package to boost consumer spending kick in. TSMC, which reports results on Thursday, is expected to post sharply higher quarterly profits.
"The sector recovery has been in place since the second quarter and it should carry on for a while more," Michael On, managing director at Beyond Asset Management, which has $60 million of assets under management, said on Wednesday.
"But while UMC's profits are looking good, I'll still prefer to put my money on TSMC. The market leader always sets the agenda, and in an industry like this, it's a better idea to stick with the big guy."
Earlier this month, Intel (
UMC reported a net profit of T$1.55 billion ($47 million) in April-June, better than analysts' expectations of a T$1.04 billion profit.
"We expect increased revenues for the third quarter, and will keep a close eye on the industry situation during the upcoming quarters and proceed accordingly," UMC CEO Sun Shih-wei said in a statement.
UMC raised its capital spending for this year to $500 million from less than $400 million it had set a quarter ago. It's smaller rival Chartered Semiconducgtor CSMF.SI raised its 2009 capital budget last week to help it boost capacity to tap growing demand. [ID:nBNG357773]
The market is already pricing in a sector recovery, with UMC's shares up 86 percent so far this year, outperforming a 54 rise in the benchmark TAIEX share index
UMC ended down 1.1 percent ahead of the results, while the broader market index fell 0.8 percent. (Additional reporting by Kelvin Soh; Writing by Lee Chyen Yee; Editing by Anshuman Daga)
