Gold steady a day after drop, ETF falls
2009-07-29 12:40:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold firmed on light physical buying on Wednesday, paring the previous day's slump on receding risk tolerance after a weak U.S. confidence reading suggested consumer demand would languish for some time to come.
Oil and share prices were also beaten down by faltering confidence on Tuesday, but the dollar rose on increased demand for safe-haven assets, making gold less attractive.
Gold has become increasingly reliant on the dollar for direction recently. When the dollar weakens, gold and other dollar-priced commodities become cheaper for holders of other currencies.
"The uptrend is not yet much damaged because the market is still holding around the $938 to $935 level. We can see some reasonable buying interest there," said Louis Lok, a senior dealer at Bank of China in Hong Kong.
Spot gold was at $938.80 an ounce at 11:36 p.m. EDT, up 0.2 percent from New York's notional close of $936.65 on Tuesday, when it touched a low of $933.70, the lowest since July 17.
Gold bullion, together with oil and share prices, had been supported by economic optimism and neared $960 on Monday, the highest level since June 11.
But a rapid rise in long futures positions recently has made the gold market vulnerable to falls, traders said.
"Profit-taking hit the market yesterday. But if not yesterday it could have been at anytime ahead of the month-end and U.S. second-quarter GDP data on Friday," said Shuji Sugata, a manager at Mitsubishi Corp Futures and Securities' research section.
"Gold is being underpinned above the 25-day moving average for now, but I don't think a quick turnaround is likely," he said. The 25-day moving average stood at around $934.
In other markets, crude oil prices dropped below $67 a barrel on Wednesday, extending the previous day's decline.
Regional equities markets were mostly lower, with the MSCI Asia-Pacific index excluding Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS falling 1 percent.
But gold mostly took these in stride as it now has a higher correlation with the euro/dollar rate than with other markets, traders said.
The euro edged up toward $1.42 after falling 0.5 percent on Tuesday, when the dollar recovered from its lowest level of the year against a basket of currencies.
Investment in exchange-traded funds was sluggish, with holdings by the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund falling for the first time since July 22.
The SPDR Gold Trust said holdings fell 3.36 metric tons or 0.3 percent to 1,083.25 metric tons on July 28 from the previous business day.
TOCOM prices in yen per gram, except TOCOM silver which is priced in yen per 10 grams. Spot prices in $ per ounce.
