UPDATE 1-Nissan clings to profit in Q1 but more losses seen
2009-07-29 04:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Nissan Motor Co (
) posted an 86 percent fall in quarterly operating profit, hit by a stronger yen and declining sales, but avoided the loss analysts had expected by cutting costs aggressively.
Predicting no convincing recovery in global car demand, Japan's No.3 automaker kept its forecasts for an annual loss unchanged as a lack of hybrid cars overshadowed solid sales in China.
For the first time, Nissan, Japan's No.3 automaker, sold more vehicles in China than at home in the first half of the year.
Nissan made an operating profit of 11.6 billion yen ($122.9 million) in April-June, down from a profit of 80 billion yen a year earlier but beating a consensus loss estimate of 117 billion yen in a poll of four analysts by Thomson Reuters.
Nissan, held 44 percent by France's Renault SA (
), lost a net 16.5 billion yen in the first quarter, against a profit of 52.8 billion yen a year ago.
For the financial year to March 31, 2010, Nissan kept its operating loss forecast at 100 billion yen and its net loss forecast at 170 billion yen.
) also surprised analysts by posting a first-quarter profit on Wednesday, and raised its annual profit forecast. [ID:nT188181]
"We believe it would be premature to lift forecasts at this juncture," Nissan Chief Operating Officer Toshiyuki Shiga said, listing among the risks a further rise in the yen and drops to global car sales when government steps to stimulate demand come to an end.
) aim to spur car sales with new hybrid vehicles, Nissan is pouring its efforts into creating a market for pure electric vehicles with the first launches in Japan and the United States next year.
Partly on hopes for its lead in electric vehicles, shares in Nissan have almost doubled in price this year, making them the best performer among Japanese auto shares. Tokyo's transport sub-index .ITEQP.T gained 44 percent in the same period.
Before the results were announced, Nissan ended up 0.8 percent, while the transport sector gained 0.3 percent. (Reporting by Chang-Ran Kim; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
