China commentary blames incompetent officials for unrest
2009-07-29 02:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Incompetent Chinese officials are often to blame for incidents of mass unrest like a steel plant protest last week in which an executive was beaten to death, state media said in an unusually harsh commentary.
The official Xinhua news agency said too often local governments blamed "mass incidents" -- China's formal term for protests -- on "people who did not know the real situation being egged on".
That was just an excuse for poor governance, Xinhua said in an opinion piece published late on Tuesday.
"In recent years when large-scale mass incidents happen, more often than not local governments have not done their job properly and have dealt inappropriately with problems," the article said.
Commentaries on Xinhua -- the government's propaganda mouthpiece -- often reflect official thinking, or efforts by the secretive ruling Communist Party to defend the government line.
Although the article did not mention ethnic riots earlier this month in the Xinjiang region, in which at least 197 people were killed, it may be a veiled allusion to that incident, the most serious in decades.
The Xinhua article follows a commentary last week in the magazine Southern Window, which also criticised local cadres for their handling of a massive protest in Shishou, central China, and for failing to learn lessons from earlier mass protests.
The central government is nervous about any kind of protests or challenge to its authority, especially this year which marks the 60th anniversary of the founding of Commmunist China.
Xinhua's commentary carries an implicit warning that officials who let protests spin out of control on their watch will be punished -- a pledge Beijing has made before as it tries to mollify a population reeling from job losses due to the financial crisis.
Last week, an executive at a private Chinese conglomerate named to manage the takeover of state-owned Tonghua Steel was beaten, kicked and finally thrown down some stairs to his death after thousands protested against the deal. [ID:nPEK104877].
"Isn't the Tonghua case about not caring about the interests of the workers during a restructuring?" Xinhua said.
The commentary also took aim at cadres in southwestern Guizhou province's Weng'an county, where 30,000 residents rioted in the streets last year after allegations spread that police had covered up the rape and murder of a teenage girl.
Xinhua said the cause of those protests was general lawlessness in the region as well as officials' "rough work ethic and simple way of doing things".
"Blaming people for not having all the facts is no different from saying they are unable to distinguish right from wrong, and that is simply untrue," it added. Low level officials are often sacked in the wake of major unrest, but senior cadres rarely are. Over the weekend, the party secretary of Shishou was fired.
"Mass incidents" involving protests of more than five people numbered over 80,000 across China in 2007, the most recent year for which state media has published a figure.
Most stem from land seizures, judicial unfairness and pollution. Suppression of complaints can inflame grievances. (Reporting by Ben Blanchard, Editing by Emma Graham-Harrison and Dean Yates)
