Trade panel approves duties on China solar products
2012-11-08 01:34:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States gave final approval on Wednesday to duties on billions of dollars of solar-energy products from China for the next five years, protecting U.S. producers against lower-priced imports and raising fears of Chinese retaliation.
Beijing has protested the case each step of the way, calling it a protectionist move that threatens the future of solar energy by driving up costs for consumers.
SolarWorld, the largest U.S. solar-panel manufacturer, accused Chinese competitors such as Suntech Power Holdings of selling solar cells and panels in the United States at unfairly low prices and receiving government subsidies.
SolarWorld's German parent, SolarWorld AG, is pressing the European Union for similar curbs on Chinese solar products.
Gordon Brinser, president of SolarWorld America, told reporters the unanimous vote showed "very clearly" that U.S. producers had been harmed the imports.
The duties should allow U.S. producers to start adding jobs, but stringent enforcement is needed to prevent Chinese companies from circumventing the orders, he said.
In the meantime, SolarWorld has invested $27 million over the past year in technology that is increasing the efficiency of its solar cells, Brinser said.
U.S. and European producers complain that China's rapid expansion of solar panel manufacturing has created a massive oversupply, destroying profits and crippling share prices.
The United States imported about $3.1 billion worth of solar cells and panels from China in 2011, up from $640 million two years earlier, although both figures contain some products not covered by the investigation.
The ITC vote clears the way for the U.S. Commerce Department to issue five-year anti-dumping and countervailing duty orders on those imports, based on rates announced last month.
Suntech, the world's largest producer of solar panels, was hit with combined Commerce Department duties of about 36 percent, while another major Chinese manufacturer, Trina Solar, faces duties of about 23.75 percent.
"SolarWorld's hypocritical campaign has forced the fast-growing American solar industry to foot the bill for SolarWorld's competitive failures," Suntech America managing director E.L. McDaniel said in a statement.
"Unilateral tariffs and a trade war in today's interconnected global marketplace are unnecessary and detrimental to effective and efficient business competition," Jigar Shah, president of the Coalition for Affordable Solar Energy, said in statement.
'PREPARING FOR THE FALLOUT'
Tom Gutierrez, president of GT Advanced Technologies, whose company exports high-technology equipment used in the solar manufacturing to China, said he feared getting caught in the cross-fire in the case.
"If you punch someone in the nose, (the U.S. government) ought to have a backup plan for when they retaliate," Gutierrez said. "I'm preparing for the fallout."
In a separate 4-2 vote on Wednesday, the ITC rejected the Commerce Department's finding of "critical circumstances," which would have made the duties retroactive to 90 days before the preliminary rates were announced.
But "we are saddened to see the global ramifications of this case," the company's chief executive Liangsheng Miao said in a statement. "We are in the midst of a global trade war now, and Europe will be defending itself vigorously in the footsteps of the U.S. decision."
(Reporting By Doug Palmer in Washington and Nichola Groom in Los Angeles; Editing by David Brunnstrom and Cynthia Osterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a good start. They now need to replace the term ¡®Chinese solar products¡¯ with ¡®Chinese manufactured goods.¡¯ Then we¡¯d get somewhere. Most of U.S. history involved steep tariffs against foreign manufactured goods (20 ¨C 40%). That¡¯s why we had so many factories here. Over the past 30 years, our import tariffs have slipped to 1.3% overall. And we know where that got us. China still charges us 20%. Raise the import tariffs across the board on manufactured goods. It generates direct revenue for the U.S. while incentivizing domestic manufacturing here. To hell with the ¡°U.S. Chamber of Commerce¡± and other deceptively-named multi-national business lobbies. Their primary interest is not the well-being of the United States. They¡¯re the main reason we got into this mess.
Nov 07, 201211:51pm EST--
¡®Bout time. Let¡¯s have a level playing field. With the Chinese, that doesn¡¯t seem to exist and never has. We are a great nation, let us rebuild our industrial infrastructure without subsidized Chinese imports designed to ruin America.
Nov 08, 201212:35am EST--
