Amex seeks way to coax growth out of frugal public
2009-07-28 14:06:00.0
(Reuters) - American Express Co's (
American Express surprised investors this month when it announced that loan losses or default rates -- which have dragged earnings down in the last year -- would peak below estimates of 11 percent, boosting shares to their highest level since last October.
While several analysts raised their earnings estimates following the improved outlook, American Express still needs to find a way to coax growth out of newly frugal consumers who are increasingly reluctant to use plastic.
The company -- which started 159 years ago as an express delivery service -- makes money from consumers and merchants who pay fees every time a person uses American Express' network.
"The worst of the credit (losses) is behind them, but their No. 1 challenge is spending growth. You have a big pullback in consumer spending," said Scott Valentin, an analyst at FBR Capital Markets. He added that American Express could return to normalized earnings in 2012, once the dust from the current financial meltdown settles.
Average basic cardmember spending shrank by 15 percent, as consumers trimmed spending from travel and entertainment to groceries.
American Express Chief Financial Officer Dan Henry said last week that the decline has stabilized in recent months, but spending would remain weak.
"This will continue to be a very difficult and uncertain operating environment," Henry told analysts last week during a conference call. "In addition to dealing with the uncertain economy, we also need to adapt to the new regulatory climate in the United States and some overseas markets."
Not only are Americans cutting spending, but they are also trimming borrowing, squeezing revenue in what remains a highly competitive industry. Industrywide, outstanding credit card debt fell by $50 billion, or 5 percent, in the last nine months.
A new law aimed at cracking down on abusive practices by credit card companies is widely expected to restrain lending when it takes effect in February 2010, also hurting American Express' revenue. The company also faces the risk of tougher regulations on fees it charges to merchants.
American Express stock is up almost 50 percent this year, and is trading at around 18 times its estimated 2010 earnings, well above most financial companies.
WHERE IS THE GROWTH?
To boost growth without extending credit to risky borrowers, the Dow Jones Industrial Average component plans to invest more on marketing, and refocus on its corporate and wealthy clients.
American Express is targeting millions of debit card holders who like to pay electronically but prefer to avoid credit cards. However, the expansion in a market already dominated by American Express could take time.
The company, which issues nearly three out of four of its credit cards in the United States, could also boost its international business, especially in countries with a growing middle class such as China, India, Brazil, and Mexico.
"It will probably be the emerging markets where they can find the opportunities to grow," Valentin said.
American Express' revenue and earnings will lag their high-flying levels of the credit boom of 2003-2007, at least for some years.
"Consumers are now more focused on repairing their balance sheets than spending/borrowing, and we see few catalysts to restart true growth over the next six to 12 months," John Williams, an analyst at Macquarie Research, said in a report.
Earnings are forecast to fall 55 percent to 90 cents per diluted share in 2009, and rise to $1.61 next year, still lagging the $3-plus the company reported in recent years, according to Reuters Estimates.
American Express was the fastest growing credit card company during the credit boom, but paid a heavy price when the bubble burst as profits sank under the weight of mounting loan losses.
"Rising unemployment, a spiking savings rate, and a slow return for business spending will retard revenues through 2010," JPMorgan analysts said in a recent note to clients.
(Reporting by Juan Lagorio; editing by Matthew Lewis)
