UPDATE 3-JFE forecasts annual profit, stock up 7 pct
2009-07-28 07:41:00.0
(Reuters) - JFE Holdings Inc (
), the world's No.5 steelmaker, forecast a full-year profit on Tuesday as higher output and improved shipbuilding business help it outperform bigger rival Nippon Steel Corp (
), sending its shares 7 percent higher.
Japanese blast furnace operators now appear to have passed the trough as orders and production are rising, helped by a recovery in demand for exports and cars, where contraction in orders had been most severe.
Recent spikes in export price and the potential for stronger demand in China are expected to benefit JFE most among Japanese blast furnace makers, as exports account for about 40 percent of its sales.
JFE, which also competes with China's Baosteel (
) and South Korea's POSCO (
), said it expects mainstay steel business to swing to a 100 billion yen ($1 billion) recurring profit, which is pretax and before special items, in October-March, from an estimated 76.8 billion yen recurring loss in the first-half.
The company aims to raise crude steel output by 12 percent to 13 million tonnes in the second half, up from 11.6 million in the preceding six months.
Helped also by a turnaround in the loss-making shipbuilding business, JFE now forecasts a market-inline 40 billion yen in recurring profit for the year to March 2010.
Shares in JFE closed up 7.3 percent at 3,550 yen, sharply outperforming the iron and steel sub-sector index's .ISTEL.T 3.3 percent gain and the broader Nikkei average's 0.01 percent slide.
JFE's full-year profit forecast has brightened the sector outlook, market watchers said.
"The steel sector is in a recovery trend," said Shigeo Sugawara, senior investment manager at Sompo Japan Asset Management. "Auto production has been moving above plans. So, I think we don't have to be so bearish on the steel sector."
Nippon Steel and Asia's many other steelmakers are ramping up production as cars, electronics and other manufacturers have now started to replenish low inventory, boosting prices by about 15 percent from recent lows in April.
Still, JFE said fragile recovery in demand prevents it from boosting its capacity utilisation rates.
It would keep its two out of nine blast furnaces shut at least until the end of this financial year, and expects to keep the current run rates of around 80 percent in the second half.
"Domestic demand is fragile, except for cars. Orders are weak in sectors like shipbuilding and industrial machines," Kohei Wakabayashi, JFE's executive vice president, told a news conference.
JFE expects its shipbuilding division to generate recurring profit of 13 billion yen in the year to March 2010 on cost cuts and a decline in raw materials costs, after a 15 billion yen loss a year ago.
JFE posted a recurring loss of 67.3 billion yen in April-June, compared with a profit of 112.10 billion yen a year earlier, hit by one-time losses such as the carryover of high-cost raw materials from last year on top of weak demand.
Nippon Steel, which is to reveal its first-quarter result on Wednesday, has an expected 100 billion yen recurring loss for the first quarter, partly because of large inventory write-offs stemming from an inventory valuation method different from JFE.
