Gates says U.S. urban withdrawal going well
2009-07-28 10:27:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Defence Secretary Robert Gates said during a visit to Iraq on Tuesday that the withdrawal of U.S. combat troops from urban bases was paying off as Iraqi forces assumed the lead for the fragile security.
"Nobody's the boss or the occupier, or however you want to put it. But there's a real sense of empowerment by the Iraqis," Gates said of U.S.-Iraqi cooperation following the June 30 deadline for pulling U.S. combat troops out of city bases.
The withdrawal, a milestone in the plan to pull out all U.S. troops of Iraq by the end of 2011, raised fears among some Iraqis that untested local forces would not be able to keep Iraq from sliding back into greater bloodshed.
"Less than a month into it, I'm really heartened," Gates told reporters after addressing U.S. troops at the dusty, sun-baked Tallil air base on a sweltering summer day.
He said Iraq's security situation was "amazingly different" to that of his first visit to Iraq as U.S. defence chief in December 2006, at the height of the sectarian bloodshed that has killed tens of thousands of Iraqis since the 2003 invasion.
He will visit the largely autonomous northern Kurdish region, which appears to be drifting farther from Arab leaders in Baghdad in an impasse over oil and disputed land, and is expected to meet Kurdish President Masoud Barzani.
"We're very much positioned now as kind of an honest broker," said a senior U.S. defence official, speaking on condition of anonymity.
ARMS SALES, NORMALISING TIES
"The Arab-Kurd dimension is probably the most pressing one at the moment in terms of the issues that really need to get dealt with to consolidate our security gains," he said.
Kurdistan held parliamentary and presidential polls this weekend that, despite an unprecedented opposition challenge, were not expected to oust the ruling powers.
Part of this is the billions of dollars Iraq is expected to spend on arms, and Baghdad's interest in Lockheed Martin Corp's (
) F-16 multirole fighter jets. Iraqi officials have expressed interest in buying an initial squadron of 18 F-16s this year, with a goal to acquire as many as 96 through 2020.
"We think it's a good idea that they go with a multi-role fighter -- that it be ours," the U.S. official said.
The U.S. Congress has already been told of potential arms sales to Iraq worth some $9 billion, including General Dynamics Corp's (
) M1A1 tank, armed helicopters from either Boeing Co (
) or Textron Inc, and Lockheed's C-130J cargo plane.
France, China and Russia are among countries that have sold Iraq arms in the past. Jassim told U.S. defence officials at a Pentagon meeting last week that Iraq had conversations with "other folks" about multirole fighters, the U.S. official said. (Editing by Missy Ryan and Alison Williams)
