UPDATE 3-DineEquity shares fall after sales miss
2009-07-28 13:25:00.0
(Reuters) - DineEquity Inc, parent of IHOP and Applebee's restaurants, saw its shares plunge 11.1 percent on Tuesday after reporting same-store sales figures that were lower than expected.
DineEquity managed to post a quarterly profit that topped analysts' views, but it was a drop in domestic same-store sales at IHOP restaurants of 0.6 percent and a 4.3 percent drop at Applebee's that caused shares to sink.
Raymond James analyst Bryan Elliott said he was expecting same-store sales to rise 1 percent at IHOP and to fall just 3 percent at Applebee's.
DineEquity's (
) second-quarter net income was $18.8 million, or $1.09 a share, compared with year-earlier a loss of $23.7 million, or $1.42 per share.
Excluding items, earnings were 74 cents per share boosted by cost controls and lower interest expense. Analysts, on average, expected 36 cents, according to Reuters Estimates.
Restaurant operators P.F. Chang's China Bistro PFCB.O, Chipotle Mexican Grill (
) and Domino's Pizza (
) all reported better-than-expected profits last week, but shares were mixed as investors fretted over their prospects as consumer spending remains weak.
Even top restaurant performer McDonald's Corp (
) is not immune to investor jitters. It posted a profit on Thursday that matched analysts' view, but its shares fell after the hamburger chain's June same-store sales missed targets.
IHOP bought Applebee's in a $2 billion leveraged buyout in 2007, before global credit markets froze and consumer spending cooled. The Glendale, California-based company later changed its name to DineEquity.
Analysts have been closely watching the company's debt load, which is heavier than that of many of its peers. Its debt can create large swings in financial results and limits DineEquity's financial flexibility in a challenging market.
During the quarter, the company said, it reduced its securitized debt by $42 million. DineEquity also said it was comfortably in compliance with its debt covenants.
DineEquity stood by its forecast that Applebee's company-operated same-store sales will fall 2 percent to 5 percent in 2009, with domestic systemwide same-store sales in a similar range. It still sees IHOP's 2009 systemwide same-store sales being down 1 percent to up 1 percent. (Reporting by Brad Dorfman in Chicago and Lisa Baertlein in Los Angeles; editing by Jeffrey Benkoe, John Wallace and Leslie Gevirtz)
