U.S. and China sign memorandum on climate change
2009-07-28 13:13:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and China, the world's largest emitters of greenhouse gases, signed an agreement on Tuesday that promises greater cooperation in tackling climate change, energy and the environment.
Chinese and U.S. officials signed the "memorandum of understanding" at the State Department following two days of high-level talks in Washington to discuss economic and other strategic issues, including climate change.
"It also provides our countries with direction as we work together to support international climate negotiations and accelerate the transition to a low carbon economy," said Clinton at the signing ceremony.
Some in the United States argue Washington should not commit itself to specific reductions in industrial emissions, which could boost energy prices, until China does so as well.
But others argue that China already has taken more concrete steps than the United States and that Washington must show, in the run-up to the Copenhagen meeting, that it is serious about reducing U.S. emissions.
"We all need to take a strategic and long-term view of China-U.S. dialogue and cooperation in these areas," he said via an interpreter.
"I think our two countries have an important contribution to make to the global efforts to tackle climate change, to ensure energy security and to protect the environment and the only planet we have."
U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu praised China's efforts but said both nations needed to do more.
"Today's agreement should send a clear signal that the United States and China are ready to work together on clean energy and climate change. It sets the stage for what I hope will be many years of cooperation," he said of the agreement.
Earlier this month, during a visit to China by Chu and Commerce Secretary Gary Locke, the two countries announced they were launching a $15 million joint research project to create more energy-efficient buildings and cars and to study the development of cleaner-burning coal.
(Reporting by Sue Pleming, Editing by Sandra Maler)
