UPDATE 2-China trims fuel prices by 3 pct after big June hikes
2009-07-28 06:16:00.0
(Reuters) - China will trim retail fuel prices by a modest 3 percent after two big increases last month had raised rates to their highest ever, showing the world's No. 2 oil consumer was sticking to its partly liberalised price regime.
China will cut gasoline and diesel prices by 220 yuan per tonne from Wednesday, the government said, to track falling global crude prices, the second modest since a similar small cut in January. Global oil prices CLc1 fell sharply from above $70 earlier this month, but have since recouped most of those losses.
The cut, which had been flagged by analysts and sources a day ago, will likely do little to crimp profits at state oil firms like leading refiner Sinopec Corp (
), which is expected to report bumper first-half earnings after China linked its domestic fuel system to global crude costs, guaranteeing a profit margin.
The authorities had said the last hike on June 30 -- when crude oil topped $70 -- was still short of reflecting the full increases in crude costs, suggesting it might have paused longer after two increases that had increased prices by 15 percent.
But wholesale prices came under pressure this month as dealers unloaded stocks to cash in on higher prices while consumer demand in the world's No. 3 economy was tempered by June's hikes, forcing Beijing's hand this week.
"Following changes in international oil prices, and taking comprehensive considerations of domestic and global economic trends and domestic fuel supply situations, and based on perfected pricing system, (the government) decides to cut fuel prices," the National Development & Reform Commission said.
For a table of China's retail fuel prices: [ID:nPEK357905]
"The move sent a signal to the market that the new pricing mechanism is working properly," said Qiu Xiaofeng, an analyst with China Merchants Securites.
After the cut, China's average retail price for 90-octane gasoline stood at about $3 a gallon, some 20 percent above the the national pump prices for U.S. regular unleaded motor fuel.
The cut came after the 22-day moving average of global crude costs against which Chinese fuel is priced fell by more than 5 percent since Beijing's price hike on June 30.
Under a system in place since January, China has said it may change gasoline and diesel guidance prices -- or ceiling prices -- when the moving average shifts more than 4 percent, but Beijing would also take into account other factors such as seasonal demand, giving it some lattitude to limit fluctuations.
China last raised gasoline and diesel prices on June 30, the second time in a month and a third so far this year that took increases close to 20 percent to track a strong rebound in international crude markets. (Reporting by Chen Aizhu and Jim Bai; Editing by Jonathan Leff)
