TOPWRAP 1-Australia warns of asset bubble risks, China upbeat
2009-07-28 06:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Central banks in Australia and China indicated on Tuesday they were more upbeat about their economies but losses at Canon Inc and Hitachi Ltd of Japan underlined the damage wrought by the global crisis.
Australia and China are two countries that have fared better than most during a global crisis that erupted last year following the collapse of Lehman Brothers and which pushed most of the world's biggest economies, including the United States, the euro zone, Japan, Britain and Canada, into recession.
But a mere 10 months after Lehman's collapse, concerns are growing again that low interest rates and government spending to stave off the crisis are planting the seeds of inflation risks and fresh asset bubbles.
Australia's top central banker said the country's record low policy rates of 3.0 percent could inflate a housing bubble, while China's central bank pointed to a revival of inflation in the months ahead.
Glen Stevens, governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, said the dangers of too much borrowing chasing up asset prices had been all too evident in other countries.
"These risks have been reasonably contained so far in Australia, but it would be prudent not to push our luck here," he told a charity lunch.
World stocks hit a nine-month high on Tuesday as investors continued to ride a wave of stronger-than-expected earnings reports, though some were beginning to wonder if the rally that began in March on hopes the worst of the global crisis was over was in fact overdone. [MKTS/GLOB]
Indeed, talk of fresh asset bubbles and a revival of inflation is raising market speculation that central banks and governments will soon have to start withdrawing the massive stimulus they have given to the world economy.
"In the second half, China should change its policy direction in a timely fashion," said He Fan, an economist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a top think-tank in Beijing. "It needs to adjust the overly loose monetary stance, while sticking to its active fiscal policy."
Both the Australian and Chinese central banks noted their respective economies were benefiting from stimulus efforts. As a major commodities exporter, Australia has benefited from China's growth.
The People's Bank of China said in a report that consumer prices are stabilising after months of declines and could bottom out in the third quarter before rebounding.
The report was the central bank's most explicit official statement yet pointing to inflation as the recovery picks up. [ID:nHKG182662]
The central bank said the economy in the second quarter grew a stronger-than-expected 14.9 percent on an annualised, seasonally adjusted basis.
That underlined government data earlier this month that had shown a 7.9 percent rise in GDP from a year earlier, making the country the fastest-growing major economy in the world.
"Global commodity markets have shown an overall trend of bottoming out and 'imported' inflationary pressure is likely to rise in the future," the report said.
"Meanwhile, domestic demand is rising with continued sufficient liquidity, and inflationary expectations are emerging," it added.
, which closed on Tuesday at a 14-month high.
Investors awaited the debut on Wednesday of China State Construction Engineering Corp, which with expected proceeds of $7.3 billion, will be the biggest IPO this year.
Reflecting huge demand in the Shanghai market, Sichuan Expressway (
) tripled in price on its first day of trade on Monday, though it gave back 10 percent on Tuesday.
India's central bank was raised concerns about inflation threats. It kept its short-term interest rates on hold in a policy review on Tuesday, stressing that its priority was to nurture economic growth.
But it said India needed to get its fiscal house in order, warning that large fiscal deficits can trigger inflationary pressure. [ID:nBOM398293]
In contrast to concerns about asset bubbles, some companies are still revealing the impact of the global downturn and collapse in demand.
Canon, the world's largest digital camera maker, attributed a 72 percent slump in second-quarter profit to sluggish demand for copiers and printers and raised its cost-cutting target this year by 28 percent to $2.3 billion.
However, it reported solid demand for high-end cameras and raised its full-year profit forecast by 6 percent [ID:nT127906]
Hitachi, Japan's biggest electronics maker, said it would launch a $2.9 billion bid for five of its listed units to help it return to growth, even though it reported a 82.7 billion yen first-quarter loss, which further eats into its capital and intensifies pressure to raise funds. [ID:nT21319]
Hitachi shares fell 3.6 percent on the earnings report while Canon's stock price dipped 0.3 percent.
The MSCI benchmark for Asia-Pacific excluding Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS rose to a 10-month high, while the MSCI's world equity index .MIWD00000PUS rose to a nine-month high. (Writing by Susan Fenton; Editing by Neil Fullick)
