Aussie film festival website defaced amid Uighur row
2009-07-27 18:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Hackers have defaced the website of Australia's biggest film festival which refused to withdraw a documentary about exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer, organizers said on Monday.
The Chinese government two weeks ago protested to the Melbourne International Film Festival over the inclusion of the documentary and last week three Chinese films were withdrawn in protest at Kadeer's planned attendance at the August 8 premiere.
Beijing has blamed Kadeer for instigating this month's ethnic riots in Urumqi in Xinjiang in which almost 200 people died. She denies the claim.
The documentary tells of Kadeer's relationship with activist husband Sidik Rouzi and the fallout on her 11 children of her push for more autonomy for China's 10 million mainly Muslim Uighurs. Three of her children have been jailed.
"It just makes our position even stronger and we may even consider programing more sessions of '10 Conditions of Love'," he told state radio.
"We're also being bombarded at present by a series of absolutely disgusting vile e-mails attacking the festival and using language that I wouldn't even begin to describe on the radio, it is vile."
Uighurs are a Muslim people native to Xinjiang, in China's far west, and culturally tied to Central Asia and Turkey.
China's government accuses Kadeer's World Uighur Congress of being a front for extremist militants pushing for a separate East Turkistan homeland. She was arrested in 1999 and found guilty of "providing secret information to foreigners."
The violence saw 197 people killed and more than 1,600 wounded, mostly Han Chinese. About 1,000 people, mostly Uighurs, have been detained in an ensuing government crackdown.
Relations between China and Australia have been strained by the detention this month by Chinese security officials of four staff working for global miner Rio Tinto, related to accusations of commercial spying.
(Reporting by Belinda Goldsmith, Editing by Sugita Katyal)
