UPDATE 3-China prices to bottom in Q3, may rebound -c.bank
2009-07-28 05:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Consumer prices in China are stabilising after months of declines and could bottom out at the end of the third quarter before rebounding, the statistics department of the central bank said in a report on Tuesday.
It was the most explicit official statement yet pointing to the possibility of a return to inflation as China's economic recovery picks up steam, though analysts cautioned against interpreting it as a signal of monetary tightening.
"From an overall viewpoint, the consumer price index (CPI) will stabilise in the second half of this year and may rebound," the statistics department of the People's Bank of China said.
"Our composite index showed that CPI would hit bottom at the end of the third quarter," it said.
The consumer price index in June fell 1.7 percent from a year earlier, its fifth straight month in mild deflationary territory.
"Global commodity markets have shown an overall trend of bottoming out and 'imported' inflationary pressure is likely to rise in the future," the central bank report said.
"Domestic demand is rising with continued sufficient liquidity, and inflationary expectations are emerging," it added.
The central bank also said the second-quarter growth recovery was stronger than expected, at 14.9 percent on an annualised, seasonally adjusted basis. Earlier this month, China reported that second-quarter GDP rose 7.9 percent from a year earlier.
"We should not read too much into it. It is very common across China, across the world that people start to consider inflation, so it is OK for them to say inflation will maybe come back," said Ting Lu, economist with Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong.
Despite sustained declines in consumer and producer prices, many economists and a growing number of officials have expressed concern about a fast rise in stock and property markets recently, powered by ample liquidity.
Yi Xianrong, a researcher with the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, said that even should consumer price index turn positive, it did not mean that serious inflation was about to take off.
"For the central bank, the biggest risk now is asset price bubbles rather than inflation in the real economy," Yi said.
China's top leadership reaffirmed the country's "appropriately loose" monetary stance last week and Premier Wen Jiabao on Monday said policy would remain stable and consistent.
But He Fan, a senior government researcher, offered a contrasting opinion, arguing that China needed to devise an exit plan for its loose monetary policy as soon as possible and lean more on fiscal measures to drive growth. [ID:nPEK49724]
The central bank resumed the sale of one-year bills this month after a seven-month suspension, apparently to tighten liquidity by locking up funds for a longer period. Some analysts have said that the central bank's open-market operations marked the end of loosening, if not the beginning of tightening.
Chinese banks pumped out a record 7.4 trillion yuan ($1.1 trillion) of loans in the first half of the year, almost 25 percent of GDP.
The lending surge came initially in response to calls from Beijing for banks to provide credit support to a slowing economy at the end of last year, but the rampant loan growth has since fuelled the bubble worries.
In its report on Tuesday, the central bank did not forecast credit growth in the coming months, instead listing several factors that can boost or discourage lending.
It said that a solidified economic recovery, especially in the real estate sector, would push up overall demand for loans and that there would also be sustained demand from construction projects which had already got underway.
But other factors could cause a credit slowdown, it said. Some money lent in the first half had not yet been put to use and banks might also slow the pace of loan issuance as they bump up against the limits of required capital adequacy ratios. (Editing by Neil Fullick)
