China's solar stocks: Make hay while the sun shines?
2009-07-27 14:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese solar stocks have been stellar performers since March, outshining their Western peers on hopes renewable energy support from Beijing will boost demand from the world's second-largest energy user.
) have tripled since March, when Beijing first announced subsidies, easily outperforming Western peers such as First Solar Inc (
Beijing said on Tuesday it would subsidize 50 percent of investment for solar power projects, a move that could put China on track to become a leading market for solar equipment in the next three years.
"It's certainly not something to rush into ahead of the second-quarter earnings," said CLSA analyst Charles Yonts, adding the second quarter should improve from the first.
Global prices for solar panels dropped by about 23 percent between the end of May and mid-July due to weak global demand, according to a July 16 report by UBS.
Any share price upside for Chinese solar firms will be limited as the market still remains cautious about falling panel prices and inventory concerns, said Chan Ka-keung, chief executive of private equity firm Nature Elements Capital.
Despite the uncertain outlook, the Chinese firms are trading at astronomical valuations compared to their Western rivals.
Suntech trades at an estimated forward price earnings ratio of 46 times, while Trina Solar trades at 25 times, according to Reuters data. U.S. bellwether First Solar trades at 20 times and its rival Energy Conversion Devices ENER.O trades at 21 times.
"I advise investors to be cautious in investing in solar," said Jong-Yuk Kim, fund manager for KDB Asset Management. "Anyone who decides to invest in China's renewable space should have a huge appetite for risk."
Despite the high valuations, some investors say Chinese solar stocks are still a good buy when one looks at projected future earnings.
China's solar panel makers are bidding for projects on the back of Beijing's stimulus package for renewable energy --- expected to be the biggest in the sector globally this year.
"With China moving strongly into renewables, these companies will certainly see some sort of upgrade in terms of valuations," said Thiemo Lang, a Zurich-based senior portfolio manager with Sustainable Asset Management.
), E-TON (
), Yingli (
), Suntech and Canadian Solar (
). These companies have a superior cost position compared to the Western manufacturers," he said.
European solar cell and module makers are selling their products 30 percent higher than Chinese firms, Lang said.
"It's difficult for Western companies to enter the Chinese market. Given the Chinese companies' superior position in China, it's a no-brainer that they will dominate the solar module market on a mid to long run," Lang said. (Editing by Doug Young and Valerie Lee)
