FTSE gains for 12th day, led by banks, oils
2009-07-28 04:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index rose in early trade on Tuesday, on track to continue its winning streak into a record 12th straight session, led by banks and energy stocks as investors cheered BP's (
By 0809 GMT, the FTSE 100
was up 23.33 points, or 0.5 percent, at 4,609.46, after closing up 9.52 points on Monday at 4,586.13, hitting its highest closing level since Jan. 5.
The index has risen 11 percent over the past two weeks on reassuring U.S. corporate earnings results, and is up over 33 percent since hitting a six-year trough in March.
"In another fairly busy corporate earnings release day, BP is the one which is standing out -- and they're quite a good looking set of numbers," said Jim Wood-Smith, head of research at Williams de Broe.
"This might be the market trying for its twelfth consecutive daily rise; it's got a nice firm feel about it," he said.
Energy stocks rallied as investors cheered BP's (
) second-quarter results, and as crude held steady above $68 a barrel.
The oil giant said it had increased its cost reduction targets for 2009 by 50 percent to $3 billion, as it reported a halving in second quarter profits due to lower oil prices and weaker refining margins. [ID:nLR694861]
BP gained 0.4 percent, with Royal Dutch Shell (
), Tullow Oil (
), Cairn Energy (
Miners were also firmer, against a backdrop of rising metals prices on positive news from major consumer China.
Consumer prices are beginning to stabilise in China and inflation could bottom out at the end of the third quarter before rebounding, the statistics department of the central bank said in a report on Tuesday. [ID:nPEK181856]
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Fresnillo (
Xstrata XTA.L, however, fell 0.9 percent despite posting an 11 percent rise in first-half production of coal, its most profitable commodity, while copper output added 1 percent.
Banks added the most points to the index, rebounding after Monday's falls, with Barclays (
), HSBC (
), and Standard Chartered (
) added over 3 percent. Following his appointment as chairman of Lloyds on Monday, the former Citigroup chairman Sir Win Bischoff has backed the present CEO Eric Daniels.
) gained 1.3 percent. RBS is considering backing out of a 1 billion pounds government scheme to boost lending to cash-starved companies, The Times said.
) was the top blue-chip riser on positive broker comment after Monday's solid second quarter results, with both Cazenove and Goldman Sachs upgrading ratings for the publisher.
Defensive tobacco stocks were among the main drags on the blue chips, with British American Tobacco (
) off 0.1 percent and 0.4 percent, respectively.
Verizon Wireless, a U.S. joint venture of Vodafone and Verizon (
) asked a U.S. court for a judgment that its advertising claims to be "America's Most Reliable 3G Network" were truthful, which rival AT&T called "misleading" on Monday. [ID:nN272618]
On the economic front, investors were awaiting the CBI July distributive trades survey, due at 1000 GMT, while U.S. July consumer confidence will be a focus this afternoon. (Editing by Mike Nesbit)
