FOREX-Dollar suffers broadly, hits 8-week low vs euro
2009-07-28 04:18:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar hit an eight-week low against the euro on Tuesday as an ongoing rally in European shares suggested increasing risk appetite and boosted demand for currencies seen as higher risk.
One of those currencies, the Australian dollar, rallied to its highest level against the dollar since September, boosted after hawkish comments the nation's central bank governor fuelled speculation that interest rates may rise in the future. European shares
Analysts said the combination of higher shares and oil prices would lure more investors away from assets denominated in U.S. dollars and yen, which had benefitted from a surge in risk aversion earlier in the year, into riskier currencies.
"Over the past few weeks euro/dollar has ground higher on general risk appetite," said Martin McMahon, currency strategist at Credit Suisse in Zurich.
"In a risk-on environment, we're going to see more downward pressure on the dollar," he said, adding that it was only a matter of time before the euro climbs to its highest level of the year beyond around $1.4340
By 0806 GMT, the euro
was up 0.3 percent at $1.4280, having climbed as high as $1.4305 on electronic trading platform EBS in early European trade, its highest since early June.
Gains in the single European currency helped to push the dollar index .DXY down to 78.315, its lowest level of the year and its weakest since December.
Crude oil prices were on track to post their 10th straight day of gains, which boosted commodity currencies. The Australian dollar
jumped 1.3 percent on the day to $0.8339, its highest since September, while the New Zealand dollar rallied as high as $0.6635, its strongest in roughly 10 months.
The U.S. dollar struggled broadly, but was flat versus the yen at 95.10 yen
With few major data or events due in Europe, traders awaited U.S. May home prices for more confirmation that the U.S. housing market may be starting to recover from the worst of its slump -- a root cause of the global economic crisis. [ID:nN27525910]
U.S. officials on Monday reassured their counterparts in Beijing, which holds a massive amount of U.S. Treasuries, that Washington would return to a more sustainable fiscal situation [ID:nWEN1390] (Additional reporting by Tokyo Forex Team; Editing by Victoria Main)
