HK, China shares push forth in liquidity-driven rally
2009-07-28 05:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong and China shares rose on Tuesday as the liquidity-driven rally in the region pushed forward with scant regard for a regulatory warning on improper bank lending.
Hong Kong shares advanced 1.8 percent to finish at a near 11-month closing high in a fourth session of gains on Tuesday, as laggard stocks continued to play catch up, while local property stocks were snapped up on record new mortgage lending data.
Chinese stocks edged up to a fresh 14-month closing high, reversing early losses with a boost from surging steel shares.
"There is only one explanation, money, money and more money, said Andrew To, sales director with Taifook Securities.
"Hopefully the rally will die down after the hot money locked in the big IPOs are refunded. If you are short on the market, its okay but if you are long, this is not the time to buy," he said.
), which last week raised 50.2 billion yuan ($7.3 billion) in the world's largest initial public offering in a year, will list its shares on the Shanghai Stock Exchange on Wednesday. In Hong Kong, cement maker BBMG Corp (
advanced 372.92 points to 20,624.54, its highest closing level since early September 2008. The index vacillated between a near 11-month high of 20,664.48 and a low of 20,109.55.
Turnover rose to HK$84.8 billion from Monday's HK$80.9 billion.
Property stocks extended gains, with New World Development (
) gaining 3.9 percent. New residential lending in the territory soared to its highest on record in June, according to the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, amid low interest rates and new launches.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, was 1.93 percent higher at 12,424.58 led by a 3.8 percent gain in top lender Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) (
) built on Monday's sharp gains to rise another 4 percent, while China Unicom (
The stock had risen close to 3 percent earlier in the day on a report that China's No.2 wireless service provider had reached an agreement with Apple Inc. (AAPL.O) to be the sole supplier of the iPhone in China for three years. A Unicom spokesperson said a formal deal had not been reached. [ID:nSHA193299]
REGULATOR'S WARNING FAILS TO HALT SHANGHAI RALLY
closed up 0.09 percent or 7.65 points at 3,438.371, after falling as much as 1.2 percent to 3,392.428 intraday. The index moved into positive territory in the final minutes of trade.
Rising Shanghai A shares outnumbered losers by 579 to 299. Turnover in Shanghai A shares rose to a 26-month high of 243 billion yuan ($35.6 billion) from Monday's 240 billion yuan.
"The market will continue to trend upward as long as investors see fresh signs of a solid economic recovery," said Gao Lingzhi, strategist at Great Wall Securities Co. "The only concern is that the government may start to tighten monetary policy, which could affect market liquidity, but such a move is unlikely soon."
Premier Wen Jiaobao reaffirmed that China would maintain its current macroeconomic policies to safeguard stable and fairly fast economic growth, the People's Daily reported on Tuesday, easing investor concerns that the government might tighten its stance.
The market shrugged off warnings by the China Banking Regulatory Commission that Chinese banks must ensure that loans they issue for investment projects are actually put to use in the real economy, rather than flowing into the property and stock markets for speculation.
Steelmakers surged on signs the industry is recovering on the back of an economic rebound, with steel prices climbing over the past few weeks.
"Steel makers are benefiting from the government's 4 trillion yuan stimulus package and a rebounding property market," said Tao Zhifeng, strategist at Debon Securities Co. "Rising demand will push steel prices higher."
), China's biggest listed steel company, jumped 8.7 percent to 9.40 yuan, while Angang Steel (
) fell by its 10 percent daily limit to 9.81 yuan, however, as investors rushed to take profit a day after an explosive speculative rally in its mainland debut that pushed the shares to more than three times their IPO price. (Editing by Edmund Klamann and Chris Lewis)
