UPDATE 1-Citigroup CEO bullish on Asia - WSJ
2009-07-27 13:27:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Mon, Jul 27 2009
Mon, Jul 27 2009
Mon, Jul 27 2009
Sat, Jul 25 2009
NEW YORK, July 27
Mon  EDT
NEW YORK, July 27
) Chief Executive Vikram Pandit said the bank will not retreat from fast-growing Asian businesses, the Wall Street Journal reported on Monday, even as the bank downsizes elsewhere and prepares to give the U.S. government a 34 percent equity stake.
"There's no question in our mind that Asia is going to represent a disproportionate amount of the world's growth over the next decade," Pandit told the newspaper in an interview in Hong Kong. "That will result in big opportunities for Citi to expand its presence in trade finance, custody business and cross-border cash flows. The intra-Asia flows are going to grow exponentially."
Asia operations generated about 26 percent of the first-half profit at the bank's Citicorp operations, which businesses that Citigroup plans to keep, including retail and investment banking. Separate operations known as Citi Holdings includes businesses that the bank plans to shed.
While Citigroup wants to grow in Asia, Pandit told the newspaper that he recognizes "a significant responsibility" for the bank to be "an integral part of the American recovery," such as through efforts to help homeowners and credit card customers who cannot make payments.
Pandit said China and India remain important to Citigroup's future. He parried a question as to whether the New York-based company would consider selling its stake in Guangdong Development Bank, noting that it has held onto its biggest investment in China, and that "our actions speak."
Separately, Citigroup said it is closing its consumer finance business in Italy, which includes 65 offices, and will reduce its staff in that country by half to about 500. [ID:nLR86270]
Citi Holdings includes the bank's consumer finance businesses.
On Sunday, Citigroup said it has completed two exchange offers for preferred securities, and that the results mean the government will swap $25 billion of its own holdings into common stock, giving it the 34 percent stake.
(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel; Editing by Richard Chang)
