Gold hits 6.5 week high as dollar weakens
2009-07-27 17:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold rose to its highest level since mid-June on Monday as the dollar weakened, with investors seeking out higher risk, while platinum's move up near a six-week high offered support.
"The strength in platinum may have spilled over into gold somewhat, said HSBC metals analyst and senior vice president James Steel, adding "Anglo Platinum's CEO gave a report today and said he thought the market would move into a deficit. That ramped platinum up and lent some support to gold."
Gold prices remained in a range of $945-960 an ounce, with strong technical resistance toward the $960 mark and weakness in jewelry and investment demand capping gains.
The dollar dropped to its lowest level in more than seven weeks against the euro as a jump in U.S. new home sales bolstered the market's risk appetite and lowered the greenback's safe-haven appeal. <USD/>
Sales of new single-family homes in the United States rose by 11 percent in June from the previous month, exceeding expectations, while the inventory of homes for sale fell to an 11-year low, government data showed on Monday.
"As long as the dollar remains under pressure due to falling risk aversion, then gold should also go higher," said Commerzbank analyst Carsten Fritsch.
"At the moment, gold is not behaving like a safe haven, but is moving higher when risk aversion is declining," he added.
While gold dipped after the U.S. housing data as some investors unwound safe-haven plays, prices returned to positive levels when the dollar fell further and with added support from higher oil and equity prices, analysts said.
Oil hit a three-week high as stocks rose on prospects for an economic recovery that would boost fuel demand. Gains in oil, the bellwether of the commodities complex, are often followed by a rise in gold as investors try to price in potential inflationary risk. <O/R>
"I think the gain in oil and the decline in the dollar would also help explain the rally. And the housing data would explain why gold came down a little bit," said Steel.
Investors in exchange-traded funds stuck to the sidelines, with holdings of the largest gold ETF, the SPDR Gold Trust unchanged on Friday from the previous session.<GOL/SPDR>
In supply news, Harmony Gold (
) said it had stopped production at a mine shaft in Mpumalanga, South Africa, following a fatal accident there on Friday.
Elsewhere, the Chamber of Mines said it saw a good possibility of reaching a wage deal with workers in the South African gold and coal mining sectors.
Among other precious metals, silver tracked gold up to break above $14 an ounce for the first time since June 30.
Spot silver was up at $14.02 an ounce in late New York business, up from $13.84 on Friday in New York.
Spot platinum rose more than 2 percent to a near six-week high of $1,219 an ounce and held those gains to trade at $1,217 in late New York trade, up from $1,185 on Friday.
The world's biggest platinum producer, Anglo Platinum (
), said its first-half production of the refined metal rose 6 percent from a year before, and reiterated its full-year target of 2.4 million ounces.
Angloplat's Chief Executive Nicolau said following the report that he saw the price of platinum rising above $1,200 an ounce for the rest of the year on robust platinum jewelry sales in China, investment demand and a recovering car sector.
(Additional reporting by Carole Vaporean and Martina Fuchs; Editing by David Gregorio)
