GLOBAL MARKETS-World stocks hit 9-month peak; euro rallies
2009-07-27 07:10:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks rose to 9-month highs and the euro hit a 7-week high versus the dollar on Monday as a recent run of strong corporate earnings and anticipation of more boosted optimism for a global economic recovery.
Tokyo's stock market posted its longest winning streak in 21 years while emerging Asian stocks .MIAPJ0000PUS hit a 10-month high. U.S. stock futures pointed to a higher open on Wall Street later following strong gains in most indexes on Friday.
This week's results include Exxon Mobil (
), Honda Motor (
), Motorola MOT, Deutsche Bank (
"Risk appetite (is) quite healthy, there is lower volatility in stock markets... which continue to register gains," said Patrick Jacq, euro zone interest rate strategist at BNP Paribas in Paris.
"If these earnings are in line or above expectations we can see risk appetite continue to be in the driving seat." MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS rose 0.7 percent, hitting levels not seen since October, adding to gains over 4 percent last week.
Since March 8, the index has had 16 weeks of gains versus just four of losses.
According to Thomson Reuters data, the second-quarter earnings growth rate for the U.S. benchmark S&P 500 index
improved to -31.0 percent last week from -35.2 percent in the previous week, thanks in part to better-than-expected earnings from financial sector firms.
Of the 184 companies in the S&P 500 index that have reported earnings to date for the second quarter, 77 percent have beaten expectations.
The materials, energy, industrial sectors are anticipating the lowest earnings growth rates for the quarter.
This week, a further 146 S&P 500 companies are due to announce earnings results.
"Investors are overall still optimistic for global growth, so the dollar and yen should remain on the back foot," said Lee Hardman, currency economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ.
Investors are awaiting the outcome of a two-day meeting of top U.S. and Chinese officials in Washington, which started on Monday, on a broad range of economic, security, diplomatic, energy and environmental issues.
The United States, which ran a record $266 billion trade deficit with China in 2008, is seeking ways to rebalance trade, including persuading the Chinese to liberalise exchange rates so that the yuan appreciates to trim Chinese exports and boost imports. (Additional reporting by Tamawa Desai; Editing by Toby Chopra)
