China slams Japan for Uighur leader's visit
2009-07-27 07:40:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Monday strongly condemned Japan for allowing exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer to visit, in an apparent escalation of Beijing's campaign against the woman it accuses of instigating deadly ethnic riots.
China says Kadeer, a once successful businesswoman in China but now leader of exile group the World Uyghur Congress, planned an outbreak of violence in northwestern Xinjiang region earlier this month in which nearly 200 people died. [ID:nPEK357998]
"We are extremely dissatisfied that the Japanese government ignored the Chinese side's repeated, stern representations and insisted on letting Rebiya visit Japan to engage in anti-Chinese, splittist activities," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement on its website (www.mfa.gov.cn).
International trips by exiled Tibetan leader the Dalai Lama, who China also blames for instigating deadly ethnic violence last year, are routinely criticised by Beijing, particularly when he has been received by prominent figures, but China has rarely commented on Kadeer's travels before.
Japan's Kyodo news agency quoted Chinese ambassador to Tokyo Cui Tiankai as saying in a group interview that Beijing did not understand why she was being allowed in.
"How would the people of Japan feel if a violent crime occurs in Japan and its mastermind is invited by a third country?" Cui said.
"The matter can be considered easily when you think from the other person's viewpoint ... she is a criminal," he added.
Cui also warned that the visit should not be allowed to damage a working relationship with China which has improved recently, after years of diplomatic spats over wartime history.
"We must prevent important matters that should be worked on together from being disturbed by a criminal or attention to our common interests from being diverted," Kyodo quoted him as saying.
Hackers have also defaced the website of Australia's biggest film festival which refused to withdraw a documentary about Kadeer, organisers said on Monday.
The Chinese government two weeks ago protested to the Melbourne International Film Festival over the inclusion of the documentary and last week three Chinese films were withdrawn in protest at Kadeer's planned attendance at the Aug. 8 premiere. [ID:nSP322351] (Reporting by Ben Blanchard in Beijing and Isabel Reynolds in Toyko)
