UPDATE 2-Mori Building: aims to join new Shanghai project
2009-07-27 05:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Mori Building Co aims to join a new development project in Shanghai to build a shopping complex, while it sees growing signs of recovery in the property market at home, its president said.
Mori Building, which completed the 101-story Shanghai World Financial Centre in 2008, also plans to start a daily helicopter service this autumn between central Tokyo and Narita airport, president and CEO Minoru Mori told Reuters in an interview.
"We've also been asked (by Shanghai city) to come up with redevelopment ideas for the post-Shanghai Expo site and airport expansion plans there," said Mori, 75, an influential building tycoon in Japan who was ranked 19th on Forbes list of the nation's richest people in 2009.
The developer of the 492-metre (1,614-ft) Shanghai World Financial Centre, which at its opening in August 2008 surpassed the neighbouring Jin Mao Tower as China's tallest building, is known for a number of major projects in central Tokyo's Minato-ward.
Mori's largest project so far is the $2.8 billion Roppongi Hills complex in Tokyo's Roppongi entertainment district, which opened in 2003 with the 54-story Mori Tower, apartments, shops and movie theatres. Then in 2006 Mori opened Omotesando Hills in the city's trendy Harajuku area with dozens of shops and restaurants, making it one of the city's landmarks.
In Shanghai, the developer is proposing to build a shopping complex similar to Omotesando Hills, Mori said in his Roppongi Hills office.
"There's a plot of about 10,000 square metres (107,600 sq ft) sitting next to Shanghai World Financial Centre, and our idea is to make something like Omotesando Hills," said Mori, who was Fortune magazine's Asia Businessman of the year in January 2008.
Mori said the company is willing to join projects to draft out development plans elsewhere in Asia, not only in China.
For years Mori Building has been trying to build facilities and offer services that help attract foreign investment and raise Tokyo's profile among Asian cities.
The latest such project is to launch a daily helicopter service this September between Mori's Roppongi building and Narita, about 70 km (44 miles) from central Tokyo.
The service would cut the journey time from Roppongi to the airport to about 30 minutes, compared with an average of about 90 minutes by train or shuttle bus.
The developer is also set to spend some 100 billion yen ($1.05 billion) to build a new 53-story office complex in Tokyo's Toranomon business district as part of the government-led circular road No.2 or MacArthur Road project to be completed in 2012.
Mori said many foreign investors -- especially from South Korea and China -- are showing interest in investing in Tokyo, and Mori Building is willing to team up to complete the project with such investors.
"Unlike some other overseas markets, Tokyo's office market is big and many say that it's full of variety and worth investing in," Mori said.
"After the Lehman Brothers shock, the (property) business environment has changed rapidly ... but I have a feeling the market's recent sharp downturn has ended," said Mori, citing positive effects from a recovery in Tokyo share prices and government-led measures such as housing tax relief and plans to boost the REIT (real estate investment trust) market.
