ASIA MARKETS WEEKAHEAD-Fretting about liquidity and bubbles
2009-07-27 01:28:00.0
(Reuters) - A mere 10 months after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and a record plunge in equity markets around the world, markets are speculating about another bubble forming. It almost beggars belief.
While we're in the early stages of any asset bubble, the concern is real.
There's no denying that Asian stocks, powered by China and Hong Kong, are on a tear higher that is being fuelled by cheap money.
Look how quickly Hong Kong's money supply growth has rebounded after having plunged at a record pace, and how that compares with the feverish surge in Shenzhen A shares
For a graphic, see:
In this city of speculators, that means property is also making a surprisingly big comeback, with new apartments being snapped up at auctions.
The key issue is this: Asia's financial system was never as damaged as that in the West and thus lending is picking up, but policymakers are still spooked by the collapse in demand last year.
Whether it's China's Politburo or central banks around the region, the last thing these policymakers want to do is hit on the policy brakes too hard before they can be confident that a recovery is self-sustaining, especially with exporters still hurting so badly.
China's ever-so-slight tightening of policy by nudging money market rates up marks a start, but one that barely even registered on the bull run in stocks.
Indeed, when compared with the stock market surge during the 2006/07 bubble, the mild tightening by the People's Bank of China seems to be lagging.
For a graphic, see:
The relaunch of IPOs as a way of redirecting funds into equity and away from bank lending has backfired: it's only made Chinese retail investors all the more bullish about stocks.
), a toll road operator. Shares in the company doubled on their debut on the Shanghai stock market on Monday. [ID:nSHA182814]
Hong Kong is susceptible to asset inflation because it's dollar peg means monetary policy is dictated by the Fed, and Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke has made it clear the Fed is not going to be tightening for a while yet. China and Hong Kong are not alone.
Taiwan's money supply is rising at the fastest pace in five years. South Korea is not seeing the same kind of money growth, but officials are still worried about a rebound in property and liquidity.
A report from South Korea's Yonhap news agency on Monday said that the country's central bank and financial regulatory agency were planning to check loan and short-term liquidity data at domestic banks next month. [ID:nSEO103644]
Mild tightening of liquidity is likely, but the question is at what point does that tightening cause bullish investors to have second thoughts.
We don't seem anywhere close to that point just yet. So what to watch?
