Murder of China steel exec shows privatization risks
2009-07-27 05:38:00.0
(Reuters) - As the crowd of Chinese steel workers meeting with their new boss grew angrier, someone hurled a chair. Others began kicking and hitting him. Finally, Chen Guojun was thrown down some stairs to his death.
Chen's killing on Friday, as he was trying to manage a private conglomerate's takeover of state-owned Tonghua Steel in northeast Jilin province, underscores the risks of privatization in China as millions are thrown out of work.
As the new general manager of Tonghua, Chen had been negotiating with the crowd after 30,000 workers shut down most of the plant to try to stop the takeover by Beijing-based Jianlong Steel Holdings.
The workers feared the labor force would be cut to 5,000 under the new controlling shareholder, state media said.
"Workers may feel the state has sold them down the river, especially if there are layoffs or if the private investor moves in their own people," said Wang Erping, who studies social unrest at the Chinese Academy of Sciences Institute of Psychology.
"But I've never heard of it getting to the point that someone was killed."
Managing China's rapid transformation from a socialist-style backwater to the world's third-largest economy has been one of the biggest challenges for the ruling Communist Party.
Nowhere has this been more apparent than in the giant steel sector, where China, the world's top producer and consumer of steel, has been trying to consolidate its firms.
That has meant opting for modern plants and laying off workers at state-owned firms while promoting well-paid executives trained in capitalist finance, a process that can get ugly, especially in economically depressed areas like northeast China.
Many local governments have resisted top-down mergers, to preserve their own tax revenues or to avoid having unemployed, unskilled and disgruntled workers on their hands.
China's official policy is to promote mergers and acquisitions in the steel sector as well as in other industries burdened with inefficient capacity and too many workers.
"An incident like this shows that governments have less power than most people think when consolidating. Or rather, that power comes at a tremendous cost in social strife," said Michael Komesaroff, of Urandaline Investments in Australia, an expert on Chinese industrial policy.
Many petitioners who flock to Beijing in hopes of getting back their old jobs or pensions have grievances dating from the 1990s, when the central government shut down many state-owned textile firms and uncompetitive heavy industrial companies.
After the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, China's economy roared back, led by newly privatized sectors. But the blue-collar proletariat of socialist years has largely failed to benefit from China's rise, accepting instead an early retirement on tiny pensions.
In cases where state-owned assets were sold off to private individuals who were once government officials or managers of those firms, workers can feel even more betrayed, Wang said.
For Tonghua and Jianlong, there appears to have been bad blood from the start.
Jianlong's local unit secured a minority stake in Tonghua in 2005 in return for a cash infusion, during a restructuring of local state-owned metallurgical firms.
That takeover generated a lot of ill feeling, as did news that Chen earned about 3 million yuan ($440,000) last year, while Tonghua's retired workers got about 200 yuan a month, said the Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy, which monitors Chinese protests from Hong Kong.
But after markets started to recover and Tonghua posted a profit, management announced last week that Jianlong would buy in again, this time taking a 65 percent stake. Resentment flared.
Further details have been hard to clarify since both firms' websites were blocked on Monday. A Tonghua executive declined to comment and Jianlong could not be immediately reached.
