UPDATE 3-Angloplat H1 earnings fall; on track for output goal
2009-07-27 07:52:00.0
(Reuters) - First-half earnings at Anglo Platinum (
) all but evaporated as expected on a weaker metal price, and the world's biggest platinum producer said it had received more cash from its main shareholder to fund projects.
Angloplat, majority-owned by mining group Anglo American Plc (
), said headline earnings per share, the key gauge of profit in South Africa, fell 95 percent to 169 cents, in line with its own forecast.
Earnings were eroded partly by a 51 percent fall in the U.S. dollar price for its platinum group metals, with the price of its main product, platinum, down 43 percent to $1,085 an ounce.
The platinum price was battered by the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression and more than halved from an all-time high of $2,230 in March 2008. It has recovered somewhat since, and traded at $1,200 on Monday.
The South African firm said refined platinum production rose 6 percent to 1,056,400 ounces compared with the same period in 2008, and that it would meet its own target of 2.4 million ounces for the full year.
The company's shares fell 1.76 percent against a 0.67 percent rise in the blue chip index
"The results are in line with expectations. It's good to see they are closing expensive shafts to cut costs," said Barend Ritter, a platinum analyst at Sanlam Investment Management.
"Still, the company is under a lot of pressure in terms of the weak metal price, some of its shafts are close to breakeven and cash generation is not that good and its debt is rising."
Angloplat's Chief Executive Neville Nicolau said the company's net debt rose to 18 billion rand ($2.32 billion) and would rise further, but 80 percent of the debt was long term, posing reduced re-financing risk.
Nicolau said Angloplat would consider various options to restructure its debt. Asked during a presentation if this would include a rights issue, he said: "I guess all options includes all options."
The company's dividend payments would remain suspended.
Angloplat said in a statement Anglo had increased funding to the platinum producer by 7.1 billion rand to 20.6 billion rand, which it could make use of over the next twelve months.
Nicolau saw the price of platinum rising above $1,200 an ounce for the rest of the year on robust platinum jewellery sales in China, investment demand and a recovering car sector.
"The platinum price is expected to trend to a long-term level of $1,350 per ounce, supported by the global economy recovery," he said.
Nicolau said the company's supply of the metal could rise to 2.6 million ounces based on inventory and smelting capacity, should market demand rise in the second half of 2009.
Nicolau said major restructuring of the company's key Rustenburg and Amandelbult mines was complete, and the company will cease production in high-cost shafts. Large mines would be split into smaller ones to cut the unit cost of production.
Nicolau, who is cutting 10,000 mostly contract jobs this year and has reduced spending on new projects, said 8,903 workers had been let go since the end of December 2008.
