Highlights: Excerpts of Hu Jintao's speech to China Party congress
2012-11-07 22:38:00.0
(Reuters) - China's ruling Communist Party began a congress on Thursday at which President Hu Jintao will give up his position as head of the party to his designated successor, Vice President Xi Jinping.
In a speech at the Great Hall of the People, Hu lauded three decades of growth, which have raised China to become the world's second-largest economy after the United States and lifted hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens out of poverty, and laid out priorities and challenges for the future.
Below are highlights of Hu's speech:
"The reform of the political structure is an important part of China's overall reform. We must continue to make both active and prudent efforts to carry out the reform of the political structure, and make people's democracy more extensive, fuller in scope and sounder in practice."
Hu said the party must make unremitting efforts to combat corruption, promote integrity and stay vigilant against degeneration.
"If we fail to handle this issue well, it could prove fatal to the Party, and even cause the collapse of the Party and the fall of the state."
"We must never let words act in place of the law or (personal) power replace the law; nor will we allow disregard for the law for personal benefit."
"On the basis of making China's development much more balanced, coordinated and sustainable, we should double its 2010 GDP and per capita income for both urban and rural residents (by 2020).
"We should firmly maintain the strategic focus of boosting domestic demand, speed up the establishment of a long-term mechanism for increasing consumer demand, unleash the potential of individual consumption, increase investment at a proper pace, and expand the domestic market."
"We should unwaveringly consolidate and develop the public sector of the economy, allow public ownership to take diverse forms, deepen the form of state-owned enterprises, improve the mechanisms for managing all types of state assets and invest more state capital in major industries in key fields that comprise the lifeline of the economy and are vital to national security."
"We should develop a multi-level capital market, take steady steps to make interest rates and the renminbi exchange rate more market-based and promote the renminbi's convertibility under the capital account in due course."
"We should act to meet the new requirements of China's national development and security strategies and ensure that the armed forces fully carry out their historic mission in the new stage in the new century."
Hu added that China should implement the military strategy of active defense for the new period; expand and intensify military preparedness; and enhance its capacity to accomplish a wide range of military tasks, the biggest of which is to win a local war in an information age.
"We should enhance our capacity for exploiting marine resources, resolutely safeguard China's maritime rights and interests, and build China into a maritime power."
(Reporting by Beijing bureau; Compiled by Jason Subler; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The parallel between Hu¡¯s outgoing 2012 warning about danger from ¡°corruption¡± in the Chinese Communist Party and Eisenhower¡¯s 1960 outgoing warning about the danger posed by the ¡°military-industrial complex¡± is striking ¡ª both are astute observations by individuals with deep knowledge from an inside position of the associated character and power involved, and despite occupying the highest office in their respective countries (a major force in the world of their times) were essentially powerless to make any substantive institutional corrections for the endemic problem which they tried, perhaps bravely or foolishly, to highlight in a very public way.
Nov 08, 20121:27pm EST--
