FOREX-Euro, yen crosses edge up as stocks rally
2009-07-27 02:25:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro and commodity-linked currencies rose on Monday, underpinned by gains in stocks and oil prices, but currency moves were modest as the market kept to recent ranges ahead of U.S. GDP data due later in the week.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke reaffirmed his view of an improving but still vulnerable U.S. economy, saying the jobless rate was likely to stay high even when the economy exited recession sometime in the next few months. [ID:nN26477938]
The market took Bernanke's comments in its stride with investors also waiting to see how U.S. Treasury debt auctions go this week as well as talks between Washington and Beijing.
"After the market has priced in stronger-than-expected U.S. corporate earnings so far, investors await new incentives. Those could be the outcome from the U.S. and China dialogue and Treasury auctions this week," said a trader at a Japanese bank.
Top U.S. and Chinese officials hold talks in Washington on Monday and Tuesday on a broad range of economic, security, diplomatic, energy and environmental issues. [ID:nN23439244]
The U.S., which ran a record $266 billion trade deficit with China in 2008, is seeking ways to rebalance trade, including persuading the Chinese to liberalise exchange rates so that the yuan appreciates to trim Chinese exports and boost imports.
"Any remarks from China related to its stance on its U.S. Treasury holdings and the dollar's role is a focus," the trader said.
, not far off a seven-week high of $1.4292 set last week or its 2009 peak of $1.4339 hit in early June. It also edged up 0.1 percent to 135.00 yen EURJPY=R.
, also not far off last week's six-week high of $0.8223 or its peak for the year of $0.8265. Against the yen, it rose 0.3 percent to 77.79 yen AUDJPY=R.
The currency market was keeping an eye on share markets and oil as gauges of investor optimism about economic recovery. Tokyo's Nikkei share average
The dollar index .DXY, a measure of its performance against six major currencies, slipped back towards a seven-week low forged last week, but the greenback was steady on the day against the yen at 94.85 yen
Data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission on Friday showed currency speculators nearly doubled their bets against the dollar in the week ended July 21, with the value of dollar net short positions reaching its highest since mid-July 2008. [ID:nN24481747]
Traders said Japanese exporters had placed big dollar sell orders above 95.00 yen, which were likely to cap the dollar's gains this week.
But the dealer at the Japanese bank also said traders would be watching the impact on the yen from launches of Japanese investment trusts, or "toshin", later this week that focus on overseas assets.
U.S. gross domestic product, due on Friday, is expected to show the economy contracted for a fourth consecutive quarter in April-June, the first time that has happened in records dating to 1947. [ID:nN24483077]
Forecasts are for a contraction at an annual rate of 1.5 percent, less than the annual pace of decline in the first quarter of 5.5 percent. Some analysts expect it to be the last negative quarter of this recession.
The dollar has tended to suffer on upbeat U.S. economic news in recent months as the global economic crisis has eased, with investors gaining some confidence to move funds into assets they expect to benefit first from a pull-up from recession.
He said the Fed expected that in the next couple of years inflation would be quite low because of slack in the economy, but if the economy began to show strength the central bank would have to gradually unwind its special programmes. The Fed has been buying U.S. Treasuries as part of its special measures.
The Treasury sells a record $115 billion this week and the bond and currency markets are keen to see how demand holds up in the face of rising stock markets and a potentially improving economic backdrop. (Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
