Exclusive: U.S. sees talks with China on corporate audits
2012-11-08 17:52:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Oct 16 2012
Thu  EST
U.S. officials for the first time have completed a round of observations in China of inspections of auditors by that country's regulators, and talks are expected by year-end between Chinese and U.S. officials on access to audit documents, a key aspect of the auditor regulation process, the top U.S. auditor watchdog told Reuters Thursday.
James Doty, chairman of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), said obstacles remain, but the upcoming talks could result in a "major breakthrough."
"The fact that it is a serious discussion with decision-makers who are aware of the complexities of the issues on both sides is new," Doty said.
The Washington, D.C.-based board in recent years has reached formal agreements with many other nations on policing auditors that deal with U.S.-listed corporations overseas, but China has been a problem.
China has blocked the PCAOB's attempts to inspect audit firms there, but decided earlier this year to let the board inspectors observe Chinese authorities' own audit inspections.
The first of the PCAOB observations took place in late October, but there is still no deal in sight to allow the U.S. to do joint inspections with the Chinese, Doty said.
The observations were a step forward in building confidence and credibility on both sides, Doty said.
China has also resisted the release of audit documents to the United States, citing its state secrets law.
Officials of China's Ministry of Finance and the China Securities Regulatory Commission are expected to travel to Washington before the end of the year to discuss the delivery of documents, Doty said. "These are very serious, significant steps for them to take, given where we started," Doty said.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, which has been trying to get audit documents from China for enforcement actions, will also be involved in the talks, he said.
(Reporting by Dena Aubin; Editing by Kevin Drawbaugh, Carol Bishopric and Leslie Adler)
