WTO negotiators attack words and deeds mismatch
2009-07-24 11:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Frustration at the gap between political leaders' calls for a new trade deal and the lack of concrete progress in negotiations boiled over at the World Trade Organization (WTO) Friday.
"There is a mismatch between what the political leaders are saying in various places all around the world and the lack of any energy here," India's WTO ambassador, Ujal Singh Bhatia, told reporters.
The gulf between pledges and action is now so marked that it threatens the credibility of both world leaders and the WTO, Bhatia said.
He was talking after a meeting of delegation leaders at the WTO to review recent progress on the complex Doha talks ahead of the European summer break, and agree work plans for the autumn.
Leaders have called at a series of international forums for a conclusion next year of the WTO's Doha round to open up trade, but major economies such as the United States and India questioned whether the 2010 deadline could be met.
Negotiators at the WTO in Geneva say they are still awaiting orders from their governments to move on the remaining sticking points, with no one ready to be the first to show their hand.
India is hosting a meeting of key trade ministers on September 3-4, which Bhatia said would be a prelude on trade issues to the G20 summit of rich and emerging countries in Pittsburgh at the end of the month.
"Pittsburgh will be the crunch moment," he said.
But they have made little progress since a meeting exactly a year ago collapsed. The United States and big emerging countries like China and India were pitted against each other and there were also underlining differences between farm exporters and importers, whether rich or poor. The ambassador for Mauritius, voicing a widespread view, said, according to a participant, that concluding the Doha round could contribute to ending the global economic crisis.
Economists differ on the precise impact of a new trade deal, but say it could help by boosting business confidence and restricting the scope for protectionism.
WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy, just returned from a meeting of Asia-Pacific trade ministers in Singapore which heard another call to complete Doha, promised negotiators they would have a busy autumn, as the diary fills up with talks on specific issues in September and October.
"It is clear that for political leaders we are now entering the end-game," he said, according to a text of his remarks.
While negotiators agree on the analysis, many differ about what order issues should be tackled in, and the timing.
