UPDATE 3-China Sunergy sees reporting Q2 profit, shares soar
2009-07-24 00:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese solar cell products maker China Sunergy Co Ltd (
) on Friday said it expects to return to profitability in the second quarter, sending its shares up as much as 15 percent.
The company said quarterly solar-cell shipments "slightly" exceeded its prior view of 35 megawatt (MW) to 40MW, with margins coming at about 9 percent.
Cowen and Co analyst Robert Stone said second-quarter shipments likely came in at about 41 MW, while average selling prices were down about 12 percent, compared with the company's forecast of a 15 percent decline.
The analyst currently expects the company to just about break-even on an operating basis, and to earn 2 cents to 3 cents a share on a non-operating basis, with revenue coming in at about $59.5 million.
"That's a huge improvement versus consensus estimates. What we'll have to see is the trend on volumes and prices in the second half. I suspect that the trend, at least on shipments, will be higher based on the second-quarter results."
Analysts on average currently expect China Sunergy to post a loss of 15 cents a share, before items, on revenue of about $49 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
The company's bright outlook comes a day after SunPower Corp SPWRA.O reported second-quarter results that blew past estimates, while China's LDK Solar Co Ltd (
The news comes even as a dearth of financing for renewable energy projects combined with a pullback in solar tax breaks in Spain have led to a flood of solar panels on the market, driving down prices and profits across the industry.
Hurt by falling average selling prices and its inventory of high-cost wafers, China Sunergy had reported a negative gross margin of 23.7 percent for the first quarter.
"End-customers for solar systems are coming back into the market now, financing seems to be freeing up a bit, and volumes seem to be going up as these lower prices make the return pretty attractive," Cowen's Stone said."
The company, which had previously guided towards second-quarter margins in the low single digits, now expects margins to come in at about 9 percent.
In May, the company began purchasing lower-cost polysilicon wafers at spot market prices, which, it said, would bring down the inventory cost in the coming quarters.
Prices of polysilicon rose to $500 a kilogram last year as solar manufacturers scrambled to buy supplies due to shortages, but new production capacity and shrinking demand has pushed those prices near the $50 mark in recent weeks.
China Sunergy, along with Solarfun Power Holdings Co Ltd SOLF.O, Canadian Solar Inc (
) and LDK Solar got squeezed by this steep drop in prices, forcing them to take inventory write-downs.
China Sunergy shares were up nearly 15 percent at $5.69, making it among the top percentage gainers Friday on Nasdaq. More than 1.7 million shares changed hands in intra-day trade, twice the company's 10-day moving average.
The stock, which has so far quadrupled since touching a year-low in November 2008, is still off nearly 60 percent from its August 2008 year-high. (Reporting by Adveith Nair in Bangalore; Editing by Jarshad Kakkrakandy)
