PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - July 25
2009-07-24 22:28:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Jul 24 2009
Wed, Jul 22 2009
Wed, Jul 22 2009
Tue, Jul 21 2009
Mon, Jul 20 2009
Fri  EDT
Data from the Office for National Statistics reveals that Britain's economic performance in the second quarter of 2009 was unexpectedly poor. In recent surveys, economists had predicted a decline in gross domestic product of 0.5 per cent. However, the contraction was 0.8 per cent. A 0.6 per cent decline in the UK's services industry caused the most disappointment and puzzlement because the fall appeared to contradict a recent CIPS/Markit purchasing managers index survey showing that the service sector had in May finally begun to recover.
Car production in Britain was 30.2 per cent lower in June than a year earlier, a smaller annual fall in output than in May. 91,718 cars were made in the country in June, and 410,710 in the year to date, 50.2 per cent fewer than between January and June 2008. The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said on Friday that the figures were a sign of gradual recovery. Paul Everitt, SMMT chief executive, said: 'The UK motor industry is weathering the global recession and beginning the long road to recovery.'
PUB COMPANIES FACE PROBE OVER 'TIED' TENANTS
Camra, the campaign for Real Ale, has lodged a strongly worded memorandum with the Office of Fair Trading in which it calls for an urgent investigation into the beer tie arrangement which requires pub tenants to purchase their beer supplies from the pub owner. Camra said that 'tied' beer prices and high rents are driving many pub tenants out of business and contributing to the 'destruction' of the ailing sector. The move comes two months after MPs urged the government to refer the tie arrangement to the Competition Commission. Figures released this week show that the rate of pub closures has accelerated from 39 a week to 52 a week over the first half of the year.
) has begun offering mortgages to credit-starved British borrowers at rates below many of the deals on offer from established UK lenders. The world's third largest bank, which in the UK has previously focused on Chinese communities, wishes to become a household name alongside lenders such as Barclays (
), Vittorio Colao, has made an impassioned case for consolidation in the UK mobile phone market, saying that the current situation hurts profitability. Mr Colao said that he was 'positive' about consolidation because it should enable mobile operators to secure cost savings. Vodafone's weakness in the UK mobile market was highlighted on Friday in the company's first-quarter trading update. Underlying sales in Europe dropped 4.4 per cent in the three months to 30 June compared to the same period in 2008. Underlying sales in the UK fell 4.7 per cent. Vodafone reported group revenue of 10.7 billion pounds for the first quarter, a 9.3 per cent rise which was mainly due to sterling's weakness against the euro.
) faces uncertainty over the group's rail franchises after the Department for Transport confirmed on Friday that it was still considering stripping National Express of its rail operations. Cosmen and CVC confirmed their interest in National Express on Friday after the Financial Times revealed their involvement. The uncertainty surrounding National Express was one of the reasons that FirstGroup (
), a previous potential bidder, announced earlier in the week that it would not pursue an offer.
In a trading statement to coincide with its annual meeting, United Utilities (
) said that it will hit its earnings targets this year despite the economic downturn putting pressure on revenue from water bills. The company said that dividends, which were cut by 30 per cent last year, would be increased by five per cent next year. Trading was in line with expectations, with the group recording a pre-tax profit of 508 million pounds this year, and earnings per share of 58.10 pence. United said that lower demand from customers, high energy prices and rising levels of bad debt were putting pressure on the business.
The British Airways BAY.L wholly-owned subsidiary OpenSkies is abandoning its all-business class service between Amsterdam and New York JFK after only nine months of operation. A fall in traffic numbers has forced BA to shrink the venture and mounting losses have forced it to restrict its investment in OpenSkies as it seeks to protect its cash reserves. The cancellation of the Amsterdam route may undermine efforts to attract investors to rescue the venture, support its current losses and back its future expansion. The venture is the first time that BA has operated direct long-haul flights between continental Europe and the US, putting it into direct competition with powerful rivals such as Air France-KLM.
Park Resorts is close to agreeing terms with its lenders on restructuring the terms of its debt of 330 million pounds. The caravan park operator has been hit by falling caravan sales and cuts in discretionary spending. However, according to people familiar with the matter, the company is understood to be recovering. The private equity firm GI Partners bought Park Resorts in March 2007 for 440 million pounds and over the last two years has injected about 45 million pounds in fresh equity.
Davenham DAV.L saw its shares fall 15 per cent to 15.25 pence on Friday after it warned of significant operating losses. In a trading update, the asset-backed lender to small and medium-sized businesses said that the losses were 'principally due to the impairment of its property loan book arising from further deterioration in the property sector'. Most of Davenham's property loans have been made to small residential developers.
) (the shares now trade on a prospective price/earnings ratio of nine times, suggesting there is better value elsewhere)
