WRAPUP 1-Swine flu spreads; health officials plan vaccines
2009-07-24 17:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Global health officials stepped up efforts to prepare for quick vaccination against the H1N1 pandemic virus, saying on Friday it appeared now to be affecting older age groups spared earlier in the pandemic.
"As the disease expands broadly into communities, the average age of the cases is appearing to increase slightly," the WHO said in a statement.
The virus has been notable for affecting older children and young adults, groups normally not hard-hit by influenza.
The CDC said summer camps and military facilities were affected, but both agencies said there was no evidence the virus was mutating into drug-resistant or more virulent forms.
The CDC broadened its recommendations for seasonal flu vaccine -- saying all children over the age of 6 months should get one, in part to lower the overall burden of respiratory disease when autumn and winter come. [ID:nN24480490]
WHO said vaccination against H1N1 might start in weeks, even though clinical trials to test the safety, efficacy and needed dosage of H1N1 vaccines have barely started.
"Manufacturers are expected to have vaccines for use around September. A number of companies are working on the pandemic vaccine production and have different timelines," WHO said.
At least 50 governments have placed orders or are currently negotiating with pharmaceutical companies to secure supplies of H1N1 vaccines, which are still being developed. [ID:nN16442908]
), Baxter (
), AstraZeneca's (
"We are continuing to see transmission here in the United States in places like summer camps, some military academies and similar settings where people from different parts of the country come together," the CDC's Dr. Anne Schuchat told reporters in a telephone briefing.
"This is very unusual to have this much transmission of influenza during the (summer) and I think it's a testament to how susceptible people are to this virus."
WHO has said the pandemic is unstoppable but some countries are still trying to limit its spread, in part by detaining travelers. Britain's Foreign Office said at least 160 Britons are being held in quarantine in China, Singapore, India and Egypt [ID:nLO303658].
"There are differences in reporting. In some places, we're hearing about only the severe cases. In other places, we're hearing about illness that's in the community," she said.
She declined to call the pandemic "mild" and noted that people had died and many others had spent weeks in hospitals, sometimes on ventilators.
) and Gilead Sciences Inc's (
The drugs should be reserved for people at high risk of complications who have been in close contact with a known case, she said. (With additional reporting by Michael Kahn and Avril Ormsby in London; Writing by Maggie Fox, editing by Alan Elsner)
