Is there a bug in Taiwan tech shares?
2009-07-24 00:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Attractive valuations and an influx of liquidity have fueled optimism for further gains on Taiwan's Technology-heavy stock market, although key tech plays remain vulnerable because of expensive pricing and competition from larger regional rivals.
After a rocky start to the year, Taiwan's market has risen 40 percent to become the world's second-best performer after China. The main TAIEX
stock index has been driven by technology shares, including Mediatek (
), the world's top chip designer, whose shares have almost doubled in value this year. Share valuations of touch-screen makers including Wintek (
Some optimists believe Microsoft's (
) launch of its Windows 7 operating system in October will offer a further boost, for PC manufacturers and brands including Quanta (
To the bulls, three themes are frequently repeated: valuations remain relatively low, Chinese investments in Taiwan could extend the rally, and many investors remain flush with liquidity and few options on where to place it.
"There's so much liquidity in the market right now," said Harvey Chang, a fund manager who invests $1.5 billion on behalf of SinoPac Securities Investment.
Foreign institutions have been a huge source of incoming liquidity in recent months, having bought a net total of nearly T$240 billion ($7.2 billion) worth of Taiwan stocks since April, according to figures from the Taiwan stock exchange.
"They're all looking for some place to invest and I think the Taiwan stock market is one of their targets."
The TAIEX share index is trading at more than 20 times forward earnings, more than double the level in November last year, according to Thomson Reuters data.
Some analysts say some of these figures are inflated now because of currently depressed earnings, and investors should look for companies that have sufficient growth potential instead looking solely at valuations.
) as examples of companies whose valuations may appear expensive, but could still be attractive because of their strong growth potential.
"It doesn't take much for China to have a huge impact on our economy," said Kevin Huang, a fund manager at King's Town Bank.
"A single swoop and they can easily drive up Taiwan's stock market in a few weeks. Unless there's a sudden turnaround in this government's policy, closer economic ties are likely to continue."
IT'S ALL PRICED IN
However, the bears are less optimistic that the rally can be sustained.
Commonly raised themes include increasingly intense competition from regional peer South Korea, and a lack of evidence of a pick-up in consumer demand in the U.S. and Europe.
"Shares are no longer cheap right now," said Michael On, who manages about $60 million on behalf of Beyond Asset Management.
"Although things are looking up now, there's still no real clear sign and I'm afraid this buying is all going a little overboard."
Some of the island's companies still play second fiddle to rivals such as Samsung Electronics (
) of South Korea, and some analysts fear these larger rivals could end up squeezing out smaller players.
They point to the recent collapse in prices of dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips, used mainly in PCs, as an example of market conditions that bigger rivals in South Korea are better placed to weather because of their economies of scale, compared with smaller competition in Taiwan including Powerchip 5387.TWO.
"Everything has been priced in now, looking at the way things are going," said Angela Hsiang, an analyst at KGI Securities. "Unless you're looking at earnings from next year or the year after, it's really no use running after shares now."
) remain better bets, the bears say, as they remain relatively resilient against any sort of impending downturn.
There is also little evidence of a pick-up in consumer demand in many of Taiwan's traditional export markets such as the United States and the European Union, with consumer confidence in both areas still hovering around record lows.
Many of Taiwan's tech companies such as chip giant TSMC (
) depend on Western economies as their primary export markets, and a lack of demand for tech devices could see the current optimsim fizzle out quickly.
"Tread very carefully," said Vincent Chen, an analyst at Yuanta Securities. "Consumer confidence in Western markets is still a big question mark, and nobody can say for sure whether it's going to pick up soon."
