Germany calls carbon tariffs "eco-imperialism"
2009-07-24 10:42:00.0
(Reuters) - European Union environment chiefs warned against trying to impose "carbon tariffs" on countries that do not join a global deal on tackling greenhouse gases, but France said they could be used as a last resort.
France says carbon tariffs could play a role if countries fail to agree a global climate deal in Copenhagen in December, but Germany called the idea a form of "eco-imperialism" and a direct violation of WTO rules.
The issue of greenhouse tariffs has met bitter opposition from developing countries such as China and India, which count on the developed world to buy their exports to help them cope with the fallout from the worst financial crisis in decades.
Matthias Machnig, Germany's State Secretary for the Environment, told a news briefing on Friday tariffs on imports from countries that do not tackle carbon emissions would send the wrong signal to the international community.
"There are two problems -- the WTO (World Trade Organisation), and the signal would be that this is a new form of eco-imperialism," Machnig said. "I don't think this is a very helpful signal for the international negotiations."
Carbon tariffs to protect European industry, although not ideal, should be an option if Copenhagen fails, he told Reuters.
"This is not an end in itself. But we will have to explain ourselves to the European workers," he said.
The U.S. House of Representatives has already passed legislation that contains carbon tariffs. It would allow the United States to impose duties on imports of carbon-intensive goods such as steel, cement, paper and glass from countries that have not taken steps to reduce their own emissions.
But Swedish Environment Minister Andreas Carlgren, whose country holds the six-month European Union presidency, said member states currently had no "plan B" beyond landing a deal in Copenhagen. He said there was as yet no official proposal on the table from the French regarding carbon tariffs. "We are absolutely against each try to make use of green protectionism," Carlgren told Reuters. "There should be no threat of borders, of walls or barriers for imports from developing countries."
EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs has said member states should keep the French idea in mind, but also worries how such tariffs could be viewed by other countries.
The WTO's says import tariffs can be imposed if such taxes are also imposed on a country's own industry to ensure a level playing field, although such tariffs would run counter to its goal of reducing barriers to trade. (Additional reporting by Johan Ahlander and Julien Toyer; editing by Philippa Fletcher)
