UK's Brown: banks stable, strategy needed for growth
2009-07-24 05:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Global banks have stabilized since the economic and financial crisis hit last year, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Friday, but work still needs to be done to ensure a return to economic growth.
"I think we're at a point where the banks have been stabilized, but we don't yet have a strategy for a full return to growth," Brown said ahead of a seminar with economists to discuss international financial reform in the run up to the G20 summit in Pittsburgh in September.
The British economy shrank more than twice as quickly as expected in the second quarter, data released Friday showed.
Brown said an issue he intended to bring up at the seminar was foreign currency reserves, saying large holdings were not always good.
"I want to raise the issue of reserves, the holding of substantial reserves, which may not be wholly to the benefit of growth in the world economy," he said in introductory remarks open to a small group of reporters.
China has the biggest stockpile of foreign reserves in the world, much of it in dollar assets. The United States is pressing China to boost its domestic consumption in order to help ensure balanced growth around the world.
Brown said there was work to be done on getting global agreement of reform of institutions like the International Monetary Fund (IMF), created in the aftermath of World War Two and now cast in a central role in helping to fight recession.
"We would like to be able to report to the G20 in Pittsburgh that there was a growing consensus on the need for reform of international institutions so that they can meet all these new tasks for a global economy," he said.
"That demands a great deal more consensus than there is at the moment and we would have to work very hard to achieve it," he added.
"What I'd like to explore this morning is the short-term, medium-term and long-term changes that we have got to make so that we have a world economy that is capable of growth in the years to come," he said.
