UPDATE 3-Merck KGaA hit by Erbitux setback; Q2 results poor
2009-07-24 09:37:00.0
(Reuters) - An EU review panel dealt a body blow to Merck KGaA's (
) ambitions to extend the range of patients for its most promising drug, overshadowing weak earnings from the German pharma-to-chemicals hybrid.
Merck's shares plummeted 12 percent after advisors to European Union regulators recommended that Erbitux -- which the company sees as a potential blockbuster -- should not be used to treat lung tumours, the world's most common form of cancer.
Merck's previous goal for Erbitux sales to exceed the 1 billion euro mark in 2011 would now "clearly be delayed, but our strategy remains unchanged," a company spokeswomen said on Friday, declining to be more specific.
Merck said late on Thursday that it might contest the recommendation by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), whose assessments drugs regulators generally endorse.
"Though Merck KGaA may appeal and request re-examination of the data, the committee's decision means Erbitux is either significantly delayed or won't ever make it to (the lung cancer) market," UBS analysts wrote in a note to investors.
Erbitux, which is currently approved to treat some types of bowel cancer and cancer of the head and neck, underpinned Merck's second-quarter results, contributing growth of 18 percent to sales that, overall, met market expectations by staying unchanged at 1.9 billion euros.
) hold the rights to Erbitux in the United States and Canada. Both firms' Frankfurt-listed shares were trading slightly higher by mid-afternoon.
Higher drug research costs drove a 42 percent fall in Merck's second quarter earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) to 184.5 million euros ($262.4 million), Merck said on Friday. The figure was far less than the 217 million average expected by analysts in a Reuters poll.
Merck, which is also the world's largest supplier of the key chemicals used in television and computer screens, said its liquid crystals unit saw a modest revival in demand from a massive slump at the end of last year.
The unit posted an earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) margin of 27.4 percent, up from 10 percent in the first quarter but still far below the margins of around 50 percent it registered for much of 2008.
In early July, Samsung Electronics (
), the world's top maker of flat TVs, forecast second-quarter earnings well above market estimates. [ID:nSEO324424]
) of the United States last month raised its short-term forecast for sales of specialty glass for flat-panel displays, citing strong demand for flat-screen televisions especially in China. [ID:nN30429602]
Merck said it now expected a 2009 decline in liquid crystals sales of 25 percent at worst, compared with the 30 percent it had foreseen earlier.
J.P. Morgan and UBS both lowered their recommendations on Merck's shares after the Erbitux news, saying the CHMP opinion was highly unexpected.
CHMP said in a statement on Friday: "The medicine did not have a convincing effect on how long patients lived without their cancer getting worse," and also cited severe side effects in some cases.
The head of Merck's drugs unit Elmar Schnee called the assessment "extremely disappointing."
In a Phase III study last year, overall survival of non-small cell lung cancer patients on Erbitux plus a standard chemotherapy was about five weeks longer than those who received chemotherapy alone.
Further analysis of the trial showed that Erbitux worked on those patients in the group who had skin rashes early during therapy, while those without the rash were not helped by the drug.
At 1324 GMT Merck shares were down 14.2 percent at 62.99 euros, trading at their lowest level in more than two months.
The company's shares trade at 12 times estimated 12-months forward earnings, roughly in line with global drugs peers, according to StarMine, which weights estimates according to analysts' track record. ($1=.7030 Euro) (Editing by John Stonestreet and Karen Foster)
