UPDATE 2-Chartered sees higher Q3 sales, ups 09 capex
2009-07-24 12:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Contract chipmaker Chartered Semiconductor CSMF.SI raised its 2009 capital budget forecast by a third after narrowing its second-quarter loss, helping it boost capacity to tap growing demand.
However, some analysts say the Singapore-based company needs to invest aggressively to upgrade its technology or it risks losing more market share next year in a market dominated by TSMC (
The world's two biggest foundries, which supply chips to fabless chip designers and chipmakers that are stepping up outsourcing to cut costs, have benefitted from China's massive stimulus package since early this year that has fuelled consumer spending on electronic devices.
"Among the top four foundries, we will buy TSMC and UMC while not optimistic on the other two," Nomura semiconductor analyst Rick Hsu said.
"We know Chartered is moving to more advanced technology but the company might won't have a chance to see a profit until the third quarter of next year."
Chartered ranks alongside China's Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp (SMIC) (
), and trails larger rivals TSMC and UMC, which own about a two-thirds share of the $20 billion chip foundry market.
Chartered said it expects third-quarter revenue to grow 9-13 percent from the second quarter's $349 million, helped by rising demand for PCs and other consumer products that use chips. It raised its 2009 capital spending forecast to $500 million, up from $375 million previously.
Chartered CHRT.O booked a net loss of $39.4 million including a tax benefit in the second quarter, marking its fourth straight quarterly loss. But the loss narrowed from $98.8 million in the first quarter.
By comparison, TSMC (
) probably made its largest profit in three quarters in the second quarter, while loss-making UMC (
) could have become profitable after three quarters of losses, according to analysts. [ID:nTP35599] Both companies release results next week.
Chartered's five-year credit default swaps spreads CSMF5YUSAC=MP, which offer protection against defaults on debt, have tightened to 392 basis points from a high of 1,100 in late March.
Chartered said its research and development expenses were $45.8 million in the second quarter, down 4.6 percent from the first quarter, mainly due to lower cost of development activities related to certain advanced technologies.
However, Chartered Chief Executive Chia Song Hwee said his company will continue to hire research and development engineers, even though he did not give an estimated figure.
"R&D engineers recruitment is kind of ongoing thing," Chia said in a telephone interview. "We will see some incremental resources added." (Additional reporting by S. John Tilak in BANGALORE;, Editing by Anshuman Daga)
