UPDATE 3-NXP swings to profit, confident on debt
2009-07-24 06:54:00.0
(Reuters) - NXP Semiconductors [NXP.UL] swung to a second-quarter profit, boosted by a debt exchange gain, and said it is making good progress towards being able to support its debt load which falls due in several years.
Struggling with the industry-wide downturn, NXP said it reduced debt in the second-quarter by $517 million in a bond exchange offer, while debt was further reduced early in the third-quarter by $744 million in various other transactions.
Chief Executive Richard Clemmer said if the dichotomy between the market-trading value and the face-value of the company's bonds continues, NXP would consider entering into new debt reduction deals.
"None of our bond debt becomes due until late 2013. We have sufficient time to create the profitability to be in a position to support that," Clemmer told Reuters.
But the company said it owed its lenders $6.05 billion at the end of June, down from its overall debt of $6.37 billion on Dec. 31, while its cash position stood at $1.37 billion, down from the $1.71 billion at the end of the first quarter.
Ratings agency S&P reduced its rating this week on NXP's secured and unsecured notes to CC with a negative outlook, to reflect its assessment that NXP's capital structure and financial risk profile is still "highly leveraged".[ID:nWNA9656]
NXP's total group second-quarter sales rose to $903 million from $702 million in the first quarter and it said it expects third-quarter sales to rise between 10 and 20 percent compared with the second-quarter.
The company's second-quarter profit of $344 million was boosted by a gain from a bond exchange offer in April and compares with a $568 million loss in the previous quarter and a $319 million loss last year.
"Although we have recently experienced positive order book developments, we believe this may be driven mainly by supply chain replenishment and not by a fundamental improvement of the semiconductors market," the company said in a statement.
Clemmer said although China was seeing signs of economic improvement due to telecoms and consumer stimulus packages, NXP had not yet seen any economic improvement in the U.S. and Europe due to stimulus packages, outside of the automotive industry.
NXP said it is on track with its cost savings and upped its targeted savings to $700 million from $550 million to be achieved by the end of 2010. It still targets 4,500 job cuts.
) has accelerated a restructuring programme, while ASML (
ASML, whose orders are an indicator of forward demand for customers such as chipmaker Intel Corp (
), reported this month an upsurge in orders but no full recovery. [ID:nLF497717]
) in 2006, and sold to a private equity consortium that includes KKR [KKR.UL]. Philips still has a stake of about 20 percent. (Editing by Simon Jessop and Rupert Winchester)
