UPDATE 1-Shanghai bourse selects funds to launch global ETFs
2009-07-24 05:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The Shanghai Stock Exchange has selected around 10 fund managers as candidates for a final three to launch the bourse's first ever exchange-traded funds (ETFs) based on global stock indices, a source close to the matter told Reuters on Friday.
The move will allow Chinese investors to trade global stock indices for the first time via the ETFs, the source said, adding the indices could cover major U.S., European and Asian markets.
Analysts see the move as part of reforms China is launching to modernise its financial system, in particular to transform its financial hub Shanghai into a global financial centre by 2020.
Earlier this month, Shanghai took the lead in China by launching a pilot programme allowing companies to settle imports and exports in yuan. This was part of a move to upgrade the city's financial mechanisms that the government says will reflect the rising status of China's economy and its currency.
Among other reforms, firms listed outside China's mainland, such as China Mobile (
), will likely be able to float shares in Shanghai as early as next year, officials and analysts have said.
"The fund managers have been asked to submit their proposals for the ETFs by late July, which appears to be quite a complicated new product in China," the source said.
Candidates are mostly big names in China's fund industry, the source said, such as Harvest Fund Management Co, Bosera Asset Management Co and ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co.
The main obstacles for ETFs include China's capital controls, with the yuan
not fully convertible, and thus Chinese investors not being allowed to own overseas stocks, analysts said.
But China has used innovations such as the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor and Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor schemes to allow foreigners into its markets, and domestic investors to trade outside China, with some restrictions.
In contrast to an excessive use of certain tools such as derivatives in some Western countries, which helped spark the global financial crisis, China urgently needs new products which also include index futures and options, to upgrade its economy to a fully market-oriented level, analysts said.
The country set up the China Financial Futures Exchange in 2006 to develop a series of financial derivatives based on stock indices, exchange rates, interest rates, bank loans and bonds.
But the launch of these products has been delayed mainly due to fears about risk sparked by the crisis, though analysts now expect some of the products to be launched next year. ($1 = 6.83 Yuan) (Writing by Lu Jianxin)
