TOPWRAP 5-Stocks fly as company profits, econ data encourage
2009-07-23 16:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Better-than-expected corporate earnings and a rise in U.S. existing home sales for June offered hope on Thursday that stimulus spending was easing the global downturn, though a rise in U.S. jobless claims foreshadowed a lethargic U.S. recovery.
The housing report of a faster-than-expected 3.6 percent annualized rise in previously owned homes in June [ID:nN23387481] offset downbeat data showing new jobless claims rose last week by 30,000, in line with expectations. [ID:nN23379623].
"The economy is hopefully bottoming here and I think the question is how much growth do we get and how quickly does it come, as opposed to are we going to get worse and worse," said Robert Macintosh, chief economist at Eaton Vance Corp (
The optimism jolted European and U.S. stocks higher, with the Dow Jones industrial average
rising above 9,000 for the first time since January.
Some economists warned, however, that once these efforts fade, underlying demand may not be strong enough to sustain the apparent recovery. Dallas Federal Reserve Bank president Richard Fisher expressed this view on Thursday, saying that while prospects for the U.S. economy are picking up, there are questions about how sustainable the rebound will be. [ID:nN23425512].
Data from France showed industry bosses were more optimistic about the prospects for their business than expected in July and at any time since November. The reason, though, was because inventories hit rock bottom rather than a renewed demand. [ID:nLN170872]
"It's not good at all," said Olivier Gasnier, economist at Societe Generale of the French data. "It shows that the improvement in industry is linked to the process of destocking, which in the short term is in itself favored by the government's stimulus plan in one sector, cars."
Lending contracted by $1.5 trillion in January-March at current exchange rates, or over 4 percent, according to data from the Bank for International Settlements.[ID:nLN257748] But forecast-beating earnings inspired a renewal of the rally in global stocks.
In New York, the Dow Jones Industrials jumped 187 points, or 2.11 percent, to close at 9069, after trading as high as 9096.
) posted a $2.3 billion quarterly net profit, mainly due to debt restructuring, and said it was on track to at least break even in 2011.
) posted a smaller-than-expected drop in quarterly profit, while Philip Morris International (
Some analysts cautioned, however, that the upswing on equities markets might not have much further to run, with share prices no longer looking so cheap and economic data still patchy.
Oil Clc1 climbed and held above $65 a barrel, buoyed by European and U.S. equities and renewed speculation that an upturn could boost demand.
) said underlying pretax profit was ahead of its expectations, while Carphone Warehouse, Europe's biggest mobile phone retailer, said it met or just beat first-quarter revenue and customer growth forecasts.
British retail sales jumped at three times the rate analysts expected in June, as hot weather and early summer discounts boosted clothing sales. The UK's Office for National Statistic said sales volumes rose 1.2 percent last month, but economists promptly put the figures in context. [ID:nONS004383]
"No one should take too much comfort from today's figures. Household retrenchment has a way to run yet, especially with unemployment rising," said Colin Ellis, European economist at Daiwa.
Japan's exports to China, the United States and Europe, posted narrower annual declines. The overall value of Japan's exports fell an annual 35.7 percent in June, an improvement on the 40.9 percent decline in May. [ID:nT193634]
"The key for the outlook is whether U.S. consumption will pick up, and when. Given the dire job conditions there, we can't expect it to happen soon," said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute.
"That might cap Chinese growth and therefore Japanese exports." (Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide, Editing by Philip Barbara)
