UPDATE 2-U.S. to urge more Chinese domestic consumption
2009-07-23 17:48:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States will urge China to boost domestic demand and rely less on exports when officials from Washington and Beijing meet for two days next week, Obama administration officials said on Thursday.
With the U.S. economy likely facing a long, slow slog out of recession, Washington is set to argue at high-level talks here that Beijing can no longer count on free-spending U.S. consumers to fuel Chinese economic growth.
"We're going to talk about how China can restructure its economy and produce, in particular, more consumption-led growth," said David Loevinger, the U.S. Treasury's coordinator for the high-level talks.
He said the talks would include suggestions for financial reforms that would allow Chinese households more opportunities to build wealth, which should encourage them to spend more.
In the past, U.S. officials have urged Beijing to spend more on social programs to create a safety net so that Chinese consumers feel less driven to sock away big savings for medical or other emergencies and have more to spend.
"All this ultimately gets back to jobs in the U.S," Loevinger told a news briefing. "If the Chinese can increase their consumption, reduce their trade surplus, that's going to mean more U.S. exports, more U.S. jobs."
CURRENCY TALKS, AGAIN
U.S. officials said the Strategic and Economic Dialogue talks on Monday and Tuesday would also touch on the value of China's yuan currency as part of a broader discussion of policies aimed at rebalancing China's economy toward more spending and less saving as the United States moves in the opposite direction.
The Obama administration has been less insistent than the former Bush administration about insisting that China speed up the move toward a freely floating yuan, though it has said the currency is undervalued given China's economic might.
"We need to have a frank discussion with the Chinese and they need to prepare for a new U.S. economy and a new global economy," one of the officials said.
In the course of the two days, Chinese officials will make the rounds on Capitol Hill and among Washington's business lobby, much of whom are skeptical that Beijing is ready to tone down an export-driven economy that is nowt the third largest in the world.
But realistically, that project could take "50 years," Larsen said, after he and other lawmakers met U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner on Thursday to discuss the talks.
"We need to assume that this is a long-term prospect. This is not flipping a switch. ... I expect China's exports to continue to grow, but I expect them to be less important to China's growth over time." Larsen said.
Among other key topics, U.S. officials said they will intensify efforts to persuade China to join the World Trade Organization's government procurement code, which would open up government purchases to more foreign firms.
One of the officials said China made a commitment to do so when it joined the WTO in 2001, but the next step on government procurement was "long overdue," particularly as China ramps up purchases in its economic stimulus program.
The July 27-28 talks in Washington are an extension of a bilateral dialogue started by the Bush administration in 2006, but will be expanded to include more foreign policy issues.
The U.S. officials said the talks will include discussions about regional security issues, including a "fair amount of attention" to North Korea, as well discussions about Iran and the conflicts in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
"We look forward to discussing a broad range of global security issues, non-proliferation, counter-terrorism," one of the officials said.
The U.S. officials also said the talks would address Chinese perceptions of barriers to their investing in the United States, but they said that security reviews by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States were not thwarting opportunities outside of a very narrow range of national security concerns.
The United States would stress the need for both countries to do all they can to sustain their economic recoveries through maintaining their monetary and fiscal stimulus programs, Loevinger told Reuters before the briefing.
The United States also intended to discuss in the July talks investment in China's service sector to help create jobs to soak up surplus rural labor, he said. (Additional reporting by Paul Eckert, Glenn Somerville, Doug Palmer; Writing by David Lawder; Editing by Leslie Adler)
