UPDATE 2-Telenor posts strong Q2, tweaks revenue outlook
2009-07-23 05:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Norway's Telenor ASA (
Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) for one of the world's biggest mobile groups with 168 million subscribers rose to 7.82 billion crowns ($1.24 billion).
It beat an average forecast for 7.6 billion crowns in a Reuters poll of 16 analysts, whose predictions ranged between 7.37 and 7.91 billion crowns.
"In spite of pressure on the top-line development, our operations are improving their performance, resulting in a record high operating cash flow," said Chief Executive Jan Fredrik Baksaas.
Telenor, which has operations in 13 countries in Europe and Asia, affirmed its 2009 guidance for an EBITDA margin of around 34 percent but put a negative slant on its organic growth goal.
"Telenor expects organic revenues in line with 2008, however on the negative side," it said in a statement, declining to say whether this meant the company now expected lower sales in 2009.
"A pretty decent report -- once again slightly ahead of expectations with strong results in core operations," said Espen Torgersen, analyst at Carnegie, who said the slightly lower 2009 revenue projection was a "given" due to the economic crisis.
Telenor also its cut capital expenditure target, excluding investments in India, to 13 to 15 percent of its revenues from an earlier prediction of 15 to 17 percent.
An impairment charge of 1.97 billion crowns in its Serbian operations -- linked to a poorer outlook for the country -- hit its bottom line, with earnings per share down to 0.86 crowns from 2.19 a year ago and missing consensus at 1.53.
Telenor also said it did not make any provisions for a Russian court case, where it could lose its multi-billion dollar stake in Russian mobile group Vimpelcom (
Russian bailiffs seized Telenor's 30 percent voting stake in Vimpelcom and plan to auction it off within months, unless the Norwegians pay a $1.7 billion fine awarded by a Siberian court in a contested case against a small Vimpelcom shareholder.
"It is more likely than not that this case would not have a material adverse effect on the financial position of the group, and accordingly no provision has been made for any liability or loss of shares in these financial statements," Telenor said.
Baksaas also said he expected consolidation in the Pakistan mobile market, one of Telenor's fastest growing, after reports that Telenor may be in talks with China Mobile (
"Pakistan is a market where we can expect some consolidation to happen, so it is no wonder that some of these (reports) are coming forward," he told a news conference.
