PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - July 24
2009-07-23 16:46:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Wed, Jul 22 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Thu  EDT
) yesterday reported revenue of A$484 million for the June quarter. The result is 35 percent lower than for the same period last year, and 10 percent below the March quarter figure. Analysts say the continuing falls in revenue may force the company to undertake a further capital raising to meet future capital expenditure requirements. Santos currently has an estimated A$11.5 billion of capital expenditure upcoming for two liquefied natural gas projects. Page 43.
Michael Anderson, the chief executive of radio network Austereo Group AOGPF.PK, has resigned after six years in the role. Mr Anderson yesterday said 'The company is in good shape. It's a good time to hand it on to someone new.' Mr Anderson's contract expires at the end of June next year, however, he said he was likely to leave the company before then. Executive chairman Peter Harvie praised Mr Anderson, describing their relationship as a 'terrific partnership.' Page 43.
) yesterday rose 10.3 percent to A$9.84 on speculation that the company is in talks with Chinese chemicals trader SinoChem Corp on a possible takeover by SinoChem. The Australian Securities Exchange is believed to have queried the company on the rise, and a response is expected soon. Nufarm chief executive Doug Rathbone played down the rumours, but added, 'we are a public company. If there is an offer put to us of suitable terms, then we must consider it.' Page 43.
) yesterday doubled the number of points holders of its loyalty cards will receive for every dollar spent over the next few days. Woolworths loyalty card holders will receive two Qantas Frequent Flyer points for each dollar spent at its supermarkets and BIG W stores. The move is the latest in the battle for customers between Woolworths and major rival Coles, and follows last week's offer of up to A40 cents a litre off the price of petrol by both companies. Page 44.
) has been accused of undermining the authority of the government of Guinea by the African country's Mines and Energy Minister, Mahmoud Thiam. In December, the government revoked half of Rio's licences for the Simandou iron ore mine. However, Rio is contesting the decision and has refused to move equipment from the site. A spokesperson for Rio yesterday said 'we remain confident of our rights, including legal rights, to the full concession.' Page 18.
) yesterday announced that 23 data entry roles at its subsidiary, BT Financial Group, would be moved offshore to India. The bank said the 23 people affected by the decision would be 'upskilled' and retained. However, the Finance Sector Union has accused Westpac chief executive Gail Kelly of breaking an 'unqualified commitment' made last May to stop the practice of outsourcing local jobs overseas until economic conditions improved. Page 19.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission yesterday said promotions run last week by supermarket retailers Woolworths and Coles were not anti-competitive. Both companies, which each control around 22 percent of the retail fuel market, offered customers up to A40 cents a litre off fuel. Independent fuel and grocery retailers complained that the discounts were an abuse of market power, however, fuel commissioner Joe Dimasi said the short-term offer did not breach the Trade Practices Act. Page 19.
) yesterday announced that it will launch a multi-million-dollar advertising campaign in a bid to regain business customers. The airline has lost customers for its premium international and domestic services following the global economic downturn, however, Qantas spokeswoman Olivia Wirth yesterday said that 'early indications are for a slight improvement in the business travel sector.' Qantas says it wants to emphasise features important to business travellers such as service, lounges and flight frequency. Page 19.
Creditors to collapsed broking house Opes Prime will today vote on a deal which would provide them with A37 cents in the dollar of the A$631 million in outstanding claims against the firm. If rejected, creditors would face lengthy and costly court battles with Opes financiers Australia and New Zealand Banking Group and Merrill Lynch. Analysts say that despite anger over the role of the banks in the failure of Opes, creditors are expected to accept the settlement. Page 17.
) and Visy face reduced margins over coming years as customers seek damages against the two groups over their previous illegal cartel arrangements. On Wednesday, Amcor reached a settlement with confectionery group Cadbury which included cheaper future contracts for Cadbury. A number of other customers are believed to have negotiated cheaper contracts already, and a class action by smaller customers is expected to reach court next year. Page 18.
) has completed its A$2 billion institutional placement successfully at A$21.50 a share, above the underwritten floor price of A$21.20 a share. The unexpected raising had initially provoked speculation that rival banks Westpac Banking Corporation and Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) would also undertake raisings to increase their Tier 1 capital ratios. However, analysts say this is unlikely, as Westpac and CBA are unlikely to make any capital-dilutive acquisitions in the near future. Page 18.
GSK also announced that it intends to treble production of the drug, with Biota receiving a royalty of at least 7 percent on global sales. Biota chief executive Peter Cook said GSK's decision to increase production could lead to global sales of up to A$3.5 billion for the drug each year. Page 19.
Mining companies say they will seek to protect the jobs of expatriate workers after the Federal Government's abolition of section 23AG of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The changes mean that Australians who work overseas for more than three months but under two years are required to pay Australian tax for the time they are out of the country. Treasurer Wayne Swan yesterday said that the changes are designed to 'improve the fairness and integrity of the tax system and to protect Commonwealth revenues.' Page 4.
Chinese company Chinalco remains eager to invest in Australian resources, despite its failed attempt to purchase mining company Rio Tinto, according to analysts. Speaking at the Australia China Business Council in Beijing, West Australian Premier Colin Barnett yesterday assured Chinalco president Xiong Weiping that he would provide special attention to Chinese investors to enable them to surmount any investment difficulties. Mr Xiong said that he was 'very encouraged' by Mr Barnett's comments. Page 2.
Peter McCarthy Ward, a former telecommunications executive at Britain's BT Group, will advise the Federal Government on whether telecommunications company Telstra (
) should be split. Mr Ward will specifically look at whether Telstra should have its wholesale and retail divisions separated in order to increase competition. Mr Ward has previously supervised the separation of one of Britain's leading phone companies. Telstra claims that there is no need for separation. Page 3.
The start of the Gorgon liquefied natural gas project on Barrow Island off West Australia, has been delayed until September 14. The project was originally planned to begin on August 31. Analysts say that the development will assist in boosting the West Australian economy, which has been severely effected by the global financial crisis due to project deferrals and production cutbacks. Energy company Chevron, the operator and 50 percent partner of the project, has already awarded A$1.7 billion in service contracts. Page 3.
