UPDATE 2-Taiwan's AU eyes Q3 turnaround, helped by China demand
2009-07-23 04:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's AU Optronics (
) aims to return to a profit in the current quarter after posting a narrower second-quarter loss, showing how China's massive stimulus spending is changing the fortunes of the world's No.3 LCD maker.
China's stimulus measures have boosted demand for personal computers and flat-screen TVs that require liquid crystal displays (LCDs), benefiting AU more than larger South Korean rivals Samsung Electronics (
), thanks to Taiwan's closer ties with the mainland.
The ties with Chinese TV vendors could yield more orders for the island's LCD makers, even though some analysts say they are facing shortages of some key components such as glasses used to make panels following robust demand.
Showing its confidence in the upturn, AU said it would be running at almost full capacity in the current quarter and raised its 2009 capital expenditure to up to T$75 billion ($2.3 billion) from its previous forecast of T$50-T$60 billion.
"China's purchasing power is very strong and the trend is going to continue, so don't have to worry too much now," said Michael On, managing director of Taiwan's Beyond Asset Management.
Major LCD makers, including AU and LG Display (
), have recently announced plans to build new factories, but if they overestimate demand, and sales in the U.S. and Europe fail to catch up with China, an inventory surplus would emerge again next year.
AU, which is a supplier to top brands such as Dell Inc (
), Hewlett-Packard Co (
), said on Thursday it booked a net loss of T$6.6 billion ($201 million) in April-June, versus a profit of T$20.4 billion a year ago and a loss of T$20.2 billion in the first quarter of 2009.
Analysts had expected a second-quarter net loss of T$10.96 billion, according to the average forecast of 12 analysts polled by Reuters Estimates. AU has now posted a net loss for three straight quarters. For a graphic, click:
Last week, LG Display said it returned to profit after two quarters of losses on robust demand for flat-screen TVs. [ID:nSP56216] Samsung, the world's largest LCD maker, reports earnings on Friday and has indicated its earnings will top analysts' forecasts.
AU expects its third-quarter shipments of TV panels, which make up about half of its total sales, to rise 10 percent from the second quarter and the price gains in percentage terms for both PC and TV panels to be in the low teens in the same period.
New applications such as touchscreen PCs, electronic reading devices and more high-definition TVs should help spur fresh demand for panels, AU President L.J. Chen told an investor conference, where his company released the results.
"New capacity and new technology are important because that can boost our value," Chen said.
Investors chased the stock before AU released the results on Thursday. AU's Taipei-listed shares rose 0.4 percent, outperforming the main TAIEX's
AU shares are up 55 percent so far this year, in line with the big board's 52 percent gain. ($1=32.86 Taiwan Dollar) (Additional reporting by Argin Chang; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
