CORRECTED - Basra officials give tentative backing to BP Iraq deal
2009-07-23 03:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Local politicians from Iraq's southern oil hub of Basra said on Wednesday after meeting with officials from BP (
) and China's CNPC they were pleased by a draft deal to develop Iraq's largest producing oil field.
The BP-led group won the right to develop Rumaila field at an energy auction last month in Baghdad, the first chance since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003 for foreign firms to get a crack at a country boasting the world's third-largest oil reserves.
Representatives from the foreign firms met with members of Basra's provincial council in a gathering hosted by Oil Minister Hussain Shahristani in Baghdad to discuss the 20-year development contract for Rumaila, council members said.
"Today, we are 90 percent satisfied the contract will benefit Iraqis. There's none of the ambiguity we had feared would stain it," said Waleed Hameed Qitan, a council member who was one of three delegates sent by Basra's provincial council to observe at the Baghdad meeting.
Basra politicians have been wary about the BP deal, expected to bring the field's output from around 950,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 2.85 million bpd, and asked Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki to ensure them a role in talks with foreign firms.
Earlier on Wednesday, a BP source said it may be difficult to meet an August deadline to sign the contract for Rumaila, the only deal awarded in Shahristani's June 30 auction that put a total of eight fields on the block.
Shahristani has faced wide and varied opposition from many quarters, including parliament, unions and even members of Iraq's state-run oil industry.
Such opposition is seen as only adding to the risk global oil majors face in doing business in Iraq, where violence continues and where a murky legal and regulatory environment raises fears about longevity of contract terms.
There is even an ongoing feud over whether current law requires Shahristani to submit such deals to parliament. He contends they do not, but some oil and gas committee members are vowing to block the deals if he does not yield.
Nevertheless, the chance to pump oil in Iraq, whose reserves may be even larger than currently estimated, is appealing.
Many Iraqis, especially those who living near oil and gas fields, fear the government will squander oil riches by signing up to ill-conceived contracts or, worse, allow foreign companies to walk away with the country's most precious resource.
Such oil nationalism runs deep in Iraq, where Saddam Hussain nationalised the industry and kicked out foreign firms in 1972.
"We left the meeting today convinced that the Iraqi government is sincere, has a strong nationalist sentiment and is determined to get the maximum benefit from this contract," said Besma al-Selemi, another local council delegate.
"We have came to the conclusion that we should go ahead with these contracts." (Writing by Tim Cocks; Editing by Missy Ryan and Lisa Shumaker)
