Guinea tells Rio to give up Simandou fight-report
2009-07-22 22:13:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
MELBOURNE, July 23
Wed  EDT
MELBOURNE, July 23
) to give up its battle to retain concessions on the $6 billion Simandou iron ore project, saying the global miner was destabilising the West African country, the UK's Times newspaper reported on its Website on Thursday.
Guinea last year gave the rights to a portion of Rio's Simandou concession to BSGR, a firm owned by an Israeli diamond trader, which has no history of producing iron ore.
In a letter to Rio dated June 26, Guinea's mines and energy minister Mahmoud Thiam said: "We regret to observe that Rio Tinto seems to ignore this sovereign decision from our Government with a doggedness verging on defiance of the authority of the State," the Times reported.
It said the letter went on to accuse Rio of a campaign against the government, with the letter adding that "such activities come dangerously close to destabilising civil peace and weakening our socio-economic balance."
Rio has spent $450 million on exploration at Simandou and considers it the world's largest undeveloped iron ore deposit.
"Rio Tinto has in all its actions, public statements and letters to the Government of Guinea indicated its desire to conduct good-faith discussions. Rio Tinto is confident of its strong legal standing as well as the win-win nature of our agreements with Guinea for the development of this project. We remain optimistic about the findings of any fully independent review of the Simandou issue," the company was quoted saying.
The row with Guinea comes on top of Rio's confrontation with China over the arrest of four employees detention on suspicion of spying during iron ore contract negotiations.
Rio's spokeswoman in Melbourne was not immediately available for comment.
Rio's shares last traded up 1.9 percent at A$56.85, defying a 0.3 percent fall in the broader market. (Reporting by Sonali Paul; Editing by Jonathan Standing)
