UPDATE 3-Kingfisher's better sales spark profit upgrades
2009-07-23 06:21:00.0
(Reuters) - The renewed popularity for home and garden do-it-yourself projects and low cost room makeovers by cash-strapped consumers helped Kingfisher's (
) second-quarter sales top forecasts, prompting broker upgrades.
Europe's biggest home improvement retailer, which trades from over 820 stores in eight countries, beat forecasts for the 10 weeks to July 11 at both its market leading businesses, B&Q in the UK and Castorama in France, growing market share, but it remained cautious on the outlook for consumer spending.
"It's tough out there, but a spell of barbeque weather and people's renewed enthusiasm for DIY has clearly been helpful. But I believe it will be some time before we see more general spending improve in the wider economy," said Chief Executive Ian Cheshire.
Nevertheless, analysts at Credit Suisse, Kingfisher's joint house broker, said in a note that consensus profit forecasts for the group's year to end-Jan. 2010 were likely to move to around 420 million pounds, a 12 percent improvement on its estimates. In the previous year the group made 368 million pounds.
Shares in Kingfisher, which have nearly doubled in value over the past year, outperforming the DJ Stoxx European retail index .SXRP by 62 percent, were down 2.1 percent at 201.75 pence by 1017 GMT, as investors booked profits.
WORST OVER?
Britain's retailers have been hit hard by the economic recession, particularly sellers of 'big ticket', discretionary, items, but there are signs the worst may be over.
Also on Thursday, British telecoms and retail group Carphone Warehouse (
) met or just beat first-quarter revenue and customer growth forecasts, and said consumer markets were experiencing a period of "prolonged stability". [ID:nLN690033] [ID:nLN730020]
At B&Q, second-quarter sales at stores open more than a year rose 0.7 percent, while the gross margin benefited from fewer price cuts. This compares with analysts' consensus forecast of a 3.5-percent fall and a first-quarter rise of 3.2 percent.
The first-quarter benefited from weak comparative numbers, a later Easter this year and very helpful weather, whereas comparatives were much tougher for the second-quarter.
B&Q said sales of kitchens, bathrooms and bedrooms performed particularly well, helped by new ranges and the withdrawal of rivals, notably the MFI chain that went into administration last year.
Underlying sales at Castorama fell 0.8 percent, and margins were flat. This compares with analysts' consensus forecast of a fall of 2.5 percent and a first-quarter decline of 1.2 percent.
In Kingfisher's other international markets, comprising Poland, China, Spain, Ireland and Russia, underlying sales fell 2.7 percent. Poland topped hopes with a 3.5 percent rise.
