PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - July 23
2009-07-22 16:58:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Wed  EDT
) chief executive Cameron Clyne yesterday backed the upbeat view of the Reserve Bank of Australia, saying the economic recovery appeared to be under way. Despite this, NAB would take a cautious approach and raise A$2.75 billion from investors to buttress itself against tough trading conditions, Mr Clyne said. "Until the cycle normalises we just don't feel comfortable being an outlier in this position," he said, adding that the capital raising would "give us a buffer against some of the headwinds we are experiencing." Page 1.
Inflation has fallen to its lowest point in a decade and is well below the Reserve Bank of Australia's (RBA) target band of 2 percent to 3 percent. The consumer price index grew by 0.5 percent in the June quarter, dragging the annual rate down 1 percentage point since the March quarter to reach 1.5 percent. The results suggest the economy has not slowed as much as had been feared, fuelling speculation that the RBA will lift its growth forecasts when it releases its quarterly statement on monetary policy in August. Page 1.
A new report says that the average balanced retirement fund declined by 13 percent in the year to June, the worst performance on record. Funds with higher exposures to equities suffered worse results, as the S&P/ASX 200 Index fell 24.2 percent in the 12 months to June 30. However, the Chant West survey says that over the past 15 years super funds have posted an average annual return of 6.9 percent. "Over the long term funds have still been delivering what they said they would," said Chant West principal Warren Chant. Page 1.
Coalition frontbenchers yesterday rebuffed Liberal backbencher Wilson Tuckey's email to Coalition members, which accused Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull of "arrogance and inexperience." The email, which voiced Mr Tuckey's concerns about Mr Turnbull's potential support for the Government's emissions trading scheme (ETS), was sent to Liberal and National members yesterday. Senator George Brandis dismissed Mr Tuckey's comments as "ill-tempered and belligerent", and insisted the opposition was not divided over its position on the ETS. Page 4.
-- A report released yesterday reveals that 25 Queensland Police officers have been involved in illegal and improper dealings with prisoners or engaged in other corrupt behaviour. The report, released by the Crime and Misconduct Commission, says some police continue to take illegal payments, confect charges and pass on confidential information to informants. A culture of "noble corruption", where police were willing to break the law to solve crimes, was prominent in the Force, the report said. P1.
Some of Australia's largest electricity generators are warning that the introduction of an emissions trading scheme (ETS) could cause an "industry crisis" and possible future disruptions to power supplies. The generators, which provide more than 20 percent of Australia's east coast power, are also asking for between A$5 billion and A$20 billion in extra assistance from the Rudd government. Green groups and the government's emissions trading adviser Ross Garnaut have argued that the sector should get no compensation at all. Page 1.
New figures reveal that the Federal Government's A$673 million remote housing package is likely to deliver as few as 300 houses, less than half the number originally promised. Northern Territory Government ministers have been warned that up to 70 percent of funds allocated for the Strategic Indigenous Housing and Infrastructure Program have been swallowed up in contractor's fees, expensive consultants and government administration fees. So far not one house has been built as part of the Program. P2.
China's Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei yesterday said that China has sufficient evidence to charge imprisoned Rio Tinto (
) executive Stern Hu with illegally obtaining state secrets. "We aim to get an outcome from the case as soon as possible, but of course we need to fully complete the legal process first," said Mr Yafei. Rio Tinto Iron Ore chief Sam Walsh continues to defend the four detained Rio employees, saying on the weekend that the accusations were "wholly without foundation." Page 2.
-- The popular northern beaches wildlife park where "Skippy the Bush Kangaroo" was filmed in the 1960s looks likely to close permanently after the intervention of the State Government and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA). Waratah Park Earth Sanctuary still holds more than 100 native animals, despite being closed for two years. Last week the RSPCA had to put down two emaciated kangaroos, and the State Government has ordered that the animals, which cannot survive in the wild, be moved to other wildlife parks. Page 1.
New South Wales (NSW) Health Minister John Della Bosca has voiced his concerns about a plan for a federal takeover of public hospital outpatient services. "If what has been reported is correct, then we would have very serious reservations," he said yesterday. The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission has put a proposal to the Federal Government which suggests the Government take control of all public health care outside hospitals. Mr Della Bosca said he was concerned that the plan could see NSW lose the Medicare payments which it is heavily reliant on. Page 2.
The Sydney Catchment Authority says a controversial longwall coalmine directly beneath Woronora Reservoir could crack the dam floor and endanger water supplies. New South Wales Planning Minister Kristina Keneally approved a modified version of the plan last month, saying it was a trade-off between environmental damage and jobs. U.S. mining company Peabody Resources, which owns the mine, says the operation is safe and will not lead to any loss of water. Page 3.
A new survey of 263 non-profit organisations has found that 60 percent have lost revenue in the last six months and 75 percent expect further loss of income over the next twelve months. Charities have suffered from reduced corporate philanthropy and a drop in investment income, whilst also having to manage rising costs. However, donations from "the small end of town" are holding up better than those from other sources, the report says. The non-profit sector employs more than 880,000 people and turns over A$76 billion a year. Page 4.
-- A three-year study by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) has found that the Coorong Wetland system in Southern Victoria is suffering from "hyper-salinity", with almost complete decline of crucial vegetation, fish and bird species. "Essentially, there is no longer an estuary," the study said of the 145-kilometre system of lagoons at the end of the Murray River, traditionally a mix of freshwater and seawater. The findings will add to political heat around the reform of the Murray-Darling river system. Page 1 .
A Melbourne private college that caters to international students has been found to have breached the most basic educational standards. An audit by the state education regulator has revealed that the Victorian Institute of Training and Learning in Clayton, which caters to 330 international students mainly from India, is providing a three-year cooking apprenticeship in just 40 weeks. Classes were overcrowded, students were being overcharged, and teachers were unqualified, the regulator said. The college is currently suspended from enrolling new students. Page 1.
Scientists said yesterday that a 7.8 magnitude earthquake that occurred last week has moved the south of New Zealand 30-centimetres closer to Australia. The quake, which was the biggest in New Zealand in 78 years, caused only minor damage to buildings and property on the South Island. However, earthquake scientist Ken Gledhill, of GNS Science, said the shift illustrated the huge force of the tremor, which was the biggest in the world so far this year. Page 3 .
Melbourne Lord Mayor Robert Doyle yesterday revealed the city's new logo, a strong and flexible "multifaceted M", which cost the council almost A$240,000 to develop. Mr Doyle said the new branding would save the council money by gradually replacing about 50 different logos currently in use. However, the president of Ratepayers Victoria, Jack Davis, said the spending on the logo was a waste of money. "It's rather ridiculous to spend a quarter of a million to design a logo in this time when ratepayers are suffering badly," he said. Page 3.
