TOPWRAP 3-Company results boost recovery hopes
2009-07-23 10:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Better than expected company results offered hope on Thursday that stimulus spending was helping ease the global downturn, but a rise in U.S. jobless claims tempered hopes of a swift recovery.
U.S. stocks opened little changed after government data showed that new jobless claims rose by 30,000 in the last week, in line with expectations. [ID:nN23379623]
"The economy is hopefully bottoming here and I think the question is how much growth do we get and how quickly does it come, as opposed to are we going to get worse and worse," said Robert Macintosh, chief economist at Eaton Vance Corp in Boston.
Governments have pumped trillions of dollars into corporate rescues and economic stimulus measures that appear to be bearing fruit. But some economists warned that once these efforts fade, demand may not be strong enough to pick up the slack.
Data from France showed industry bosses were more optimistic about the prospects for their business than expected in July, and than at any time since November. The reason, though, was because inventories hit rock bottom, rather than a recovery in demand. [ID:nLN170872]
"It's not good at all," said Olivier Gasnier, economist at Societe Generale of the French confidence data.
"It shows that the improvement in industry is linked to the process of destocking, which in the short term is in itself favoured by the government's stimulus plan in one sector, cars."
Lending contracted by $1.5 trillion in January-March at current exchange rates, or over 4 percent, according to data from the Bank for International Settlements.[ID:nLN257748]
But forecast-beating earnings continued to support global stock markets, which stabilised near the previous session's nine-month high on Thursday. Wall Street opened little changed as investors digested a slew of company results.
) posted a $2.3 billion quarterly net profit, mainly due to debt restructuring, and said it was on track to at least break even in 2011.
) posted a smaller-than-expected drop in quarterly profit, while Philip Morris International (
Some analysts cautioned however that the upswing on equities markets might not have much further to run, with share prices no longer looking so cheap and economic data still patchy.
European stocks were down 0.1 percent around midday, halting an eight-session winning run, as falling food and utilities shares offset a rally in banks sparked by Credit Suisse's (
Oil eased slightly on Thursday but held above $65 a barrel, buoyed by European equities and renewed speculation that an upturn could boost demand.
) said underlying pretax profit was ahead of its expectations, while Carphone Warehouse, Europe's biggest mobile phone retailer, said it met or just beat first-quarter revenue and customer growth forecasts.
It also said it was optimistic consumer markets would not suffer a fresh downturn, an outlook supported by new data showing British retail sales jumped at three times the rate analysts expected in June as hot weather and early summer discounts boosted clothing sales.
The UK's Office for National Statistic said sales volumes rose 1.2 percent last month, but economists promptly put the figures in context. [ID:nONS004383]
"No one should take too much comfort from today's figures. Household retrenchment has a way to run yet, especially with unemployment rising," said Colin Ellis, European economist at Daiwa.
Japan's exports to China, the United States and Europe, posted narrower annual declines. The overall value of Japan's exports fell an annual 35.7 percent in June, an improvement on the 40.9 percent decline in May. [ID:nT193634]
"The key for the outlook is whether U.S. consumption will pick up, and when. Given the dire job conditions there, we can't expect it to happen soon," said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute.
"That might cap Chinese growth and therefore Japanese exports." (Writing by Lin Noueihed, editing by Will Waterman and Erica Billingham)
