UPDATE 5-Japan June annual export fall narrows; outlook subdued
2009-07-23 04:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's exports fell in June at their slowest annual rate this year as stimulus spending around the world props up global demand and dealers replenish depleted inventories of cars in the United States and Europe.
Shipments to China, one of the world's most vibrant economies, also declined at the slowest annual rate since October as Beijing's stimulus package boosted the country's economic growth in the second quarter and slowed a decline in its imports.
Still, some economists warn that once the impact of stimulus spending and the restocking of inventories wears off, final demand probably will not be strong enough to pick up the slack as the ranks of unemployed swell in major economies.
"The key for the outlook is whether U.S. consumption will pick up, and when. Given the dire job conditions there, we can't expect it to happen soon," said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute in Tokyo.
The 35.7 percent annual fall in the value of exports in June roughly matched economists' median forecast for a 35.1 percent drop and was smaller than a 40.9 percent decline in May, the Ministry of Finance data showed.
In volume terms that strip out the effects of currency fluctuations, Japan's exports fell 27.6 percent in June from a year earlier, also less than May's 36.0 percent decline.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, exports rose 1.1 percent in June from May. Since seasonally adjusted export growth peaked this year at a 3.3 percent in March, exports grew 2.8 percent in April and fell 0.4 percent in May.
Slowing declines in shipments of steel, semiconductors, car parts and electronic parts to Asia were the main reason Japan's overall exports fell at a slower annual pace in June, a Ministry of Finance official told reporters at a briefing.
China-bound exports fell 23.7 percent in June from the previous year, after a 29.7 percent drop in May.
Shipments of steel to China fell 19.1 percent in June from a year earlier, almost half the 35.9 percent annual decline in the previous month. Exports of semiconductor parts to China declined 11.0 percent in the 12 months to June, also a much slower pace than a 25.8 percent annual decline the month before.
Japan's exports have benefited from government stimulus in China, whose economy grew a faster-than-expected 7.9 percent in the second quarter from a year earlier due to a surge in state spending and bank lending. [ID:nSP486673]
China's imports fell 13.2 percent in June from a year earlier, about half the previous month's 25.2 percent fall.
Exports to the United States fell 37.6 percent while those to the European Union were down 41.4 percent, both narrowing their pace of annual declines.
For a graphic showing Japan's exports by destination, click:
Auto exports to the United States fell at a slower annual rate in June, in another sign that exports are gradually recovering, the MOF official said.
Japan shipped about 124,000 autos to the United States in June, up from about 83,000 in May, as firms restock inventories that are at very low levels, the official said. Shipments to the European Union rose to around 65,000 units from May's 50,000.
Governments in the United States and Europe are offering tax breaks on purchases of new cars to help their own auto makers, and the measures are also lending support to sales of Japanese cars there.
"Labour markets are still weak and wage growth is timid, so U.S. and European consumption isn't going to come back with a vengeance and propel export-oriented economies forward," said Jan Lambregts, global head of financial markets research at Rabobank International in Hong Kong.
"With the inventory cycle where it's at, there will be a pick up, but that won't bring us back to the boom years any time soon. This puts a damper on enthusiasm for Japan and Asia."
after the data from about 93.55, while Tokyo stocks were flat. [FRX/] [.T]
Japan's economy is gradually emerging from its worst postwar recession with exports and output rising again, but production is still down about a third from last year and many manufacturers are considered to be operating below the break-even point.
Unless global demand recovers strongly, Japanese exporters may need to cut more jobs and trim production, some analysts say.
"Overseas inventories at Japanese firms have declined while demand is slowly recovering, so I expect exports to continue to grow, but I doubt we'll see strong growth like in 2005-2006," said Junko Nishioka, chief Japan economist at RBS Securities in Tokyo.
