PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - July 23
2009-07-22 22:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Sat, Aug 8 2009
Wed  EDT
HIGH COST OF FOOTSIE EXECUTIVES' PENSIONS
Actuarial consultants Lane Clark & Peacock have published a report looking at the actual cost of executive pensions at FTSE 100 companies, revealing that they are paying an average 70 percent of top officials' pay towards their final salary pensions. This generosity will be offset by tax break limits on pension contributions for high earners being introduced from April 2011. However, employees' final salary pension plan benefits are far outweighed by those of senior executives.
The CBI employers' group's recently published quarterly British industry survey indicated that due to the manufacturing sector, business investment and export orders remaining in decline, and order books falling at the fastest rate for 17 years, recovery and return to growth by the UK economy is likely to be insipid and protracted. The Bank of England's monetary policy committee has also decided to put further "quantitative easing" on hold, saying that data on whether the 125 billion pound scheme had successfully expanded the money supply were "too muddied to draw firm conclusions".
Tax contributions by immigrants from the ten countries that joined the European Union in 2004 are greater than the amount they receive in benefits and welfare state services, according to a study by University College London. The immigrants are younger and better educated than the native population, and whilst they earn a lower hourly wage, their employment rates are higher. The study found that immigrants from accession countries paid 37 percent more in taxes than they received in benefits during 2008/09, whereas native residents of the UK paid 20 percent less than they received over the same period.
) over three million pounds due to loss of customers' confidential details by three of its insurance companies, HSBC Actuaries, HSBC Life, and HSBC Insurance Brokers. The breaches of information security procedures included the loss in the post of unencrypted floppy discs and CDs containing customer details. Previous recipients of fines for data loss by the FSA include Nationwide, which was fined 980,000 pounds for lapses in security after the theft of a laptop.
The banking crisis last October prompted savers to deposit record amounts in the state-owned savings provider National Savings and Investments, with the net inflows standing at 12.5 billion pounds in the year ended March 31, excluding outflows from withdrawals. This boosted NS&I's estimated share of the savings market from seven to eight percent, and reached a total nearly four times greater than the savings provider's initial target of four billion pounds. Following the collapse of Lehman in September, this was revised upwards to 11 billion pounds.
) has seen depressed sales due to strong competition from generic drugmakers, but the pharmaceutical group raised its dividend, saying it saw clear areas of strength in vaccines and consumer healthcare. The vaccine division saw sales rise 14 per cent to 756 million pounds in the three months to end-June, and consumer healthcare sales rose nine per cent in the quarter, helped by the European launch of the over-the-counter anti-obesity drug Alli. GSK also predicted a stronger performance in the US which will come from a range of new drugs. It has launched 12 new products in the US since 2007 and has six more products filed for regulatory approval. In the second quarter, earnings per share climbed 3.3 per cent to 50.3 pence, and GSK raised its second interim dividend one penny to 14 pence.
) has revealed that it has received a second takeover approach but has refused to name the potential bidder, saying that its intentions were 'not yet known'. The initial bidder, FirstGroup (
), on Wednesday ruled out making a formal bid for the company, saying that National Express's decision to walk away from its East Coast rail franchise, and the government's comments on the future of its other train franchises, had created 'considerable uncertainty' around the business.
), as was reported in the Financial Times on Tuesday. CIC confirmed it was not the buyer on Wednesday and Diageo confirmed that the shares were registered with another Chinese state entity, the People's Bank of China. Diageo had confirmed on Monday that CIC had in June bought a stake worth 221 million pounds, but now says it cannot comment on whether the People's Bank of China is holding the shares on behalf of a sovereign wealth fund. CIC is the officially-designated sovereign fund for China, but the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) has emerged as a de facto rival. However SAFE could not be contacted on Wednesday night.
Share in Galiform GFRM.L rose over 20 per cent to 46.5 pence on Wednesday after interim results beat expectations and the supplier of kitchens to the building trade expressed hopes that it would open new depots this year. Results for the 24 weeks to 13 June revealed that gross profit margins climbed from 52.7 per cent to 54.1 per cent. Interim profits were hit by a 4.4 million pound charge relating to rent bills on nine stores previously owned by Sofa Workshop, which went into administration earlier in the year. Pre-tax profit from continuing operations dropped to 4.7 million pounds, down from 21.6 million pounds a year ago. Galiform reported a loss of 1.4 million pounds after exceptionals, compared with a profit of 14.1 million pounds last year.
Duke Street is close to selling a 43 per cent stake in Groupe Proclif, its French private hospital business, to Predica, a subsidiary of Credit Agricole (
). The move will enable Duke Street to return about 35 million euros to investors while providing the group with capital to pursue an aggressive growth strategy. Last year, Proclif had turnover of 135 million euros and the group has ambitions to become a national operator by tapping into Credit Agricole's extensive branch network in France.
