U.S. business warns Congress of green trade war
2009-07-22 17:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Mon, Jul 20 2009
Fri, Jul 17 2009
Thu, Jul 16 2009
A labourer works inside a steel factory in the northern Indian city of Kanpur July 20, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Pawan Kumar
Wed  EDT
"We urge the Senate to refrain from including provisions that could negatively impact U.S. relations with key trading partners and disrupt the global trading systems," the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Foreign Trade Council and two other groups said in a letter to Senate leaders.
"Climate change is a global problem that calls for international cooperation, not unilateral ultimatums."
Last month, the House of Representatives passed a bill aimed at reducing U.S. carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions blamed for global warming by 17 percent by 2020 and 83 percent by 2050.
The bill includes a "border adjustment" program that, beginning in 2020, would allow additional tariffs on carbon-intensive goods such as steel, cement, paper and glass from countries the United States believes are not doing enough to reduce the heat-trapping emissions.
Developing countries such as China and India have objected strongly to the provision, saying that the United States and other developed countries are responsible for most of the greenhouse gases already in the air.
However, China has recently passed the United States as the world's top emitter of carbon dioxide.
"In fact, these provisions are already stirring consternation among some of our key trading partners and could trigger a green trade war," the groups said.
However, Senators Sherrod Brown and Debbie Stabenow, who hail from the industrial Midwest, have said the House language is the minimum they can accept.
Together, the United States and China account for about 40 percent of annual global greenhouse gas emissions.
