PREVIEW-Ericsson seen posting robust Q2 despite downturn
2009-07-22 11:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Ericsson (
), the world's biggest mobile network maker, is seen delivering a resilient set of results this week, helped by sales in China, cost cutting and continued strength in its services business.
But investors will be on the lookout for signs the downturn it has so far kept at arm's length has begun to eat away at its business as operators scale back spending.
"They (Ericsson) have gone from saying they've seen no impact to saying they've seen some impact. I suspect they'll say they've seen more impact. And I think they'll be very vague and not give too much detail," Nomura analyst Stuart Jeffrey said.
"So we are quite bullish on 2010-2011 in terms of hardware revenues, as well as services," Jeffrey said. "The more cuts that come through this year, the more likely we are to see a recovery in 2010."
Ericsson's second-quarter operating profit, before the toll of its loss-making joint ventures and restructuring charges, is seen rising 29 percent from a year ago to 6.0 billion crowns ($768 million), a Reuters analysts poll showed. [ID:nLG605004]
The company's main European rivals are more exposed to fixed-line telecom networks, a market that has been falling much more sharply than wireless networks, Jeffrey said.
"And neither of them has been doing as well in the transition to (new wireless network technologies) HSPA/LTE in the way that Ericsson has, which has also played a role. Nor have they been as good at managed services," he said.
China, building mobile networks at a furious pace and tying with India as Ericsson's largest market in 2008, has continued to boost Ericsson's sales this year.
"While China 3G should help the top-line ... overall we expect the company to report a mixed set of results as carriers continue to remain in cautious mode on capex spending," Credit Suisse said in a research note.
After a shock profit warning in 2007, Ericsson launched cost cutting measures that have boosted margins at its core networks business, but it has still to return to levels seen before that.
"We believe that the networks business will continue to recover but that this underlying trend will be once again hidden by provisions, currency hedging losses and restructuring charges," Societe Generale said in a research note.
