UPDATE 2-China Everbright Bank to raise $1.6 bln before IPO
2009-07-22 09:29:00.0
(Reuters) - China Everbright Bank has agreed to raise more than 11 billion yuan ($1.61 billion) in a private placement of shares to meet minimum capital requirements as China's 12th biggest lender prepares for an initial public offering.
"(The fund-raising) will ease capital shortages that have long restricted Everbright Bank's expansion and pave the way for rapid growth ahead," the bank said, adding that it would increase its holdings of riskier assets to improve profitability.
After this round of financing, Everbright will renew its listing application and submit it to the China Securities Regulatory Commission, aiming to go public as soon as possible, the Beijing-based lender said, without giving a timetable.
Everbright applied to sell yuan-denominated A shares publicly in Shanghai in June 2008 but the plan was delayed when China suspended IPOs for 10 months until last month, due to a slump in the domestic stock markets.
Everbright Bank hired China International Capital Corp to arrange the private share placement, which is still awaiting regulatory approval.
The sales would boost the bank's core capital adequacy ratio to 7 percent and improve the company's financial health, the bank said.
Everbright Bank, which was ranked China's 12th biggest bank by tier-one capital by British magazine The Banker this year, did not name the investors, but said that they were potential clients and strategic partners.
However, two listed Chinese firms, Guangdong Expressway and water supplier Shanghai Chengtou, said in separate statements on Wednesday that they would buy a combined 1.32 billion yuan worth of Everbright Bank shares with a lock-up period of three years.
"The share placement will help us to lay a solid financial foundation and enable us to speed up an IPO," the bank said.
China resumed initial public offerings last month, as it grew confident that a recovery in its stock markets was on solid footing.
Everbright Bank, a unit of the Everbright Group financial conglomerate, said last month that it aimed to raise 13 billion yuan via share placements to strategic investors ahead of an IPO planned for next year. ($1=6.83 Yuan) (Additional reporting by Lu Jianxin; Editing by David Cowell)
