Games-Commonwealth Games chief impressed by India's progress
2009-07-22 04:03:00.0
(Reuters) - After a few early setbacks, India is back on track to host a successful Commonwealth Games in October next year but there is absolutely no margin to ease up on preparations, games federation president Mike Fennell has said.
Backed by Asia's third largest economy, India had hoped a smooth build-up and decent medal tally would help the country compete with China as a sports power and future Olympic host.
However, delays in building the games venues in New Delhi as well as work to transform the crowded national capital into one ready to attract foreign visitors had raised serious doubts.
Venue delays forced next month's world badminton championships to be moved to Hyderabad and other international meets scheduled over the next few months have also been affected.
However, Fennell gave the thumbs up to preparations after the latest inspection by the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF), the Jamaican particularly impressed by security arrangements and continued government funding despite the economic downturn.
"We were here a couple of months ago for the meeting of the coordination commission and the report had identified a number of areas of concern," he told Reuters.
"On this visit, we got some very good reports. It is clear they are paying attention to the recommendations that have been made and spending a lot of time in ensuring those things are in proper condition.
Fennell, however, cautioned the organisers against easing up.
"We have a long way to go yet. There is a lot of training and development of people, training of volunteers and training of security personnel for games time mode.
Senior Delhi police officials briefed the CGF chief on security and Fennell praised the plan, especially aimed at allaying concerns following the November militant attacks in Mumbai.
"Even without the games, India is looking at the country and for the games they have put all the resources that are necessary," he added.
"They are on the ball, putting in place adequate security measures which will make the games a very safe place.
"Organising such an event is very complex, particularly when you are doing it when the world is in recession and when you have a government that despite the recession has committed the funds.
"But to fit all the pieces together and to have the coordination, the linkages, this is something very important." (Editing by John O'Brien; To comment on this story email sportsfeedback@thomsonreuters.com)
