Emerging markets bolster copper outlook: Freeport
2009-07-21 14:14:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Jul 21 2009
Tue, Jul 21 2009
Tue, Jul 21 2009
Thu, Jul 16 2009
NEW YORK, July 21
Tue  EDT
NEW YORK, July 21
) sees a tighter global supply base for copper and strong demand from China and the developing world favoring the industrial metal's longer-term outlook.
"From a market standpoint, the recent upward movement in copper prices reflect some important fundamentals about this business that are going to be important for the long run, and that is the requirements for copper in China and the developing world," Chief Executive Officer Richard Adkerson told analysts on a conference call on Tuesday.
With the price of copper trading up near $2.50 per lb and a record-setting pace of Chinese imports during the first six months of the year, Adkerson saw the opportunity to resume some planned expansion efforts.
"We are looking at opportunities that we may have to increase some volumes without spending expansion-type capital," he said.
"Absent any real negative change, we are highly likely to go forward with the (expansion) project at El Abra and we will have the opportunities to look for the chances of adding some volumes from our other operations."
Mining operations at the El Abra mine in Chile began in 1996, but construction activities at the mine were deferred due to the economic downturn which saw copper prices plummet.
Adkerson also saw the Henderson molybdenum deposit in Colorado as another opportunity, especially as prices of the metal recovered this year.
"The Henderson mine is a very efficient mine ... it would be a mine we could scale back up," he said.
Adkerson said construction at the company's Tenke Fungurume copper and cobalt project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) was essentially complete, with 26 million pounds of sales in the second quarter.
"By the second half of the year, all of our production costs will be flowing in and we will be up to design capacity," he said. "At design capacity and with $10 cobalt, we are looking at unit costs being less than 50 cents a lb."
Going forward, Adkerson said a railroad connection to the Angolan railroad and the Port of Angola was a primary objective for the Tenke Fungurume project.
"That will be necessary for us to achieve the kind of expansion opportunities that we have with this ore body," he said.
Earlier on Tuesday, the Phoenix, Arizona-based mining company reported a sharp drop in second-quarter profits, but cost-cutting measures and a three-fold increase in gold sales enabled it to beat Wall Street earnings estimates. [ID:nN21527523]
Looking ahead, Adkerson said strong requirements of copper from China for its infrastructure initiatives and very low inventory levels were important, long-term features to the market, despite weaker demand from the United States and the Western world.
"In the context of a weak environment in the U.S. and Western world, inventories are very low, the industry has and continues to face issues with new projects maintaining supplies out of existing mines, so the supply situation for copper is very well situated for miners," he said.
"All of this indicates a very bright future in our view for copper and we're committed to being a very strong supplier of copper with great growth projects as we go forward." (Editing by Christian Wiessner)
