China shares post best gain in 7 weeks, HK issues slide
2009-07-22 05:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese stocks scored their biggest one-day gain in seven weeks on Wednesday as oil and coal shares surged on a solid earnings outlook, while Hong Kong-listed shares fell off a 10-month peak as blue chips succumbed to profit taking.
The main gauge in Shanghai finished at a 13-month high on Wednesday, even as the world's largest IPO loomed, vaulting 81 percent in a liquidity bounce so far in 2009 to become the best performing major market in the world.
"I cannot see where the index will stop rising for now. Most institutions hold a positive view for the index for the second half of the year, backed by global economic recovery," said Zhang Gang, a strategist at Central China Securities in Shanghai.
The Chinese market also appeared unfazed by a total solar eclipse that darkened Shanghai's skies for several minutes shortly after the start of trade. Eclipses were considered a bad omen in imperial times and analysts said interest in the phenomenon may have affected turnover in the morning.
was down 253.56 points at 19,248.17, after inching up to a 10-month high of 19,641.75 points earlier in the session, with shares worth HK$76.7 billion ($9.90 billion) changing hands.
) led losses with a 2.2 percent drop, joined in by Chinese banking counters and local property stocks.
, which represents top locally listed mainland Chinese stocks, fell 1 percent to 11,481.30.
"Hong Kong shares are pretty much overbought across the board, so except for some rotational buying it is very difficult to see further upside to the market," said Ben Kwong, chief operations officer with KGI Asia.
"Fund managers still have a lot of cash on hand so while some of them are taking profits, others that have missed the rally and are underperforming are ready to step in and buy the stocks," said Patrick Yiu, fund manager with CASH Asset Management.
"Recent data shows slight deflation in Hong Kong, so despite the increase in property prices an asset bubble seems unlikely at this point," he said.
) shed 2 percent. The world's largest wireless network operator has cut its target for third generation network, based on an untested homegrown technology platform, subscriber additions this year, a report in a mainland newspaper said.
) gained 4.2 percent, joining the overnight rally in Chinese panel makers on Wall Street. [ID:nPEK125709] In Shanghai, Wuhan Linuo Solar Energy (
ended 2.6 percent higher at 3,296.615 points, more than erasing a loss the previous day that was the biggest in five weeks.
Gaining Shanghai A shares outnumbered losers by 771 to 153, while turnover for Shanghai A shares eased to 205.3 billion yuan ($30.1 billion) from Tuesday's heavy 231.6 billion yuan.
), the most heavily weighted share in the index, gained 5.32 percent to 15.45 yuan in its heaviest trade in more than 18 months.
"The earnings of PetroChina and Sinopec are sound, while if the oil price holds up at $65, there is little chance for a cut in retail fuel prices in China this month," said Deng Yong, a petrochemical analyst at Haitong Securities in Shanghai.
The official China Daily reported that China may consider cutting its retail fuel prices at the end of this month, in line with a recent drop in international crude oil prices.
Analysts said strength in large-cap shares encouraged many individual investors to stay in the market rather than move their money to an initial public offering by home builder China State Construction Engineering Corp, the world's largest IPO so far this year, which is taking subscriptions until Wednesday and is expected to see a strong market debut.
"Institutions bought energy shares, supporting the market and offsetting pressure from CSCEC's large IPO, so it seems the index could hold firm," added Chen Huiqin, an analyst at Huatai China Securities in Nanjing.
Coal shares rose, with China Shenhua Energy (
) gained 2.5 percent to 33.16 yuan after state media reported that its parent company's first-half net profit rose 43 percent to 8.7 billion yuan. [ID:nPEK144519]
Official statistics showed that 484,799 share trading accounts were opened last week in China, the highest since January 2008, reflecting recent active trade in China's stock markets.
