INTERVIEW-UPDATE 1-Taiwan HTC aims to maintain profit in 2009
2009-07-22 07:32:00.0
(Reuters) - HTC (
), Taiwan's top smartphone maker, said on Wednesday it expects to maintain its profit level in 2009, as it shifts toward greater emphasis on mid-range models in its drive to grow in developing markets.
"We think we'll maintain our profit," CEO Peter Chou told Reuters in an interview, even as the average of 19 analysts polled by Reuters Research was looking for the company's 2009 profit to decline 7 percent to T$26.3 billion
Chou added that his company, which traditionally focused on high-end smartphones, is aiming to boost its sales of lower-priced mid-range models as it looks for growth in more cost-sensitive developing markets like China.
"They are now 20-30 percent of our unit sales," he said. "Hopefully they will be 50-50 or even more," he added, declining to give a timeframe.
China is one of HTC's most promising markets, accounting for about 800,000 of the company's total 12 million phones sold last year. The company is on track to boost the China total to more than 1 million units this year, outpacing its last forecast for global growth of about 10 percent in unit sales.
But it is unlikely to attain the doubling of unit sales in China that some had been looking for, Chou said.
Despite stiff competition and the move to mid-range models, HTC is trying to maintain its profit margins at about the 30 percent range, he added.
From its roots as a contract manufacturer, HTC has transformed itself over the last few years to a major global smartphone brand whose customers include France Telecom FTE.PA and T-Mobile [TMOG.UL] in Europe and AT&T (
Chou discussed his company's outlook as HTC rolled out its first smartphone using Sense, its own customised version of Google's (
He said his company, which also makes smartphones using Microsoft's (
) Windows Mobile operating system, will promote the new Sense platform in an effort to differentiate itself from competitors like Apple (
) and BlackBerry maker Research In Motion RIMM.O, which have carved out niches for themselves by developing their own cellphone operating systems.
"This will be our foundation -- a DNA that will evolve," he said.
(Reporting by Doug Young and Joanne Chiu; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Rupert Winchester)
((doug.young@thomsonreuters.com; +886 2 2508-0815; Reuters Messaging: doug.young.reuters.com@reuters.net))
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com)) Keywords: HTC/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nHKG73560
