Taiwan pension fund to invest more in stocks
2009-07-21 07:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's labour pension fund will raise its investments in local and overseas stocks by T$73 billion (1.3 billion pounds) next year from T$330 billion now on hopes the global economy will recover from its worst downturn in generations, an official said on Tuesday.
The pension fund, which has T$860 billion under management, is aiming to reap a 3.4-3.5 percent annual return in 2009 as stocks of Taiwan, Wall Street and other global markets had posted solid gains so far this year, said Huang Chao-hsi, chairman of the fund's supervisory committee.
"The worst for the economy is over, though we are still seeing mixed signals," Huang told Reuters in an interview. "One thing for sure is that the economy will definitely pick up next year, so we will continue to lower our cash positions," he said.
One of the government's "Big Four Funds", the fund posted a negative 8.1 percent return in 2008 after its stock and bond investments were badly hit by the global economic downturn, said the chairman.
The fund, whose assets will likely grow to T$920 billion at end of this year, is expecting to benefit from its stock investments.
had staged a 51.5 percent rally year to date, making it the world's third-best performer after China markets .SZSA1
, amid investor hopes warming ties between Taiwan and China will offset weak U.S. demand for the island's technology exports.
On Tuesday, Taiwan stocks ended up 0.21 percent at 6,953.34, hitting a fresh more than one-month closing high.
Aiming to achieve a higher return, the pension fund is set to allocate six new mandates worth $1.2 billion (731 million pounds) to foreign fund managers before December.
"Some 20-30 firms, including Fidelity, ING (
) Funds, Templeton and PIMCO, have submitted their bids," Huang said. "We have hired a global consulting firm to go through the list and then our committee will review whom to award the mandates."
), PIMCO, Templeton, Alliance Bernstein Holdings LP (
) had managed overseas mandates for the pension fund, the chairman said.
(Reporting by Faith Hung and Jeanny Kao, Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
