Q+A-GM and Germany decide Opel's fate
2009-07-21 10:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The German government and U.S. carmaker General Motors are to consider three bids for Europe's Opel in coming days and weeks. However, a row could be looming as GM likes the offer from Belgian financial investor RHJ (
) while Germany prefers Canadian supplier Magna's MGa.TO plans. China's Beijing Automotive (BAIC) has also submitted a bid.
WHO MAKES THE DECISION?
GM, which holds 35 percent of Opel shares, and the German government, which is being asked to provide loan guarantees worth up to 4.5 billion euros, have to agree on the partner.
If they disagree, as seems likely, the end game will play out in the Opel Trust which has been responsible for Opel since GM entered bankruptcy in June. The trust holds 65 percent of Opel shares and has to approve any investor.
The Trust's board is comprised of two GM representatives and two for Germany, one for Berlin and a delegate for the four federal states in which Opel has a plant. There is a fifth "neutral" board member -- Fred Irwin, President of the American Chambers of Commerce in Germany -- but he has no vote. He may, however, be forced to try to actively broker a deal.
Even if the Trust members disagree initially, they will have to negotiate until they reach agreement.
WHICH OTHER PLAYERS CAN INFLUENCE THE CHOICE?
- Other governments in Europe where there are Opel plants, including the UK, Spain, Belgium and Poland, are involved as they may also provide aid.
- The European Commission has to approve Opel's overhaul plan as a condition for authorising a state rescue.
- German politicians will be involved behind the scenes but if talks between GM and the German representatives on the Opel Trust prove intractable, Chancellor Angela Merkel may intervene and try to resolve the matter with U.S. President Barack Obama. The majority of GM belongs to the U.S. government.
WHAT IS THE TIMING OF THE DECISION?
GM is to discuss the bids with the German state and federal governments, other European nations and the European Commission this week. However, Germany does not expect even a preliminary decision in that timeframe.
GM, which must also hold talks with its controlling shareholder in Washington, plans to seek approval from the Opel Trust for a buyer by the end of July.
Legally, the Trust is obliged to have the deal agreed by Oct 31 although the body could in theory continue until 2014.
The financial position of Opel raises the pressure to get a deal done quickly. Since June 1, Opel has relied on a six-month bridge loan of 1.5 billion euros ($2.13 billion) pledged by German federal and state governments, but the momentum of political will to rescue Opel could slow with September's federal election.
WHAT POLITICAL FACTORS FOR GERMAN GOVT?
While GM prefers the RHJ bid as it seems to offer GM the easiest opportunity to eventually buy back Opel, in Germany the decision is being influenced by the national vote on Sept. 27.
Two main factors are at play. Firstly, Merkel and the premiers of the four "Opel states" want to avoid the prospect of plant closures or mass compulsory layoffs before the vote.
However, there is also pressure not to back a deal that has poor long-term prospects. German Economy Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg has stressed German taxpayers must not be cheated.
WHAT HAPPENS IF THEY CAN'T AGREE?
In addition, Germany has said there are other possible partners, including Italian carmaker Fiat (
) which had originally expressed interest in Opel. (Compiled by Madeline Chambers; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
