Recovery uncertainty to keep U.S. dollar supported
2009-07-21 15:54:00.0
(Reuters) - The global economy bottomed in the first quarter, but the outlook for a recovery remains uncertain and that could support the U.S. dollar in the near term, a top currency manager at JP Morgan Asset Management said.
Against currencies in the developed world, the dollar is now "reasonably close to fair value," and its near-term outlook will continue to be driven by the ebb and flow of risk sentiment, the firm's head of currency management, Robert Stewart, told Reuters in an interview. JP Morgan Asset Management has exposure under management of about $55 billion.
While some leading indicators have rebounded significantly, and bigger bank earnings have been positive so far for the second quarter, the economy still faces headwinds as consumers continue to reduce their debt and cut back spending.
"What concerns us is the deleveraging that occurs with us as consumers. We need to deleverage," Stewart said. "We need to -- particularly in the States -- increase the saving rates.
"So we're probably more bearish on the outlook at the moment than perhaps the market is. Although you may well see a bounce in the general sentiment and a bounce in the asset markets through perhaps this month, I think it's unlikely that will continue toward the end of the year."
Stewart said a V-shaped recovery in developed economies is off the table, but a U-shaped rebound is likely.
"It's a real (risk) on-off debate at the moment. The market is unsure whether to really follow either one of these."
Stewart also said that despite rising voices challenging the dollar's role as a global reserve currency, foreign central banks are unlikely to "rapidly shift" their reserves in the near term.
"There's no other market that can match the liquidity of government instruments that you have in the United States," he said. "Certainly, longer-term, you may well see central banks diversify away from the dollar."
China will likely continue purchasing U.S. Treasuries as it tries to keep the yuan stable to promote exports, he said. Data last week showed China's currency reserves leapt by $177.9 billion in the second quarter to $2.13 trillion.
"They have a problem," Stewart said. "They have lots of U.S. dollar reserves and lots of U.S. government instruments, but, of course, what else can they diversify into at the moment?"
While investors are still happy with U.S. assets for now, concerns have arisen over whether the record U.S. fiscal deficit and the Federal Reserve's quantitative easing are going to erode the value of the dollar.
Stewart said there's been renewed interest from U.S. pension plans as to how to take advantage of a potential dollar decline. "There's clearly concern building that perhaps the dollar will fall."
Pension plans, Stewart added, have also shown interest in the surging emerging markets. The equities sector of emerging markets .MSCIEF has rallied 42 percent this year after plunging 55 percent in 2008.
Stewart liked Eastern Europe in particular, a market badly scarred by the global financial crisis that resulted in massive deficits and rapidly shrinking economies.
"Eastern Europe has been hit badly, but with the IMF coming in and bailing out some of these countries, I think risk sentiment has turned."
At least 10 Eastern European countries are in talks with the International Monetary Fund about multi-billion dollar emergency loans for their ailing economies, according to newspaper reports.
Stewart, however, cautioned against commodity-linked currencies such as the Brazilian real and Chilean peso. He said demand for these currencies was significantly fueled by China's commodity-buying binge in the first half of the year.
"I think Chinese demand will taper off in the second half, which should weigh" on these emerging market currencies, he said.
