MOVES-UPDATE 3-Jefferies, KPMG, Freddie Mac, Cerberus
2009-07-21 16:11:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Tuesday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com
The investment bank announced today it is expanding its global healthcare investment banking effort with more than 35 experienced professionals, including 16 managing directors and senior vice presidents across the U.S., Europe and Asia, joining Jefferies this summer.
Prior to joining Jefferies, Kelly served as a managing director at UBS Securities LLC.
The mortgage company has named Charles "Ed" Haldeman its new chief executive, effective in August. Haldeman stepped down as head of Putnam Investments in June.
The boutique investment bank said Caroline Silver will join the firm in October as a Managing Director based in London. Silver, who was most recently Vice Chairman of EMEA Investment Banking at Bank of America Corp Merrill Lynch (
), will focus on providing advisory services to clients in the financial services industry.
), Barclays Wealth, appointed Mitch Cox as managing director and head of the Global Investment & Product Office. Cox will be based in New York and joins from Merrill Lynch Global Wealth Management.
) HSBC Private Bank appointed Jafar Hamid as managing director, key accounts, in the GSAD team, based in London. Hamid joins from UBS.
Standard Chartered Bank said it appointed Ray Ferguson as chief executive of Standard Chartered Bank in Singapore. Current chief executive of Standard Chartered in Singapore, Lim Cheng Teck, will take on the role of executive vice chairman and chief executive of the bank's business in China.
Investment management firm Julius Baer appointed Marion Williams, who was previously from Threadneedle, to its London asset management distribution team.
Merrill Lynch appointed Sergey Babayan as managing director and co-head of the bank's global markets team in Russia. Babayan was previously managing director and co-head of corporate and investment banking at MDM Bank.
Investment services provider Mercer, which is a unit of Marsh & McLennan Cos Inc (
), appointed Clare Bryant and Gareth Anderson to its manager research team in its investment consulting business.
A provider of exchange traded products, Source, appointed three salespeople to its pan-European marketing team. Stefan Garcia has joined from ETF Securities, and will be responsible for broad European marketing and distribution. Ludovic Djebali has joined from Lyxor Asset Management and will be responsible for coverage of French speaking countries, Holger Schmid will be joining from UniCredit and will be responsible for distribution to Germany and Austria. (Compiled by Vidya Lakshmi in Bangalore and Jui Chakravorty Das in New York)
