SCENARIOS: Japan set for change of govt with Aug 30 election
2009-07-21 04:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's cabinet on Tuesday signed off on unpopular Prime Minister Taro Aso's plan for an election, expected on August 30, paving the way for a possible change in government after more than 50 years of almost unbroken rule by his party.
A win for the opposition Democratic Party, ahead of Aso's conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) in polls, would raise the chance of breaking through a policy deadlock in parliament, where the opposition controls the upper house and can delay bills.
The Democrats are promising to pay out cash handouts to families, keep the sales tax at 5 percent for the next four years and reduce bureaucrats' control of policy-making as a way to cut wasteful spending.
Following are possible outcomes of the election for the 480 seats in parliament's lower house, where Aso's LDP and its junior coalition partner, the New Komeito, now hold a combined 333 seats.
The Democratic Party looks set to either win a majority on its own or become the biggest party in the lower house and form a coalition with smaller allies, ousting the LDP from power for only the second time in its 54-year history.
Financial markets would welcome the prospect of a breakthrough in a long-running political stalemate but worry about the ability of the untested Democrats to govern and the impact of their ambitious policies on Japan's huge public debt.
Plans to pay cash allowances for families and rid highways of tolls have prompted worries of bigger government bond issuance and a rise in bond yields, although the Democrats say they can secure funds by cutting waste and tapping special reserves.
Even if they win a majority on their own, the Democrats need help from two small parties, one conservative and one leftist, in order to keep control of parliament's upper house and smoothen implementation of policies.
A new coalition government, like the LDP, would stress the need to revive the economy over repairing Japan's tattered public finances and would unlikely make sharp shifts in policies as Japan tries to shake off its worst recession in 60 years.
A victorious Democrats would quickly focus on keeping voter support, probably by implementing pledges to boost household incomes ahead of a mid-2010 election for the upper house.
If Democrats stumble on the way to the polls, the result could be that the margin of victory is so small that both the LDP and Democrats try to form a ruling coalition through a tug-of-war to lure defectors or small parties into their camps.
That could happen if the LDP manages to scare away conservative voters with charges that the Democrats are weak on security and irresponsible on spending, or if a simmering funding scandal involving party leader Yukio Hatoyama widens.
Forecasts of a landslide Democratic victory could also prompt some risk-averse voters to switch to the LDP, trimming their margin of victory, some analysts say.
A fuzzy outcome could spark a realignment of party allegiances, though not necessarily along clear policy lines.
Although the chances at present appear slim, the LDP and its junior partner, the New Komeito, could win a simple majority and stay in power.
Without the two-thirds majority, Japan's policy stalemate would worsen, at least until the mid-2010 upper house election.
If the policy stalemate drags on, the idea of a "grand coalition" among ruling and opposition blocs could be revived as the only way to break the deadlock.
Aso's predecessor Yasuo Fukuda attempted to form such a coalition with then-Democratic Party leader Ichiro Ozawa, only to have the Democrats reject the notion soundly.
