UPDATE 1-Spain's prosecutors study Alierta appeal
2009-07-21 10:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Spain's anti-corruption department is studying whether to appeal the acquittal of Telefonica (
) Chairman Cesar Alierta on insider trading charges, the prosecution lawyer for the case said on Tuesday.
"My opinion is to appeal the sentence, but we are awaiting the authorisation of the department for public prosecutions," lawyer Alejandro Luzon told Reuters.
Madrid's Supreme Court on Friday concluded Alierta had traded stock using insider information but dismissed the criminal charges against him because too much time had elapsed, official documents showed. [ID:nLH287171]
Prosecutors have argued that the alleged insider trading damaged the reputation of Spain's markets and made the trial a matter of public interest, despite the expiry of the charges.
If the department of public prosecution decides to appeal the acquittal, the move would put further pressure on one of Spain's most respected business leaders.
However, most investors say they would not press for Alierta to step down, even in a climate of distrust over dishonest business practices generated after the Madoff and Stanford scandals.
"Under Mr Alierta's rule, Telefonica is delivering exceptional results in these difficult times," Daiwa analyst Michael Kovacocy said after the court verdict.
Under Alierta's tenure Telefonica has become a behemoth worth 75 billion euros with a strong presence in Europe, Latin America and China, grown from a largely Spanish-speaking company.
"This (the Friday court verdict) is something shareholders, especially foreign ones, are going to be asking about a lot in a discreet manner," said a second telecoms analyst who requested anonymity.
"But, at the end of the day, the guy has a lot of support and I don't think it's going to bring him down."
One of Telefonica's top 10 investors, who spoke to Reuters under condition of anonymity, said Alierta's track record at Telefonica is excellent and he would be difficult to replace.
"I would judge him if there had been a mistake at Telefonica. This was before Telefonica. It is more a problem of reputation; if he could not stay it would be more of a concern for us," the investor said.
Telefonica declined to comment on the court's Friday verdict but a company insider said the issue of Alierta being replaced was not being contemplated.
Like other telecoms companies, Telefonica is facing tough challenges in its home market of Spain where analysts fear unemployment could rise as high as 20 percent in 2010.
"This is a difficult time to change the senior management team," the Telefonica investor said.
"If Alierta retired next year when the crisis could be behind us - it would be no problem," the investor said.
(Reporting by Robert Hetz and Elisabeth O'Leary, writing by Sarah Morris and Judy MacInnes; additional reporting Cecilia Valente; Editing by David Cowell)
