UPDATE 1-Buyout funds shortlisted for AIG Taiwan unit -sources
2009-07-21 01:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Global buyout funds including Bain Capital and Carlyle, which are shortlisted for second-round bids for AIG's Taiwan unit, are in talks with local firms to form rival consortiums to acquire Nan Shan Life, in a deal estimated to be worth over $2 billion, sources said.
Primus Financial, a new investment firm led by Robert Morse, a former top Citigroup (
) banker for Asia, and MBK Partners, a buyout fund founded by former Carlyle dealmakers, have been shortlisted for second-round bids for AIG's (
) Nan Shan Life, said the sources who were briefed on the progress of the bidding.
American International Group, bailed out by the U.S. government in the financial crisis, is selling its Asia assets to shore up its capital base and the sale of Nan Shan could fetch over $2 billion, said the sources.
However, Taiwan regulators want that the second-round foreign bidders should choose a local partner to form consortiums to bid for Nan Shan Life, a pre-condition that makes the prospects of the deal more uncertain, they said.
) for a possible joint bid for Nan Shan, said one source.
Bain and Chinatrust Financial Holding Co Ltd have yet to agree on a joint bid, he added.
"The pre-condition of Taiwan regulators makes the situation much more complicated and uncertain. Even for those who are now going to form a consortium, things may be changed in the third-round or fourth-round bid if regulators ask for more specific restrictions," the source said.
Besides Chinatrust, Fubon Financial Holding Co Ltd (
) also won the right to enter the second-round bid, said the sources. They declined to name who Fubon might partner.
), which supports Chinatrust's bid for Nan Shan, said the sources.
Separately, Morgan Stanley, which owns nearly 5 percent of Chinatrust, has won approval from Taiwan regulators to raise its stake in Chinatrust to 9.9 percent.
The ongoing Nan Shan bid and Morgan Stanley Private Equity's (MSPE) holdings in Chinatrust are two separate cases and MSPE will raise and keep its stake in Chinatrust as planned, said one of the sources.
All the sources declined to be identified as the bidding process is confidential. Representatives for Bain, Carlyle, Primus, Chinatrust and Fubon all declined to comment. MBK could not be immediately reached for comment.
), the No. 3 life insurer in Mainland China, in which Carlyle holds around 17 percent stake, is planning to raise $3.5 billion from a Hong Kong listing, a channel for Carlyle to cash out. [ID:nSP383297] (Additional reporting by Kevin Plumberg in HONG KONG and Rachel Lee and Chyen Yee Lee in TAIPEI; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
