UPDATE 1-BHP Billiton sees mixed commodities demand outlook
2009-07-21 19:38:00.0
(Reuters) - BHP Billiton (
) said restocking of commodities in China may have come to an end though North American markets may be starting to rebuild inventories, painting a mixed picture for global demand.
In its June quarter production report on Wednesday, the world's largest miner reported a 10 percent fall in iron ore output on the same quarter previous year after its operations were adversely affected by mining fatalities and flooding in western Australia.
In the short term, BHP Billiton said underlying demand trends in its markets for minerals and metals were "still being masked by de-stock and stocking activities."
"The 2009 financial year proved to be very challenging, with significant demand contraction exacerbated by dramatic movements in inventory levels," BHP Billiton said in its fourth quarter production report.
Output of metallurgical coal, used in steel-making, rose 4 percent in the June quarter on the previous year, while copper output fell 21 percent, BHP Billiton said.
Copper production was cut due to lower grade ore mining and reduced output from milling operations at its 57.5 percent-owned Escondida copper mine in Chile, the company said.
Escondida's mined copper output was down 37 percent to 111,500 tonnes, while cathode production rose 22 percent to 49,400 tonnes in the last quarter.
Iron ore production in the fourth quarter of 27.048 million tonnes took full year output to 114.415 million tonnes, up 2 percent year-on-year but less than a targeted 130 million tonnes it had hoped to achieve.
Responding to five fatalities in the iron ore division, BHP Billiton reduced site access and suspended all non-essential work outside daylight hours to improve safety practices during the year.
In fiscal 2009, 68 percent of iron ore sales from its Western Australian operations were based on annually agreed pricing, the company said.
Neither BHP Billiton or Rio Tinto have announced any contract sales agreements for the current shipping year with customers in China, a main market for ore shipments.
BHP Billiton has said it would like to scrap annual contract sales in favour of more market-based pricing, such as indexing. (Editing by James Thornhill)
