Eaton CEO: Stimulus funds are showing up
2009-07-20 14:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Stimulus funds geared at boosting the U.S. economy are starting to show up in customer orders earlier than expected, but the main effect of the stimulus for now may be psychological, the chief executive of industrial conglomerate Eaton Corp (
Stimulus funds aimed at making both new and existing buildings more energy-efficient are expected to support Eaton's Electrical Americas segment, CEO Sandy Cutler said in an interview. The business unit makes power distribution and monitoring technology.
Eaton has booked $50 million in stimulus-related revenue and is negotiating for a further $250 million in contracts. Cutler cited demand for improving energy efficiency of government office buildings, military bases, wastewater treatment facilities and educational facilities.
"We didn't expect to book any of this business until we got into 2010," Cutler said. "We think that's quite encouraging and actually a bit ahead of our expectations."
Overall, Eaton expects $1 billion in stimulus-related revenue in 2010 and 2011, split about evenly over the two years. But Cutler said the stimulus is not yet a big factor in the wider U.S. economy, though it is likely to be more noticeable next year.
"The bigger impact at this point is the expectation that there'll be additional funds moving into the economy," Cutler said. By contrast, the stimulus programs in China appear to be moving more quickly.
A key obstacle to a U.S. recovery remains the dearth of credit available, especially for smaller businesses. Cutler said Eaton expects a "muted" recovery, since the lack of credit is a "deterrent" for durable goods and industrial companies.
Earlier, the maker of hydraulics, electrical control systems and truck transmissions reported better-than-expected quarterly earnings, helped by cost cuts and improved margins in the electrical business, sending its shares up 8 percent. Profit margins in the electrical Americas business jumped to 16.6 percent in the second quarter, from 12.5 percent in the first quarter, and were up more than a point from a year ago.
Eaton expects full-year profit margins in the segment to be in the 15 to 16 percent range, Cutler said. He added that the first quarter is typically the weakest, so seasonal factors are at play.
Separately, Cutler said further cost cuts were dependent on whether Eaton's markets deteriorate more than it currently expects, but added the company was "sized correctly" given its forecast which calls for its end markets to shrink by 21 to 22 percent.
(Reporting by Nick Zieminski, editing by Matthew Lewis)
