PREVIEW-Third-party logistics Q2 results hinge on pricing
2009-07-20 14:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Wall Street will be looking out for comments on pricing, when third-party logistics companies kick off their quarterly earnings with C.H. Robinson Worldwide (
) reporting on Tuesday. Prices, as a result of weak volumes in the freight market and a spike in oil prices, have dropped drastically. And companies are finding it difficult to offset the fall with changes to cost structure, thus affecting margins and profits.
Third-party logistics providers pick up wholesale capacity in all types of cargo carriers - air, ocean, rail or road - and this gives them more flexibility to plan shipments in a cost-effective way without actually owning transportation assets.
Even as a few companies in the freight market have sounded off on some green shoots, analysts are not convinced and believe that even if there were signs of improvement, the companies have definitely not felt them in the second quarter.
As a preamble to the upcoming results, one of the top companies in the group, Expeditors International of Washington (
), forecast a weak second-quarter profit that analysts attributed to weak volumes and yield pressure.
Expeditors said though it observed some quarter-end strength during the month of June, volumes would still be below year-ago figures. [ID:nBNG503796]
"I think the trend is going to be low revenue and mostly that is going to come from low volumes," said Wall Street Strategies analyst David Urani.
He said there might be some sequential improvement in revenue, but that it would be more of a seasonal impact than a sign of improvement.
Wall Street Strategies' Urani said he would also be looking out for performance in China, where the stimulus program is said to be working well.
DON'T EXPECT HIGHER NUMBERS
Most of the companies are expected to post stable margins for the second quarter as shipping companies, saddled with excess capacity, are also forced to lower pricing.
However, companies that are slow to adjust their cost structure might post slightly lower margins.
) is expected to post a 16 percent drop in quarterly revenue and a flat net income, according to Reuters Estimates.
Expeditors is expected to be hit more due to higher exposure to air and ocean freight, in addition to truck brokerage.
Last week, trucking company Landstar System Inc (
), which also provides third party logistics services, posted a 5 percent sequential increase in revenue and said it was seeing a slow improvement in demand.
Analysts expect second half of the year to be better than the first half as they believe the worst of year-over-year comparisons are over. (Editing by Anil D'Silva)
