PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - July 21
2009-07-20 22:07:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Jul 20 2009
Mon  EDT
Financial Services Authority head Hector Sants has warned that banks could face heavy penalties for breaching the authority's new remuneration code by offering their executives bonuses guaranteed for over 12 months. The FSA will apply these new rules to all deals made since March when it opened its pay consultation, potentially revoking some bankers' recently-negotiated guaranteed bonuses. It has also emerged that the Conservative Party has mooted plans to scrap the FSA for its failure to identify the excessive risk taking that started the current financial crisis.
The Bank of England has reported in its monthly survey Trends in Lending that interest rates on mortgages are being raised by lenders. As mortgage approvals in June rose to 51,100 compared to 45,000 in May, lenders have found that their ability to fund loans has been outstripped by demand, in the form of the highest levels of lending since early 2008. In spite of this indication that the housing market is stabilising, rates have been increased on fixed-rate mortgages above the rise in swap rates due to the growth in demand.
According to the British Retail Consortium, the level of vacant shops in town centres has risen to one in eight. This has resulted in calls for the government to rescue the high street by freezing business rates and offering relief from empty property taxes. As Experian (
) reports that the high street is suffering more than it did during the recession in the early 1990s, the BRC has forecast that vacant premises could reach up to 15 percent, as the rise of online shopping had caused shoppers to turn away from the high street even before the current financial crisis.
In a report based on data from Debtwire, Close Brothers reveals that the UK has the highest percentage of financially distressed companies in western Europe, due to its position as the leveraged buy-out capital over the past decade. The UK had 24 per cent of all distressed companies in 2009, while Germany had 14 per cent, Italy 12 per cent and France six per cent. The European manufacturing sector has been the worst hit in recent years and in July 2009 41 per cent of distressed companies came from the sector. The sector itself accounts for only 15 per cent of European gross domestic product. The leisure and retail sectors also suffered high rates of distress.
) has announced plans to build a battery production facility costing over 200 million pounds in Sunderland, employing 350 people, as well as investing 250 million euros on a factory in Portugal, creating 200 jobs. These investments are to be supported by loans from the British and Portuguese governments to aid the development of 'green' technologies. The lithium-ion batteries are to be used in electric vehicles, and Nissan and its alliance partner Renault are going to release electric cars within the next couple of years using batteries made in Sunderland. Toyota and Tata Motors are also looking at Britain as a potential manufacturing site for electric and hybrid cars.
Friends Provident FP.L rejected on Monday a fresh takeover proposal from Resolution after a meeting which left the two sides at odds over the structure of a merger group. Friends said: 'Friends Provident continues to believe that key elements of Resolution's structure and its governance arrangements are totally inappropriate in a public company context and materially out of line with currently accepted best governance practice.' One person close to Friends said there were no plans for any further talks, but a person close to Resolution said that there was an opportunity to continue talking.
), giving it a stake worth 221 million pounds. The move by China's sovereign wealth fund makes it the drink group's ninth-largest investor. In recent months CIC has started to reassert itself after its earlier large paper losses in Morgan Stanley and Blackstone. The financial crisis has created buying opportunities for CIC and has made some markets more solicitous of Chinese money. China has the world's fastest growing alcoholic drinks market and Diageo expects the country to rival the US as one of its most important markets by 2021.
) is cutting its dividend after seeing its pre-tax profits drop by more than half. The maker of luxury wallpaper and embroidered sofas said that pre-tax profit had dropped from 5.94 million pounds to 2.65 million pounds in the year to 30 April. Group revenue fell three per cent from 78.2 million pounds to 75.6 million pounds and, were it not for the effect of currency, it would have fallen 14 per cent. Retailers specialising in goods for the home have been hit hard during the recession as shoppers cut back on big purchases, and the stagnant property market has meant that homeowners are not redecorating. Colefax halved its final dividend from 2.65 pence to 1.33 pence, shares closed down 0.5 pence on Monday at 103 pence.
DOMINO'S RETAINS ITS MEAL APPEAL
Domino's Pizza (
) has reported a double-digit sales and profits increase for the six months to the end of June. The pizza delivery chain said it expected to beat full-year profit forecasts thanks to stay-at-home Britons' unrelenting appetite for its takeaways. Pre-tax profits rose 35 per cent to 13 million pounds on revenue which rose 11.4 per cent to 73.7 million pounds. Like-for-like sales increased 7.1 per cent despite the good weather which usually weakens demand for pizza as barbecues become more popular. Shares closed on a 12-month high on Monday at 235.25 pence.
