Dousing the fire of red-hot emerging markets
2009-07-20 11:26:00.0
Track China's Leaders
By Jeremy Gaunt, European Investment Correspondent - Analysis
By Jeremy Gaunt, European Investment Correspondent - Analysis
Mon  EDT
The question is whether it is sustainable. Is the outperformance over developed markets excessive?
Equities in the sector .MSCIEF are up more than 42 percent so far this year, based on MSCI's readings. It is a stunning performance even if a lot of it does reflect a rise from a low base.
By contrast, MSCI's index for developed markets stocks -- which has a similar base effect -- has gained just 7.6 percent.
are up 79 percent and 57 percent, respectively, Europe
has eked out gains of around 6 percent and America's blue-chip Dow Jones index
Emerging market bond yields, meanwhile, have been tightening against U.S. Treasury yields, narrowing by nearly 3 full percentage points since March.
Some warnings are being given. Michael Hartnett, chief global equity strategist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, wrote last week that there was a short-term risk to emerging equities.
He based this on his firm's monthly poll of fund managers, which showed a net 54 percent of respondents were overweight in emerging market equities, the second highest on record, and only 10 percent actually underweight.
"Such extreme positioning has typically been followed by a period of relative underperformance," Hartnett wrote.
"The last time stocks in developing countries got this expensive was in October 2007," said Andrew Milligan, head of global strategy at Standard Life Investments.
There are, however, two major factors mitigating against a major retrenchment in emerging markets even given the run-up in prices.
Standard Life Investment, for example, is negative on the sector as a whole, recommending a very light exposure to the asset class because of potential capital outflows due to the credit crisis.
But it notes that some countries are protected from credit concerns because of their current-account surpluses. Milligan says the firm is quite keen on Brazil, for example, but dead set against eastern Europe.
The Bank of America Merrill Lynch poll also shows a wide diversity in fund managers' exposure, with many shying away from Malaysia, Poland and Chile, but embracing Indonesia, China and Russia.
The second factor likely to keep emerging markets on the boil is global economic recovery. In this light, the performance of emerging markets since hitting an all-time high on November 1 2007 vis-a-vis developing markets is instructive.
MSCI's emerging market index lost 67 percent from peak to trough and has since recouped 40 percent of the points it lost. The developed market index lost 59 percent and has regained only 30 percent of that loss.
In other words, emerging markets have been playing their traditional beta role of underperforming on the way down and outperforming on their way up.
So it follows -- if recent history is a guide -- that for emerging markets to retrench, developed markets would have to do so too.
But it is now widely assumed that there is a more than even chance the developed world, led by the U.S. economy, should see a slow upturn in the coming half year or so.
"Historically, risky assets have performed better in the months following upward revisions to GDP and corporate earnings forecasts," Goldman Sachs said in a note on Monday. "The latest data suggest that on both the growth and earnings fronts, forecast revisions have turned positive."
In effect, if the world is going to grow, then emerging markets would appear to remain the place to be. But the warnings against ebullience have nonetheless been sounded.
