Old allies signal loyalty to Russia has limits
2009-07-20 11:20:00.0
(Reuters) - The Kremlin will find it hard to ignore the absence of half the leaders of the former Soviet Union from an informal summit in Moscow last weekend, at a time when Europe is developing its interests in Russia's "back yard."
This year's Presidential Cup horse race, a traditional cue for an informal gathering of the 11-member Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), drew only five top guests: the leaders of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Moldova and Tajikistan.
The presidents of Ukraine, Belarus, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan all failed to show up, citing personal reasons. Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko went instead to ride a Harley-Davidson at a local bikers' rally.
"The CIS leaders used the chance ... to show they are unhappy with the state of relations with Russia," said Alexei Mukhin, head of the Center of Political Information think tank.
Medvedev's predecessor Vladimir Putin had managed to stiffen the loyalty of the ex-Soviet states, helped by their economic dependence on Moscow and their fear of popular revolutions. But Russia's war with Georgia last year and a series of bilateral spats have strained this loyalty again.
"A race away from Russia is inevitable," analyst Leonid Radzikhovsky said on an opposition-minded web site, Yezhednyevny Zhurnal. (
Moscow's war with Georgia last year over the pro-Russian separatist region of South Ossetia marked the first time the Kremlin has deployed troops in anger outside its borders since the fall of the Soviet Union, and this alarmed its neighbors.
None have so far followed Moscow in recognizing the independence of South Ossetia and another Georgian rebel region, Abkhazia -- both of whose leaders did go to Moscow's hippodrome as Medvedev's guests. Georgia anyway quit the CIS after the war.
Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev is preparing for a presidential election on July 23, but the other absent CIS leaders all had bones to pick with Russia.
Ukraine, looking for closer integration with the West since its popular revolution in 2004, is at odds with Moscow over gas transit and the future of a Russian naval base.
Belarus, long Russia's closest ally, has clashed with Moscow over gas prices, ownership of gas networks and dairy exports.
Uzbekistan is angry about Russia's support of border hydropower projects in neighboring Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, which it sees as a threat to its national water supplies.
And Turkmenistan has stepped up efforts to diversify its gas supplies to China and Iran after an explosion in April on a pipeline linking it with Russia, its traditional partner. It has blamed the explosion on the Russian gas monopoly Gazprom.
WEST'S COURTSHIP
Such problems are not new for Russia. The new factor is the West's attempts to court some of its allies.
Moscow has been alarmed to see the European Union lifting its ostracism of Lukashenko over his democracy record, and inviting Belarus to join the EU's Eastern Partnership.
Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia have also joined the project, designed to expand their political and economic ties with Europe, and viewed by many in Russia as an instrument to prise them away from Moscow's orbit.
To the east, Russia sees Turkmenistan being courted by the West as a source of gas for the projected Nabucco pipeline, designed to ease Europe's reliance on Russian supplies.
Kyrgyzstan this year shut down a U.S. air base, but later allowed the Americans to re-establish a transit point there for their supplies to Afghanistan.
But Fyodor Lukyanov, editor of the magazine Russia in Global Affairs, warned against overdramatizing the exodus of Russian allies.
"Doing a balancing act has become a survival tool for these countries," he said. "But ... each time it turns out that when it comes to real problems, they have nowhere to go (but Russia)."
Trade with Russia remains the largest source of income for most of the CIS allies. Until Nabucco takes off, Russia also remains the key gateway for Central Asian gas to Europe.
Since the start of the global crisis, Russia has disbursed more than $5 billion in rescue credits to Belarus, Armenia, Moldova and Kyrgyzstan and has pledged another $7.5 billion to a special ad-hoc fund. Few others can match this largesse.
"Several years ago we faced a similar situation, and people were saying that was the end of the CIS," he said. "Later everyone flocked back."
