PREVIEW-Kyrgyzstan, eyed by big powers, readies for election
2009-07-20 04:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Kyrgyzstan, at the heart of a fierce power struggle between the United States and Russia, votes in a presidential election this week certain to hand incumbent Kurmanbek Bakiyev a second term in office.
In power since 2005 when protests ousted his predecessor, Bakiyev has found himself enmeshed in a complex game of geopolitical intrigue as Moscow has sought to resist growing U.S. military clout in former Soviet territory.
Bakiyev, who once enjoyed the reputation of being a relatively liberal leader compared to his more hard-line Central Asia neighbours, has been accused by the opposition of tightening the screws and silencing political rivals -- a charge he denies.
"Bakiyev will certainly win. Everything is under his control," said Alexander Knyazev, an independent political analyst. "There are no real opposition players and voters are apathetic, tired and disillusioned."
This weekend, the capital Bishkek basked in a hazy summer heat, its dusty street corners festooned with huge pro-Bakiyev billboards. No posters of the main opposition challenger, Almaz Atambayev, could be seen.
"Bakiyev is deliberately trying to add fuel to the fire and raise tensions," said Bakyt Beshimov, an opposition member of parliament. "No one believes in free and fair elections."
As the geopolitical game unfolded, Bakiyev said in February he would shut the U.S. military air base -- a key transit point for troops fighting the Taliban in Afghanistan -- after receiving promises of $2 billion in crisis money from Russia.
Kyrgyzstan and the rest of Central Asia, largely peaceful since 2005, have been volatile in past weeks as fighting intensified in the adjacent areas of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Some security analysts believe the surge of U.S. troops in Afghanistan, and Pakistan's offensive against militants in tribal areas, may have forced some Taliban fighters of Central Asian origin to trickle back into the former Soviet region.
In May, gunmen attacked an Uzbek border post in Ferghana, Central Asia's most densely populated area seen by local governments as a hotbed of Islamist-led resistance to their secular rule.
Security in Kyrgyzstan was tight ahead of the vote, with 5,000 officers placed on high alert and additional measures enforced in the potentially restive border areas in Ferghana.
"No one cares about this election. Bakiyev, Bakiyev, Bakiyev, it's all you hear," said Sergei, a Bishkek resident in his 50s who asked for his surname not to used. "But there is tension in the air because this country is so unpredictable." (Additional reporting by Olga Dzyubenko; Editing by Richard Balmforth)
