Bond, Japan equity funds lure on uncertainty-EPFR
2009-07-17 07:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Global bond funds saw their highest inflows since 2002 in the week ending July 15 and Japanese equity funds attracted inflows for the third successive week as investors hunkered down for second-quarter earnings session, funds tracker EPFR Global said in its weekly report.
Investors' preference for fixed income assets over uncertain equity and low-yielding money markets continued to drive flows into U.S. bond funds, which absorbed over $1 billion in the week. Short-term, inflation-protected and municipal funds saw the strongest inflows driven by inflation concerns.
"Asia ex-Japan equity funds were the only one of the four emerging-markets fund groups to post inflows during the second week of July as appetite for exposure to riskier asset classes continued to cool," EPFR said.
Doubts over the commodities investment story hit equity funds focused on Brazil and Russia, which surrendered $229 million and $112 million respectively.
JAPAN, FINANCIALS
Japan equity funds saw their longest winning streak since the third quarter last year "even though the investment case for the country contains as many minuses -- an appreciating yen, the threat of deflation, political turmoil -- as pluses," EPFR said.
Investors pulled $11.6 billion out of money market funds, pushing year-to-date outflows to over $185 billion. But this fund group still holds more than $544 billion of net inflows accumulated during the start of the credit crisis in mid-2007.
Inflows into financial sector funds rebounded on the back of Goldman Sachs' (
) bumper earnings [ID:nN13221883], snapping a nine-day losing streak and attracting $499 million on a single day -- July 14 -- that nearly offset earlier outflows.
Despite the pressure on oil prices, energy-sector funds tracked by EPFR rebounded strongly on track for a weekly tally of $603 million.
Funds focused on consumer goods, healthcare and biotechnology as well as telecoms and utilities raked in $374 million, $176 million, $11 million and $10 million respectively.
These defensive sector funds had "one of their better weeks", the data provider said. (Reporting by Cecilia Valente, editing by Toby Chopra)
