China communist party to probe Wen family wealth: SCMP
2012-11-04 20:38:00.0
(Reuters) - China's ruling Communist Party has launched an internal inquiry into allegations made by The New York Times that the family of Premier Wen Jiabao accumulated at least $2.7 billion in "hidden riches", the South China Morning Post said on Monday.
Wen himself asked for the inquiry in a letter to the Politburo Standing Committee - the party's top decision-making body of which he is also a member - in an apparent move to clear his name, the Hong Kong daily said, citing unnamed sources.
Lawyers for the Wen family have rejected The New York Times' October 26 report, which says corporate and regulatory records show Wen's mother, siblings and children amassed most of their wealth since Wen became Vice Premier in 1998.
"The Standing Committee had agreed to his (Wen's) request," the South China Morning Post said, quoting the sources.
It cited some analysts as saying that Wen's request for a probe showed the premier was keen to use it as a chance to push forward a long-stalled "sunshine law", which would require a public declaration of family assets by senior leaders.
However, Professor He Weifang, a law expert at Peking University, told the Post that he doubted the party's senior leadership would go that far.
"Even if Wen wants to disclose his assets, I don't think other senior leaders, who may also have 'hidden wealth' of their own, will allow him to go ahead, considering the explosive social repercussions," He said.
(Writing by Mark Bendeich; Editing by Terril Jones and Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The article reads, ¡®¡±Even if Wen wants to disclose his assets, I don¡¯t think other senior leaders, who may also have ¡®hidden wealth¡¯ of their own, will allow him to go ahead, considering the explosive social repercussions,¡± He said.¡±¡® Reuters interviews Professor He Weifang as if he were a professor at a Western University, forgetting that all Communist nations in 1960 signed onto the ¡°Long-Range Policy¡± to defeat the West, the only strategy Communists knew had any chance of success against an opponent with superior technology and populations that could be counted on to fight an offensive war against the Communists, unlike Communist nations who could count on, at most, 10% of their populations to fight in an offensive war with the West. At any rate, the next scene in this Chinese opera is where ¡°reformers¡± in the Chinese Communist Party win the day and get an investigation of not only the Wen family¡¯s unexplained assets, but the unexplained assets of other Chinese Communist Party officials¡¯ families (and friends). The results of the investigations will prove ¡°damning¡±, and occurring contemporaneous with other ¡°revealed¡± misdeeds of the Chinese Communist system and the soon to be manufactured economic downturn in China, will lead to the fraudulent collapse of the Chinese Communist government. The upcoming ¡°collapse¡± of the Chinese Communist government will be the next major disinformation operation under the ¡°Long-Range Policy¡±, the last major disinformation operation being the laughably incompetent ¡°collapse¡± of the USSR in late 1991. For more on the ¡°Long-Range Policy¡±, read KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn¡¯s 1984 book ¡°New Lies for Old¡± (available at Internet Archive), the only Soviet-era defector to still be under protective custody in the West, proving (1) the collapses of the USSR/East Bloc were strategic ruses; and (2) that all other Soviet-era defectors who followed Golitsyn were still loyal to their respective Communist intelligence agencies, since all of them provided incorrect intelligence on the future of the USSR/East Bloc.
Nov 04, 201211:57pm EST--
