Q+A: What's on the agenda at Asia-Pacific security meeting?
2009-07-18 23:22:00.0
(Reuters) - The Thai resort island of Phuket will host Asia's biggest security gathering, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), alongside a meeting of Southeast Asian foreign ministers from this weekend until July 23.
WHAT IS ARF?
The ARF was created in 1994 with a focus on security and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Besides most Asian countries, the European Union, Russia and the United States also take part in meetings.
HOW WILL NORTH KOREA FIGURE IN TALKS?
Thai officials say North Korea, which has sent its foreign minister to previous ARF meetings, will this time send a low-level delegation. It is highly unlikely those officials would engage in talks about anything of substance, assuming they show up. Washington and other powers want North Korea to return to six-party talks aimed at dismantling its nuclear program. North Korea has said those talks were dead. With the other five players -- the United States, China, Japan, South Korea and Russia -- attending ARF there has been speculation of a gathering on the sidelines about North Korea. But Beijing is against this idea, said a South Korean official with knowledge of the issue.
EMPLOYEES?
The Phuket meeting could provide an opportunity for talks between the foreign ministers of China and Australia on Beijing's detention of an Australian executive working for Rio Tinto on spying charges. Three of his Chinese colleagues are also held.
WILL ACTION BE TAKEN ON MYANMAR?
Expect strong words from the United States and European Union over military-ruled Myanmar's trial of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi. And expect no response from Myanmar's foreign minister. The generals snubbed U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on a visit this month and they are unlikely to budge this week. Myanmar is likely to be spared a grilling by its Southeast Asian neighbors because of ASEAN's policy of non-interference. ASEAN ministers may make positive noises about this week's pledge by the Myanmar regime to free an undisclosed number of prisoners ahead of elections next year.
WHAT ABOUT SECURITY IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA?
China's growing economic clout make it an important participant in ASEAN meetings, but tensions persist over competing claims in the South China Sea. China says there is no dispute over its jurisdiction over a series of tiny islands and atolls. China's flexing of its maritime military muscle has also prompted concern from the United States, whose ships have been jostled by Chinese vessels several times in recent months. With most of the concerned parties present in Phuket, there may be scope for talks on how to reduce tensions in the South China Sea.
IS CLIMATE CHANGE ON THE AGENDA?
The issue is set to be discussed, although officials say it is not yet known what will be raised or if any specific requests for talks had been made. So it looks unlikely that any declarations will be made this week.
CAN THAILAND KEEP ANTI-GOVERNMENT PROTESTERS AT BAY?
After the anti-government "red shirts" embarrassed Thailand by forcing the cancellation of April's East Asia Summit, Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva has taken no chances with security. Close to 10,000 troops and hundreds of police will enforce a no-protest zone in Phuket. They will carry out security sweeps at vehicle checkpoints and in hotels to root out members of the red-shirted United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship, although it insists it will not try to disrupt the meeting. A peaceful meeting would help boost the credibility of Abhisit.
WHAT ABOUT ASEAN'S HUMAN RIGHTS MECHANISM?
Working groups and foreign ministers will discuss the formation of a Human Rights Mechanism on Sunday as part of the ASEAN Charter, but recent developments in Myanmar have been a major setback for the credibility of the 10-member bloc.
(Compiled by Martin Petty in Bangkok, Ben Blanchard in Beijing, Michael Perry in Sydney and Jon Herskovitz in Seoul; Editing by Alan Raybould)
