Top US rating shaky if dollar lost status-Barclays
2009-07-17 00:51:00.0
(Reuters) - If the U.S. dollar's status as the world's leading reserve currency slipped, U.S. sovereign debt could lose its top AAA rating, analysts with Barclays Capital wrote in a research note.
A tide of U.S. government debt issuance to pay for rescues of banks, companies and securities markets, expected to tally some $2 trillion this fiscal year alone, is giving bond analysts some cause for concern about the long-term outlook for the top U.S. credit rating.
However, "even though deteriorating financial metrics in the U.S. are grabbing all the headlines, the real threat to the AAA rating would arise if the proportion of world reserves held in U.S. dollars were to fall below 55 percent," the analysts wrote in a research note dated Thursday. That scenario is not imminent, but not unrealistic over the longer term, they added.
The U.S. currency currently accounts for some 65 percent of global foreign exchange reserves, according to Barclays.
A decrease of 10 percentage points in the U.S. dollar's share of global exchange reserves would be the equivalent of about $900 billion in sales of U.S. dollar assets by central banks, Barclays wrote.
Overseas central banks, particularly in Asia, have been huge buyers of U.S. debt in recent years and own more than a quarter of marketable Treasuries. China recently overtook Japan as the biggest such holder.
But if the dollar held its ground as the world's premier currency, near the current level of global reserves, the proportion of debt-to-gross domestic product, "would have to worsen to unrealistically high levels for the U.S. to experience a downgrade," the Barclays analysts wrote.
If world U.S. dollar reserves stay at 65 percent, the projected proportion of debt-to-GDP would have to rise to 250 percent to signal a downgrade of the credit rating, they wrote.
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office forecasts U.S. debt-to-GDP at about 63 percent in 2013, rising to about 80 percent in 2018, according to Barclays.
The Barclays note, entitled "Safe for now: Deconstructing sovereign ratings," said despite the expectation the U.S. would hang on to its AAA rating for now, other AAA sovereigns such as France, Germany and Sweden "may be better credits and appear mispriced by cash markets."
"Our analysis suggests that the U.S. would be AA rated were it not for the size of the U.S. economy and the dominant status of the dollar as a reserve currency," the note said. (Reporting by John Parry; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
