PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - July 18
2009-07-18 12:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sat, Jul 18 2009
Fri, Jul 17 2009
Fri, Jul 17 2009
Fri, Jul 17 2009
Sat, Jul 11 2009
Sat  EDT
Institutional investors have raised concerns about proposals in Sir David Walker's report on corporate governance in banks which concern the monitoring of a codified set of principles of investor engagement. Under the proposals, institutions and fund managers would sign up to a set of "principles of best practice stewardship." The Financial Reporting Council's remit would be extended to cover development and adherence to those principles. There are concerns about the FRC's role in overseeing these principles in the same way that they do corporate governance. Questions have also been raised as to whether the FSA should "encourage commitment to the principles of stewardship as best practice".
According to property consultants Knight Frank the average price of residential building land outside of London increased by 2.1 per cent over the three months to the end of June compared with the first quarter, the first rise since 2007. During the quarter land values increased in every region of the country except London, however prices falls in the capital appeared to be slowing. Knight Frank analysts Jon Neal said developers and builders were returning to the market as they become more confident of their finances and start planning for the future. Property developers: Taylor Wimpey(
), Redrow(
According to data from the professional services group Ernst & Young, retailers' summer sales have arrived on average more than ten days earlier than last year, with discounts that are deeper and more wide-spread as the high street attempts to recover heavy losses in the recession. Separate research by Verdict indicated that one in ten items of clothing were reduced during May, compared with only two per cent of clothing items during the same month in 2008.
), the owner of the DIY retail chain B&Q, has announced plans to trial a small store format in Moscow. The store would maintain the same 35,000 lines as other Russian stores but in 60 per cent of the space and the concept could also be rolled out into other markets such as China, Poland and even the UK. Kingfisher's expansion into Russia has been hit by the financial crisis with like-for-like sales growth falling from around 25 per cent a year in 2007 and 2008 to just 6.7 per cent for the five months to May. Peter Hogsted, chief executive of the group's international operations outside of France, said there were advantages to expansion during a down-turn such as more favourable terms from suppliers and access to better sites.
The waste management start-up Sterecycle has gained planning permission to build its second autoclave, a steam treatment plant for sterilising "black bag" rubbish prior to it being sorted for recycling, in Cardiff. The company is raising 50 million pounds of equity that, combined with debt, will form a 200 million pound war chest to fund further expansion through projects aimed at the UK's largest urban areas. According to Sterecycle chief executive, Duncan Grierson, London and Glasgow are now said to be "top of the list" of further possible sites.
British AirwaysBAY.L is to raise about 680 million pound in extra cash facilities to help it survive a deepening financial crisis that has seen it suffer an operating loss of about 100 million pound between April and June, the first time in its history it has incurred a first quarter loss. BA will raise 350 million pound through a convertible bond issue and 330 million pound through taking back control of a guaranteed line of bank credit that had previously been given to its pension funds three years ago.
Friends ProvidentFP.L has set a merger proposal with Clive Cowdery and his Resolution investment vehicle, five days after rejecting a 1.64 billion pound takeover approach from Resolution. Convinced of the need for consolidation in the UK life and pensions industry to combat changing regulation and increased competition Sir Adrian Montague, Friends' chairman, proposed that Friends issue new shares in exchange for those in Resolution to ensure a structure that would be "fair to both sets of shareholders."
Allied carpets have been placed into administration with more than 160 stores now up for sale, putting 1,100 jobs at risk. BDO Stoy Hayward, the restructuring firm, was appointed administrator of the flooring retailer and, in a process known as pre-pack administration, 51 of the company's stores were immediately sold to Allied Carpets Retail, a new company set up in partnership with the collapsed retailer's management. Allied's collapse is another blow to retail property owners who are struggling with a decline in consumer spending and the frozen housing market.
Arab Investments, a private property company, yesterday entered into an exclusivity agreement with administrators KPMG over the potential acquisition of Coffee Republic, the coffee shop chain. Although Coffee Republic Plc did not go bust its three subsidiaries: Coffee Republic (UK), Coffee Republic Franchising Ltd and Goodbean Ltd, were placed into administration. If successful, Arab Investments intends to put money into developing the Coffee Republic brand in the UK and overseas and start an immediate expansion of the branch network.
