UPDATE 1-EU decision on Asia shoe duty seen in Sept-sources
2009-07-17 00:29:00.0
(Reuters) - The European Commission is expected to decide in September whether to propose extending dumping duties on imports of leather shoes from China and Vietnam, but most EU states want them scrapped, EU sources said.
Last October, the Commission -- which oversees trade policy for the 27-country European Union -- extended duties of up to 16.5 percent on Chinese leather shoes and 10 percent on those made in Vietnam, pending a review.
"The Commission's proposal is expected to be submitted to member states in September. But as it stands the majority, or at least 15 member states, favour termination," one source said.
Britain, Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and Sweden want the duties scrapped immediately, before the lucrative Christmas retail period, an EU diplomat said.
"Major shoe-producing countries Italy, Spain, France and Poland are all leading the charge to keep the duties," the diplomat added.
The shoe duties were introduced in 2006 only after a compromise deal to keep them in place for just two years, instead of the usual five. If extended again, Commission sources say the duties would last at least five years.
"This would give certainty either way to EU importers before the busy Christmas period and at the same time allow EU producers the time to adapt and plan against cheaper imports from Asia," another source said.
European retailers and global shoemakers, led by sports shoe producers such as Adidas ADSG.DE, Asics (
), Nike (
A review can take between 12 and 15 months, but the Commission had said it hoped to complete its work more quickly. It said it could reimburse the extra tariffs imposed during the review should it be proven that the duties were unnecessary.
"If we get a termination, that will be enough. We are not going to try and make life any harder for ourselves and threaten the Commission," a representative from an EU importer said. (Editing by Dale Hudson)
