U.S. stocks stage late-day rally, oil gains
2009-07-16 17:29:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. stocks staged a late-day rally on Thursday on renewed hopes that earnings will remain strong, while rebounding equities and news of surging growth in China, the No. 2 energy consumer, helped lift crude prices.
), the biggest contributor to the Dow's rise, was set to report results after the closing bell.
Wall Street rallied, with the benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 index posting the best four days since late March, when the S&P 500 recovered from a 12-year low set earlier in the month.
"Investors have ratcheted up expectations for earnings almost across the board, so that optimism is still there even if today's action is rather muted," said Paul Baiocchi, senior market strategist at Delta Global Advisors in San Francisco.
After the bell, IBM (
) posted better-than-expected quarterly results despite a sharp slide in revenue, [ID:nWNAB8097], while quarterly profits at Google Inc (
shot up 95.61 points, or 1.11 percent, to close at 8,711.82. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
advanced 8.06 points, or 0.86 percent, to 940.74. The Nasdaq Composite Index
rose 22.13 points, or 1.19 percent, to 1,885.03.
European shares hit a one-month closing high on improved sentiment following JPMorgan's results and data that showed the number of U.S. workers claiming new jobless benefits fell last week to their lowest since January.
index of top European shares ended 0.4 percent higher at 866.81 points, its fourth straight daily gain.
Asian shares across the region outside of Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS rose 1.3 percent to their highest since mid-June, while Japan's benchmark Nikkei
Risk aversion had earlier swept markets, pushing up U.S. government debt prices and dampening commodity prices after mixed economic data and concern about the possible failure of U.S. lender CIT (
U.S. Treasuries' prices rose, supported by some bargain hunting after a three-day sell-off, and by safe-haven buying, given the concern about the potential CIT failure.
A fall in a reading of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's index of business conditions in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic region to minus 7.5 in July from minus 2.2 in June also helped push up bond prices.
"We are in a difficult position at the moment because we are caught on the cusp between is this a sense of sustainable recovery or a possibility of a relapse?" said Richard McGuire, fixed income strategist at RBC Capital Markets in London.
"There's no real convincing evidence yet on either side," he said.
DOLLAR DROPS, COMMODITIES MIXED
The U.S. dollar initially fell to a six-week low against major currencies after JPMorgan Chase & Co reported strong results, providing further evidence of recovery.
The dollar was down against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY off 0.10 percent at 79.237.
The euro was up 0.30 percent at $1.4147, and against the yen, the dollar was down 0.50 percent at 93.79.
U.S. crude oil rose 48 cents to settle at $62.02 a barrel, while London Brent eased 34 cents to $62.75 a barrel ahead of the August contract's expiry.
The gains, which added to Wednesday's rally of more than $2 triggered by a U.S. report showing sliding domestic crude inventories, coincided with Wall Street's afternoon bounce.
"Another late rally and coinciding with an S&P 500 rally, although it's arguable who's watching whom more closely," said Tim Evans, oil analyst at Citi Futures Perspective in New York.
U.S. gold futures ended lower after trading in a tight range as bullion investors looked for a new catalyst from markets outside of the commodities sector to fuel the metal's recent rally amid inflation concerns. <GOL/>
Copper ended down, giving back a fraction of the week's strong gains, even though upbeat U.S. corporate earnings and China's robust growth data provided fresh signs that the worst may be over for the world economy.
China reported economic growth rose to 7.9 percent in the second quarter, beating forecasts.
(Reporting by Rodrigo Campos, Ellen Freilich, Steven C. Johnson in New York; Atul Prakash, David Sheppard and Emelia Sithole-Matarise in London; Writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Jan Paschal)
