U.N. council sanctions North Korea entities, officials
2009-07-16 15:35:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.N. Security Council announced sanctions on Thursday against five North Korean organizations and five individuals for involvement in Pyongyang's nuclear and ballistic missile activities.
Transfer of two weapons-related products to North Korea also will be banned under the measure announced by Turkey's U.N. Ambassador Fazli Corman, chairman of the Security Council's North Korea sanctions committee.
The organizations sanctioned comprise North Korea's General Bureau of Atomic Energy (GBAE) and four trading companies. The individuals are GBAE director Ri Je-son, two other nuclear officials and two trading company directors.
The measure, binding on all 192 U.N. member states, slaps an asset freeze on the named organizations and individuals and travel bans on the individuals. It greatly lengthens an existing blacklist, consisting only of two companies and a bank involved in Pyongyang's nuclear and missile programs.
Arms sales are a vital source of foreign currency for destitute North Korea, which has a yearly GDP of about $17 billion and a broken economy that produces few other items it can export.
Analysts have said the new U.N. measures will make it more costly for the North to trade arms but they will not likely deter customers, including Iran, who have shown little interest in joining international plans to punish Pyongyang.
It asked the committee, which includes all 15 council members including China, the closest Pyongyang has to an ally, to add more names to the sanctions list.
Corman said the committee would continue working to identify subsidiaries of the targeted North Korean firms and additional technical items, including sensitive dual-use goods, ballistic missile-related items and nuclear-related items.
The items that were banned by Thursday's measure were graphite for weapons-making purposes and para-aramid fiber such as kevlar.
Apart from Ri, the people sanctioned were Namchongang director Yun Ho-jin, Hwang Sok-hwa, described as a director in GBAE, Ri Hong-sop, former director of North Korea's Yongbyon nuclear research center, and Han Yu-ro, director of Korea Ryongaksan General Trading Corporation.
Corman said the sanctions were "carefully targeted at only those entities and individuals responsible for the DPRK's (North Korea's) ballistic missiles, nuclear and other (weapons of mass destruction)-related programs."
"They are intended to minimize any unintended humanitarian consequences on the people of the DPRK," he said.
