Asia Steel-China prices up as major mills raise prices
2009-07-17 04:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices rose 1.3 percent this week, as price hikes by major steelmills raised expectations that demand may remain buoyant even during the usually slow summer season.
China's stronger-than-expected economic growth data, fuelled by powerful fiscal and monetary stimulus and an ensuing jump in fixed-asset investment and factory output, also helped boost market sentiment.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil rose to around 3,700 yuan ($541.7) a tonne from 3,653 last week in south and east China, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphics on China's steel prices, click
"Traders' restocking activity remains quite healthy, as price increases by major mills ahead of the traditionally slow summer season are raising expectations that market conditions would remain solid," said a trader.
Earlier this week, Baosteel (
) raised prices of its major steel products by a greater-than-expected, 9 to 13 percent for domestic sales from next month. [ID:nSHA359529]
But signs of actual demand recovery from end-users remain fragile, causing prices of flat steel products to lag recoveries in construction steel products, a major beneficiary of China's massive fiscal spending plan, while roaring steel output growth threatens to slow down recovery.
"Conditions and activity levels have improved and steel prices are rising from their low in April," said Alexander Latzer, a Daiwa Institute of Research analyst.
"However, the large steel mills are concerned about excess capacity and have seen little demand pull from the fiscal stimulus but are raising prices to restore profitability."
China's annual gross domestic product growth accelerated in the second quarter to 7.9 percent, marking it the best-performing major economy and reinforcing hopes that the world economy is pulling out of its deepest recession in 80 years. [ID:nSP537798]
Factory output growth also quickened to 10.7 percent in the year to June, while investment in fixed assets in urban areas grew 33.6 percent in the first half, up from 32.9 percent in the first five months.
Global steelmills, led by China, are raising output fast after slashing production this year, encouraged by rebounding prices and demand as the world economy slowly recovers.
China's crude steel output rose 6 percent on the year to a record 49.42 million tonnes in June, data showed on Friday. [ID:nSHA292168]
South Korea's POSCO (
) also raised its output target by 6.4 percent to 29.8 million tonnes this week, as rising prices and improving demand from automakers and other manufacturers help the industry recover from its toughest environment in decades.
"Global steel prices are on the rise as a major steel shortage appears to be under way ... Prices, which are already up by $50-100 a tonne from their lows in April and May, are likely to run another $100 -$150 before additional supply tempers the temporary spike," Macquarie analyst Polina Diyachkina said on Friday.
POSCO, which raised capacity run rates to 85 percent in the second quarter from 75 percent in the first quarter, also warned that a fast rise in production threatens to dampen steel price recovery. [ID:nSEO174429] (Editing by Ben Tan)
