Brazilian stocks close up on earnings, indicators
2009-07-16 17:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks closed higher on Thursday as a wave of economic indicators and earnings reports whetted investors' appetite for risk.
rose 1.21 percent to 51,918.20, reversing morning profit-taking that had pushed stocks lower. On Wednesday, the index soared almost 5 percent, the biggest jump in nearly two months.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, strengthened 0.26 percent to 1.931 reais per dollar.
The slew of numbers on Thursday included the addition of payroll jobs to Brazil's economy for the fifth straight month in June and higher-than-expected growth numbers from China, a leading consumer of Brazilian commodity exports.
"The pieces of good news built on each other," said Raffi Dokuzian, superintendent at Banif brokerage. After the morning profit-taking, he said, "the market started to look forward again."
Strong earnings reports in the United States this week from such companies as JPMorgan Chase, Google, IBM and Goldman Sachs Group also gave investors hope that the worst of the global economic crisis could be over.
"The numbers I've seen so far have surprised the market, coming in better than expected," said Januario Hostin Jr., an analyst with Leme Investimentos.
) seesawed, closing down 0.23 percent at 30.10 reais. The company, the world's largest iron ore miner, may bid for fertilizer company Mosaic (
), the Estado de Sao Paulo newspaper reported.
Shares of Brazil's Aracruz Celulose ARCZ6.SA, the world's largest producer of bleached eucalyptus pulp, rose 1.29 percent to 3.14 reais after the company reported its first quarterly profit in a year.
In contrast, TIM Participacoes TCSL3.SA plummeted 22.7 percent to 5.45 reais on a ruling from Brazil's securities regulator that the wireless operator's parent company does not have to buy out minority shareholders.
Changes in yields on Brazilian interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:> were mixed, reflecting investor sentiment that the central bank still has room to lower the benchmark interest rate, the Selic, from its current record low of 9.25 percent, but that policymakers will eventually have to bring the rate back up.
The yield for the contract due Jan. 2011 DIJF1, among the most highly-traded, stayed flat at 9.78 percent.
Central bank policymakers meet on July 21 and 22 to review possible changes to the rate. Analysts expect another cut, perhaps a slice of another 50 basis points.
(Reporting by Luciana Lopez; Editing by Diane Craft)
