BUY OR SELL-Can SE Asian coal stay rock solid after strong run?
2009-07-16 05:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Southeast Asian coal companies, which have weathered the financial storm better than most, are thriving as investors bet on buoyant thermal coal prices and China's appetite for overseas coal.
Resurgent crude prices are throwing a spotlight on the regional favourites, with shares in Indonesia's PT Adaro (
), Thailand's Banpu BANP.BK and Singapore-listed Straits Asia STRL.SI all outrunning their broader markets after the global recession punished them in 2008.
Adaro, the region's largest coal firm by market value, has risen 143 percent this year after tumbling 85 percent in 2008. Others, such as second-ranked Bumi (
) and Straits Asia, have also more than doubled this year after last year's falls, but, after such strong gains, is it time to bail out?
Despite the recent run-up, bulls say coal remains attractive.
"No, I don't think it's overpriced and there's definitely an upside for people to play on," said UBS analyst Athaporn Arayasantiparb. "The story is still there. We believe coal supply won't be able to keep up with demand."
Athaporn, who noted valuations were not rich, increased Banpu's rating to 'buy' from 'sell', with a target of a 100 percent rise in 2009 to 364 baht a share, saying Banpu is now trading at a 12 percent discount to Indonesian coal.
UBS, which has raised Indo Tambangraya's (
) target by 136 percent and its rating to 'buy' from 'neutral', upgraded its long-term thermal coal price forecast by 15 percent to $75 a tonne.
Among others with a UBS 'buy' recommendation were Bumi, Bukit Asam (
Alan Heap, Citi commodities analyst, said thermal coal prices had been robust in recent months, driven by Chinese imports. For him, the sustainability of those sales was the key risk to prices in the short term, although the long-term outlook for thermal coal is increasingly positive.
"The prospect of China becoming a sustained importer has come closer, while Indian demand remains robust," Heap said.
China's buying has helped keep Asian coal prices above $60 a tonne for much of this year. Thermal coal on the globalCOAL Newcastle weekly index, a benchmark for Asia, ended at $71.63 a tonne in the week ended July 10.
"My general view on coal remains favourable," said Lance Depew, managing director of UPI Management, who manages $50 million. "There's still some room there for them to rise, given how much they were sold before."
"We're still pretty much underweight the sector. There's price volatility on one side, and we don't know, either, how well the global economy is recovering," said Ayudhya Fund Management Chief Investment Officer Prapas Tonsipulsak, overseeing $1.38 billion and with stocks like Banpu among its top holdings.
Problems in the credit markets may have had less impact on coal miners in the region, which typically have strong, clean balance sheets and less debt than financial and other industries.
"But as long as there is no clear sign of an upturn, people are going to question their earning risks," Prapas added.
Sharp fluctuations in coal prices would add to the downside risk as they put pressure on the revenue side, while production interruptions due to unforeseeable climatic incidents -- anything from high waves to heavy rainfall -- could disrupt output or cause shipment delays.
Bumi trades at 9.5 times 2009 earnings, with Adaro at 8.2, and both Bukit Asam and Indo Tambangraya at 8.6. By comparison, the Indonesian market trades at about 12.5 times forecast earnings. ($1=34.02 Baht) (Editing by Lincoln Feast)
