UPDATE 3-LG Display swings to Q2 profit, strong H2 seen
2009-07-16 05:07:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korea's LG Display (
) returned to profit after two quarters of losses, spurred by robust demand for flat-screen TVs that is expected to power the industry through most of the year.
The LCD sector, one of the few bright spots in the weak global technology sector, is benefiting from the popularity of liquid crystal display (LCD) TVs in North America and China, and makers are scrambling to restart plants and secure raw materials.
"Third quarter performance is expected to be even better facing the usual high-demand season," said Jason Kang, an analyst at NH Investment & Securities.
), the world's No. 2 LCD maker, expects its average panel prices to gradually rise in the third quarter after gaining 11 percent in April-June from the previous quarter. Shipments are expected to rise by a mid-teen percent from the second quarter, the world's second-biggest LCD maker said.
Demand is expected to increase further in the third quarter thanks to strength in TV demand and a seasonal boost for computers, chief financial officer James Jeong said.
But the outlook is clouded due to rapid growth of output and a fragile global economy. Some analysts warned prices and sales may fall in the fourth quarter when demand usually weakens, leading to another oversupply in early 2010.
"The industry is roller-coasting," Jeong said, noting LCD makers may have to lower plant utilisation once again in the fourth quarter.
"I have no disagreement with the market view that there will be oversupply in the first half of next year. But the sooner it comes, the earlier it will end," Jeong said.
LG Display on Wednesday announced it would invest $2.55 billion to build a new advanced production line, signalling a return to a full-fledged capacity expansion. [ID:nSEO62379]
"Capacity ramp-up will not be a concern until next year," said Lee Ka-keun, an analyst at IBK Securities.
Jeong also said on Thursday the company was "seriously" considering building a panel-manufacturing plant in China, where it has so far only run assembly lines.
In response to media reports that it would boost its own LCD capacity, the world's biggest LCD maker Samsung Electronics (
LG Display, which competes with Samsung and Taiwan's AU Optronics (
), posted a 302 billion won ($238.5 million) net profit in the second quarter, beating forecasts.
Operating profit in April-June was 218 billion won, which also beat forecasts. Sales rose 16 percent from a year ago to 4.89 trillion won on a consolidated basis.
%20ER%20Deck%20( ENG)%20090716%20(Final).pdf For graphics on the company's results:
Samsung, which reports earnings late next week, is also expected to see its LCD business swing to an operating profit in the second quarter thanks to booming sales at its TV division.
Last month, research firm DisplaySearch raised its forecast for 2009 LCD TV sales, predicting a 21 percent increase in global LCD TV shipments to 127 million units. [ID:nSEO106017]
Shares in LG Display have rallied 66 percent so far this year, pricing in the recovery, against the wider market's
27 percent gain. (Reporting by Rhee So-eui; Additional reporting by Cheon Jong-woo and Marie-France Han; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
