UPDATE 1-US trade enforcement strategy a good start-US Steel
2009-07-16 14:35:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. government is taking the right approach on moving to do more to enforce trade agreements, the chief executive of U.S. Steel Corp (
U.S. Steel Chairman and CEO John Surma spoke with reporters at one of the company's plants on the outskirts of Pittsburgh, where leaders from the G20 nations will meet in September to discuss the global economic recession. [ID:nN07343863]
"This emphasis ... on enforcing trade agreements, on enforcing countervailing duty, anti-dumping laws, that's extremely important for us," said Surma.
He was responding to remarks by U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk who said the U.S. government will get tough with governments that don't live up to trade deals, including those with substandard labor practices.
"If they won't fix their labor problems, then we will exercise our legal options," said Kirk, at the same gathering.
The steel executive blasted China in a recent Reuters interview for undermining the global steel industry through tax benefits, calling on the country to play by world trade rules.
On June 22, China's Ministry of Finance said it would cut taxes on some exported steel products by 5 percent to 10 percent starting July 1, to help domestic producers ease their excess supply.
Surma said Thursday that import-export flows out of China have been relatively benign in recent months, other than specific products the industry had formally complained about.
He spoke previously about a complaint involving steel pipes used in the oil and gas industry, saying China's activity forced production curtailments and employee layoffs.
"Because of the size and the system in China, the risk is great, and we were delighted to hear the Ambassador's pledge to be vigilant in that regard," the executive said.
"Enough or not -- it's hard to say -- but we're very delighted with the direction," he said.
Asked whether the U.S. measures would move quickly enough, Surma said, "U.S. domestic trade law and the WTO systems work slow. Jobs can be lost in the meantime. But, Kirk seems to want to move quickly where he can. I have no idea how successful he'll be, but we think it's certainly a good start."
President Barack Obama promised during last year's election campaign to boost enforcement of trade deals and strengthen labor provisions, tapping into cynicism felt by Americans who have seen manufacturing jobs continually migrate overseas.
In the U.S., Surma said the steel industry was beginning to register signs of very slight improvement.
Citing the American Iron and Steel Institute's most recent figures showing capacity use at about 50 percent for the first time in five or six months, Surma said there were indications of some mild improvement in demand.
"It shows some slight improvement, but from a really low base. We'll just have to wait and see," the steel producer said.
The economic downturn forced most steelmakers to cut output in the face of slumping demand. U.S. Steel and many other steel producers are operating at less than 50 percent capacity. (Writing by Carole Vaporean; Editing by Christian Wiessner)
