Britain gives green light to four new eco-towns
2009-07-16 07:26:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, Jul 12 2009
Thu  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - Britain gave the green light on Thursday to four new towns that will provide 10,000 homes built to strict environmental standards by 2016.
The four sites chosen, all in southern or eastern England, are: Whitehill-Borden in Hampshire, China Clay Community at St Austell in Cornwall, Rackheath in Norfolk and North West Bicester in Oxfordshire.
It said the government should concentrate on refurbishing existing properties, redeveloping derelict brownfield sites and helping bring back into use 800,000 empty homes in England.
Gordon Brown announced his plan to build up to 100,000 homes in five eco-towns shortly after succeeding Tony Blair as prime minister in 2007.
The new towns are designed to tackle Britain's housing shortage while minimizing damage to the environment.
Homes will be energy efficient, streets will have charging points for electric cars and children will be able to walk or cycle to the local schools.
The government said it wants 10,000 homes to be built in the four target sites by 2016, and by 2020 to have up to 10 eco-towns completed or under way.
"I recognize that the proposals can raise strong opinions, but climate change threatens us all," he said.
"Underneath the thick layers of greenwash, many of these schemes are unsustainable, unviable and unpopular, but Gordon Brown wants to impose them from Whitehall irrespective of local opinion," said Conservative housing spokesman Grant Schapps.
The government said on Wednesday it would double the share of Britain's electricity generated from low carbon sources by 2020 as part of plans to cut emissions and counter global warming.
(Reporting by Tim Castle; Editing by Paul Casciato)
