Nikkei up 2.2 pct on US earnings hopes, Mazda jumps
2009-07-15 22:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average climbed 2.2 percent on Thursday, boosted by shares of high-tech exporters on a weaker yen and after results from Intel Corp (
"In addition to hopes for a recovery in U.S. corporate earnings, investors are welcoming growing signs of a recovery in U.S. economic data," said Hiroaki Kuramochi, chief equity marketing officer at Tokai Tokyo Securities.
U.S. manufacturing data released yesterday suggested the recession is abating, and minutes from the Federal Reserve's most recent policy-setting meeting showed officials judged that the U.S. economy's contraction was slowing.
In moderate trade, the benchmark Nikkei
gained 205.79 points to 9,475.04 and the broader Topix
But a fall in U.S. stock futures, partly on deepening troubles for U.S. firm CIT (
), a major lender to small and mid-sized businesses, put a lid on sharper gains for the Nikkei, Kuramochi said.
A U.S. Treasury official said that the Treasury and other federal agencies had explored several aid solutions to rescue CIT Group from collapse, but that its liquidity situation had deteriorated to the point where these became unworkable.
"Investors took media reports about CIT negatively and that weighed on U.S. futures, although its potential failure has been somewhat factored in," Kuramochi said.
But a media report on China's growth figure ahead of the official announcement provided support to the market, said Yumi Nishimura, a deputy general manager at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
China's economy grew by 7.9 percent in the second quarter from a year earlier, the Beijing Times newspaper said, citing an unnamed official. The median forecast of economists polled by Reuters is for second-quarter growth of 7.5 percent from a year earlier.
Among tech exporters, Canon Inc (
) advanced 3.3 percent to 3,130 yen and Advantest (
) added 3.9 percent to 1,809 yen. Electronics components maker TDK Corp (
) jumped 4.8 percent to 4,330 yen.
Shares of Japanese chip-related stocks such as Advantest had made some modest gains on Wednesday in the wake of Intel's results, but the Nikkei ended the day flat as investors grew cautious ahead of more earnings results.
On Wednesday, the Standard & Poor's 500 Index
gained 3 percent. Intel's quarterly results and outlook blew past Wall Street forecasts on better-than-expected consumer demand for PCs, especially in Asia.
Shares of Mazda surged 8.9 percent to 246 yen, while Toyota rose 2.9 percent to 3,570 yen.
In early Asia trade, the dollar was trading around 94.30 yen, up 0.1 percent. <FRX/> Investors welcome a weaker yen as it boosts exporters' profits when they are repatriated.
) gained 8.4 percent to 1,070 yen after the Nikkei business daily reported the producer of electric wires and cables has developed the world's first semiconductor laser that generates green light on its own without having to convert light to green from another color.
Some 1.1 billion shares changed hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, roughly in line with last week's morning average.
