China Sina, Focus merger application incomplete-govt
2009-07-16 01:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese Internet portal Sina Corp's (
) application to buy the core assets of Focus Media FMNC.O is incomplete, China's commerce ministry said on Thursday, amid speculation regulators may reject the deal.
China's Ministry of Commerce received the application from Sina, the country's leading Internet portal, in February, the ministry said in a statement. The proposal would see Sina effectively buying Focus, a leading outdoor advertising firm, in a deal valued at about $1.37 billion in stock.
Sina and Focus provided supplementary information on four occasions after the initial filing, according to a commerce ministry statement provided to Reuters. But the documents submitted failed to satisfy conditions set out in China's anti-monopoly act, the ministry said.
"Currently the ministry is conducting procedures in accordance with the law," the ministry said in the statement, without elaborating.
Since announcing the deal in December, which would be the largest to date for China's media sector, both firms have said the government has officially notified them on their application to merge.
The lengthy delays have led to rampant speculation that the deal was running into trouble with regulators, especially after Coca Cola's (
"We have not been formally notified by the Chinese Ministry of Commerce that they have officially accepted our application for the merger," said Jing Lu, a spokeswoman for Focus Media.
Both companies have told Chinese media recently that they have complied with the ministry's request for more information and are preparing additional documents.
"We continue to believe both Sina and Focus are committed to the deal," said Citigroup analyst Jason Brueschke in a broker note earlier this month.
"But the elongated delay in government approval gives rise to concerns that the deal has become a more political, rather than economic antitrust, issue," he said. (Editing by Doug Young)
