China stocks may rise further on liquidity,growth -Goldman
2009-07-16 03:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese stocks, which have heralded global market rebounds, may rise further as ample liquidity chases high-yield assets in the improving economy, but the government should take action to avoid price bubbles, Goldman Sachs (
"Confidence is back. Liquidity is abundant. Overseas money is chasing China assets through various channels," Deng, managing director of Asia-Pacific Investment Research, said in a media briefing.
Deng declined to give a forecast for China stocks listed in Hong Kong or the mainland, but said valuations were not yet excessive. He added that banking, property and consumer-related stocks were still worth buying.
China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
has jumped more than 70 percent this year following a 65 percent tumble in 2008, while the Hang Seng China Enterprises Index
, which tracks Hong Kong-listed Chinese companies, has surged nearly 40 percent so far this year. The rise was fuelled by a surge in lending and signs of economic recovery.
China's economic growth accelerated to 7.9 percent in the second quarter from 6.1 percent in the first three months, as the country recovered from the global recession with the help of powerful fiscal and monetary stimulus measures.
China would overtake Japan as the world's second-biggest economy after the United States late this year or sometime next year, said Deng, who forecast China's economy to grow 8.3 percent this year and 10.9 percent in 2010.
The government's 4 trillion yuan ($585 billion) stimulus package is starting to trigger private sector investment, domestic consumption is rising faster than expected, and exports may expand 7 to 9 percent next year as the global economy stabilises, he said.
Corporate profits will rise as profit margins may have already bottomed out, Deng said.
He projected that earnings per share for Chinese companies listed in China and Hong Kong may fall 5 percent on average in 2008, and rise 20 percent next year. "China is a relative bright spot in the world," Deng said. "Investors should buy stocks that would benefit from rising domestic demand in China."
China's vehicle market is staging a stronger-than-expected rebound, and will benefit from rising disposable incomes in second- and third-tier cities.
Real estate developers were starting to acquire land again after clearing inventories, and a revival of the property sector would prompt investment and consumption, Deng said. Future growth in China's economy could gain strength from further deregulation of its service industries, and more balanced development in coastal and hinterland regions, he added. (US$1=6.832 Yuan) (Editing by Chris Lewis)
