Gold eases as dollar rises, technical charts improve
2009-07-15 23:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold prices eased on Thursday as the dollar's rise spurred profit-taking on bullion's jump to a two-week high the previous day when U.S. consumer price data stoked concerns about rising inflation.
Optimism about economic recovery prospects drove stocks higher, encouraging investors to take more risks and weighing on the dollar, while inflation worries returned after the U.S. price data came in stronger than expected.
Gold investors continued to take cues from the dollar, as a rise in the currency reduces bullion's appeal as an alternative to U.S. currency and assets, but emerging inflation concerns are helping to improve gold's technical charts, traders said.
As the market approached key resistance of $950, the rise in the dollar prompted investors to take profits, said Louis Lok, a senior dealer at Bank of China in Hong Kong.
The whole situation "is related to the U.S. dollar, and investors are taking profits ahead of important resistance," he said.
"But the market is finding a new excuse to buy gold as a hedge against inflation fears after the U.S. prices data. Any dip will be a good opportunity to buy," he said.
The break of the 20-day moving average around $927-$930 paves the way for the market to test $950, a level it failed to sustain when players tried to establish a floor after prices had been steadily falling from near $990 in early June, traders said.
"The market broke the resistance that stood at $927-928, and that has encouraged fresh buying," Lok said.
Spot gold eased 0.2 percent to $936.40 per ounce as of 0303 GMT, compared with New York's notional close of $938.45 on Wednesday, when it rose to near $942.
U.S. gold futures for August delivery fell 0.3 percent to $936.70, from $939.40 an ounce on the COMEX division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. The August contract rose to $942.30 on Wednesday, its highest since July 1.
Economic optimism was reinforced on Thursday as China's second-quarter gross domestic product rose 7.9 percent against the previous year, beating expectations, while its first-half GDP rose 7.1 percent against a year earlier.
This followed U.S. manufacturing data which suggested the recession is abating, and minutes from the Federal Reserve's most recent policy-setting meeting that showed officials saw the U.S. contraction was slowing.
Inflation worries emerged along with the economic data, as U.S. consumer prices rose at a slightly faster-than-expected 0.7 percent pace in June.
Earlier this week, data showed U.S. producer prices soared by 1.8 percent, twice as much as expected, in June for the steepest gain since November.
The world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, the SPDR Gold Trust, said holdings were unchanged at 1,094.54 tonnes as of July 15, after falling 1.4 percent the day before, its largest drop in three months.
