China hints at move to strengthen Communist rule at party congress
2012-10-22 07:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China's ruling Communist Party will discuss a proposal to amend its constitution at its congress in early November, state media said on Monday, a move aimed at strengthening one-party rule over the next five years.
State news agency Xinhua did not elaborate on what the amendments could be, though they have previously formed the guiding principles on which major policy decisions such as moving China in the direction of a market economy have been based.
"The meeting stressed the importance of making a draft amendment to the CPC (Communist Party of China) Constitution that conforms to the needs of the CPC's theoretic innovation, practice and development and will also promote the CPC's work and strengthen its construction," Xinhua said, citing a statement from the meeting of the politburo.
The party "constitution" is less a legal document and more an organizational guide and compilation of the ideological justifications that China's Communists have accumulated - and often quietly shelved - in their evolution from a party of Mao Zedong and mass revolution to one of mass markets and dynamic growth.
The constitution has also cemented legacies of previous leaders, enshrined landmark policies such as letting capitalists into the party, and stressed economic modernization as a priority of the nation.
In 2007, the party issued an amended version of its charter enshrining the slogans and enhanced influence of President Hu Jintao, who steps down as party leader on November 8 at the 18th Congress.
The changes were a symbolic victory for Hu in this top-down one-party state where ideological jargon is the language of power, telling officials and citizens which leaders to heed.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Strengthen Communist rule? More corruption, more oppression, more lies, more censorship. And more of a threat to their neighbours.
Oct 22, 20128:08am EDT--
The caption reads, ¡°China¡¯s ruling Communist Party will discuss a proposal to amend its constitution at its congress in early November, state media said on Monday, a move aimed at strengthening one-party rule over the next five years¡± One has to wonder about the IQ levels of those the CCP has aimed this news at? Not too high. At any rate, one-party rule in China has never been weakened, and will remain firmly in-place after the fraudulent collapse of the Chinese Communist government in several years or so. You see folks, a dictatorship that has millions of agents reporting back on every aspect of life in China gets to create events it can control, and thanks to Western business interests Beijing would get away with the ruse, but won¡¯t thanks to Dean Michael Jackson: ¡°Since at least the early 1970s, the Communist party of China has been poised to create a spectacular but controlled ¡°democratization¡± at any appropriate time. The party had by then spent two decades consolidating its power, building a network of informants and agents that permeate every aspect of Chinese life, both in the cities and in the countryside. Government control is now so complete that it will not be seriously disturbed by free speech and democratic elections; power can now be exerted through the all-pervasive but largely invisible infrastructure of control. A transition to an apparently new system, using dialectical tactics, is now starting to occur.¡± In order to understand the World Communist threat to our liberties, one must understand Communist strategy: ¡°Lenin advised the Communists that they must be prepared to ¡°resort to all sorts of stratagems, maneuvers, illegal methods, evasions and subterfuge¡± to achieve their objectives. This advice was given on the eve of his reintroduction of limited capitalism in Russia, in his work Left Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder. ¡­ Another speech of Lenin¡¯s ¡­ in July 1921 is again highly relevant to understanding ¡°perestroika.¡± ¡°Our only strategy at present,¡± wrote Lenin, ¡°is to become stronger and, therefore, wiser, more reasonable, more opportunistic. The more opportunistic, the sooner will you again assemble the masses round you. When we have won over the masses by our reasonable approach, we shall then apply offensive tactics in the strictest sense of the word.¡± If you examine the backgrounds of prominent Russian figures, you will find that they have long Communist Party/ KGB or Komsomol pedigrees. Yet for some inexplicable reason, the Western media have accepted their sudden, orchestrated, mass ¡°conversion¡± to Western-style norms of behavior, their endless talk of ¡°democracy,¡± and their acceptance of ¡°capitalism,¡± as genuine. ¡°Scratch these new, instant Soviet ¡°democrats,¡± ¡°anti-Communists,¡± and ¡°nationalists¡± who have sprouted out of nowhere, and underneath will be found secret Party members or KGB agents,¡± Golitsyn writes on page 123 of his new book [The Perestroika Deception]. In accepting at face value the ¡°transformation¡± of these Leninist revolutionary Communists into ¡°instant democrats,¡± the West automatically accepts as genuine the false ¡°Break with the Past¡± ¡ª the single lie upon which the entire deception is based. In short, the ¡°former¡± Soviet Union ¡ª and the East European countries as well ¡ª are all run by people who are steeped in the dialectical modus operandi of Lenin. Without exception, they are all active Leninist revolutionaries, working collectively towards the establishment of a world Communist government, which, by definition, will be a world dictatorship. It is difficult for the West to understand the Leninist Hegelian dialectical method ¡ª the creation of competing or successive opposites in order to achieve an intended outcome. Equally difficult for us to comprehend is the fact that these Leninist revolutionaries plan their strategies over decades and generations. This extraordinary behavior is naturally alien to Western politicians, who can see no further than the next election. Western politicians usually react to events. Leninist revolutionaries create events, in order to control reactions to them and manipulate their outcomes.¡± ¡ª KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn (his 1984 book, ¡°New Lies for Old¡± can be read at Internet Archive). You ask, what does Golitsyn mean when he says, ¡°Leninist Hegelian dialectical method ¡ª the creation of competing or successive opposites in order to achieve an intended outcome¡±? Simply explained, and on a tactical level, it¡¯s called the ¡°Scissors Strategy¡±, where one blade represents (for example) Putin & Company, however the other blade of the scissors¨Cthe leadership of the political ¡°opposition¡± to Putin & Company¨Cis actually controlled by Putin & Company*, which leaves the genuine opposition in the middle wondering why political change isn¡¯t taking place. Understand this simple strategy? On a strategic level, back in the 1960s the USSR and China played the ¡°Scissors Strategy¡±, by pretending to be enemies. This strategy allowed one side to play off against the other with the West, thereby gaining political advantages from the West, which neither Communist giant could have achieved if it was believed they were united. Clever, huh? Keep Golitsyn¡¯s words in mind.
Oct 22, 20128:12pm EDT--
Conspiracy theories make me laugh. Especially when they come from a loser that told everyone a British PM was a KGB informer. Are you a doomsday prepper?
Oct 22, 20129:30pm EDT--
