PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - July 16
2009-07-15 22:36:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Sun, Jul 5 2009
Wed  EDT
Energy Secretary Ed Miliband presented a government white paper which set out plans to cut carbon dioxide emissions by 17 per cent over the next ten years. As a result of the proposals energy bills for business users are expected to rise by 17 per cent over the same period. Large industrial users warned the energy cost increases could make British manufacturers uncompetitive and said they were concerned that the government was putting too much reliance on wind and not enough on nuclear power. Mr Miliband said the proposals could lead to the creation of 400,000 "green jobs" by 2015.
Company directors who fail to stop staff formulating price-fixing plots with rivals would face disqualification under a crackdown by the Office of Fair Trading. OFT chairman, Philip Collins said the agency planned to target for the first time board members who were not directly involved in cartels but had ignored evidence of wrong doing by employees. The proposal forms part of a wider effort by the OFT to clamp down illicit anti-trust deals between rival companies. Mr Collins said the agency would soon publish proposal to revive dormant powers that allow it to disqualify company directors for up to 15 years.
The mayor of London, Boris Johnson, has warned a government revaluation of business rates, set to impose rises averaging 10 per cent above inflation over the next five years for businesses in London, will "bleed the capital of hundreds of millions of pounds". The revaluation plan by the Department for Communities and Local Government is based on a formula linked to property valuations in April 2008 when rental values were at their peak. The department said it is consulting on a two billion pound relief scheme to soften the impact of the rises on businesses.
) has been buoyed by tourists from continental Europe and China buying Burberry clothing and accessories, helping the firm navigate the downturn during the past three months. Sales at the luxury goods company in the three months to June 30, including the effect of exchange rate movements, were up eight per cent. Stacey Cartwright, finance director, said buyers from continental Europe and China, encouraged by the weak pound, were heading to Burberry's British shops.
GOOD WEATHER AIDS NORTHERN FOODS' TRADING
Northern FoodNFDS.L has benefited from good weather during the company's first quarter to June 27, with a nine per cent increase in underlying revenue at its chilled food division. The division supplies a range of snacks to customers of Marks & Spencer(
), Tesco(
), Sainsbury's(
) and has enjoyed strong seasonal demand for sandwiches and salads. Northern Foods also reported a gradual return to growth in the ready meals market, and overall, like-for-like sales were up 5.5 per cent, largely owing to volume increases.
Beleaguered subprime lender, CattlesCTT.L, has secured a deal with its banks to extend 500 million pound of wholesale funding that was due to expire on Tuesday, in a move that has angered holders of 750 million pounds worth of bonds. The loan has been extended to December 31, and involved a syndicate of 22 banks led by Royal Bank of Scotland(
). There is a wrangle between banks and bondholders about the correct ranking of creditors, with bondholders disputing the banks' position that they should be paid out ahead of them.
Connaught CNT.L has made a 13.3 million pound all share offer for Fountains, a grounds maintenance expert. The acquisition by the social housing group signals a move into the utilities sector, and would make Connaught the largest operator in the 1.5 billion pound market for environmental services such as landscaping, street cleaning and tree lopping. Mark Davis, chief executive said: "This is a new leg for Connaught," adding, "we're used to looking after buildings, and can now look after everything outside of those buildings."
ICAP'S RECORD FIGURES SLIPPING
) has warned full-year profits for the year to March 2010 are expected to be marginally lower than the record numbers reported in last year's results. The world's largest interdealer broker reported the details to shareholders at its annual meeting. Revenue for the first quarter rose by more than 10 per cent, but the group cautioned that margins would be reduced in the coming months amid lower market volatility, higher costs and an uncertain regulatory outlook.
) shareholders vented their anger at the telecoms company's poor performance at the group's annual meeting on Wednesday. BT reported a pre-tax loss of 134 million pounds for 2008-09, the company's second pre-tax loss since privatisation. Institutional shareholders holding 11 per cent of BT's stock voted against the company's remuneration report, with a further six per cent abstaining. The profit losses were attributed by BT to problems at its BT Global Services Arm, which recorded two profit warnings this year.
Xavier Rolet, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange(
), told shareholders at his first annual shareholders meeting the exchange plans to launch a new market for trading corporate bonds aimed at retail investors. Mr Rolet also said LSE would expand its over-the-counter derivative clearing business, but ruled out extending that to credit default swaps: "There is a clear need, especially in the SME sector, for a lot of companies to be able to tap the bond market, particularly for retail investors - and today there really isn't a clear mechanism that's transparent, with good technology", Mr Rolet told the Financial Times.
