PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - July 16
2009-07-15 17:05:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Wed  EDT
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd yesterday increased pressure on Beijing to resolve the detention of Rio Tinto employee Stern Hu, reminding China about its economic interests in Australia and the world. Steel industry sources yesterday said that the arrest was part of a move to freeze Rio Tinto out of the iron ore trade. However, a spokesman from the Chinese Commerce Ministry said the bilateral economic relationship between Australia and China would not be harmed. Page 1.
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) has suggested that existing disclosure rules governing managed investment schemes may not provide enough protection for retail investors. The corporate regulator has expressed concern about the viability of agribusiness investment schemes since the collapse of Timbercorp and Great Southern earlier this year. ASIC chairman Tony D'Aloisio yesterday said that access to the schemes might need to be restricted. Page 1.
Hotels owned by collapsed development company Silverwater continue to operate despite going into receivership a year ago. Insolvency expert Craig Shepard of KordaMentha, who is managing the Silverwater Holiday Resort near Phillip Island, says it is often better to restructure the asset and wait for property prices to rise before reselling it. "If they can wash their face and cover interest, it provides you with the benefit of time,' he said. Page 1.
Australian Bureau of Statistics data released yesterday shows a 7 percent plunge in new housing construction in the March quarter. However, building activity is expected to pick up in the second half of the year and help ward off a sustained slowdown in economic activity. Westpac chief economist Bill Evans said a recovery in the housing sector appeared to be in "full swing' and that the economy should gain momentum by the end of the year. Page 3.
A former ambassador to China, Ross Garnaut, has recommended quiet diplomacy in solving cases of detention involving Australians in China. Professor Garnaut said a low-key approach had a better chance of success than loud public demands, citing a case during his time as ambassador from 1985 to 1988. The advice comes amid repeated Federal Opposition calls for Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to directly intervene to resolve the case of detained Rio Tinto (
Immigration Minister Chris Evans has conceded that loopholes in Australia's migration law may be allowing convicted paedophiles to sponsor minors or adopt overseas children. The Department of Immigration yesterday warned about gaps in the laws, which stipulate that a sponsorship visa may not be refused purely on the grounds that the applicant has been convicted of a sex crime or violent offence. A spokesman for Senator Evans yesterday said work was under way to "toughen policies around the sponsorship of minors for visas to enter Australia.' Page 3.
Federal Environment Minister Peter Garrett, who in the past co-founded the Nuclear Disarmament Party, was president of the Australian Conservation Foundation and prominent in his opposition to uranium mining, is defending his decision to approve the Four Mile uranium mine in South Australia. Mr Garrett says he entered parliament as a "team player' and that party decisions are accepted over personal opinions. Nuclear spokesman for the Greens, Scott Ludlam, said that the mine will not operate using world's best practice. Page 3.
The Australian Liberal Party has accused the Rudd government of using the Jobs Fund scheme for political purposes, rather than distributing money across the nation to those in need. "The Rudd Government has a political strategy, but no economic strategy,' Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull said. Employment Participation Minister Mark Arbib denied the accusation and said each priority employment area was chosen based on factors such as the unemployment rate and the proportion of people on income support. Page 4.
A secret New South Wales Government report warns that a black panther may be stalking Sydney's western suburbs and recommends warning signs be erected to keep children safe from the wild cat. There have been more than 300 reported sightings of the panther, although there is no scientific proof that it exists and many dismiss it as an urban myth. The report concludes that the existence of the panther "cannot be discounted,' and suggests the Government continue to collect sighting reports. Page 1.
The Australian Bureau of Meteorology last night issued a tsunami warning to the east coast of Australia, after a powerful undersea earth-quake struck off the south-west coast of New Zealand. Although residents in Bondi reported feeling the tremor at around 7.22pm Sydney time, the tsunami alert was later cancelled. A bureau spokeswoman said it was possible waves could hit Australia's coast but "it's quite rare that this would happen.' Page 3.
Australian and German researchers have found that male camels living in the Australian outback cool themselves down in preparation for strenuous daily bouts which will determine the leader of the herd. By implanting temperature-sensitive radio-transmitters into wild camels near Alice Springs, University of Queensland Professor Gordon Griggs and his team have discovered that male bulls preparing for battle have a body temperature that is about 0.6 degrees, on average, lower than normal. Page 3.
An Australian 14-year-old girl who received life-saving brain stimulation surgery in France four years ago urgently needs another round of treatment after an electrode in her brain failed. The girl, who suffers from Primary Dystonia, an extremely rare and debilitating movement disorder for which there is no known cure, will rely on funding from the Federal Government's Medical Treatment Overseas Program to allow her to travel to France for the surgery next week. Page 3.
Richard Cass had given up hope and was at Sydney Airport ready to fly home when he received a text message from police telling him that his son, Jamie Neale, who had been missing in the Blue Mountains National Park for 12 days, had been found. Mr Neale departed his hostel intending to hike to Mount Solitary, but, without provisions, he spent 12 days eating seeds and weeds. Mr Cass, who said that a family characteristic was liking the cold, remarked, "I knew the one thing that wasn't going to kill him was the cold.' Page 1.
According to the Victorian Department of Human Services, swine flu is causing serious problems to pregnant women who have contracted the virus. There have been two cases in Victoria and six in New South Wales where women are either fighting for their lives after giving birth, have had premature births or their babies have been born with respiratory problems. "Usually we don't have any pregnant women in ICU with influenza so this is worrying,' said Professor Brian Trudinger from Sydney's Westmead Hospital. Page 1.
Graffiti removal vans will soon patrol the streets of Melbourne as part of Melbourne City Council's zero tolerance approach to graffiti tagging. The move appears at odds with Tourism Victoria's marketing campaign, which sells Melbourne's graffiti street art to the world. Lord Mayor Robert Doyle says he is not opposed to street art, but "it does actually have to be a contribution to the city and we have to have guidelines about what is and isn't street art.' Page 3.
A Chinese Embassy Official yesterday rang the director of the Melbourne International Film Festival to insist that a documentary about exiled Uighur leader Rebiya Kadeer be excluded. Beijing has accused Ms Kadeer, head of the World Uyghur, of being a "convicted criminal' and jeopardising national security. Festival director Richard Moore said the film, "The 10 Conditions of Love', would still screen as scheduled on August 8, with Ms Kadeer as a guest speaker. Page 5. --
