China emissions cap an open question: U.S. officials
2009-07-15 14:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed  EDT
"Right now, our purpose is really to convey the seriousness of this issue and the need for U.S.-China leadership," U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke told Reuters on a trip to China to boost cooperation on energy conservation and cleaner fuels.
"What the ultimate mechanism may be is to be decided at Copenhagen. But it is something that can not be shirked or delayed," Locke said.
Scientists say major emissions cuts are needed to prevent dramatic climate changes that could cause more droughts, flooding and disease, and cause ocean levels to rise.
In a separate interview, U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu said he would leave it "to the diplomats" to figure out whether China will be required to cap emissions as part of the new pact.
He also challenged critics who say Beijing does not take the issue seriously to "go to China and look at what they're doing."
"They are working very aggressively on this, anywhere from a more stringent mileage standard on cars to very aggressive subsidies and help in promoting green energy too," Chu said.
"What they have been doing the past couple of years is proof positive that they know there is a problem with climate change due to CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions," Chu said.
"Instead of harping on differences, let's just help each other. Their leaders know the consequence of climate change. This is big time serious stuff to them," Chu said.
Under Kyoto, the treaty agreed in Japan in 1997, developing nations like China did not have to cap their emissions. Former President George W. Bush pulled the United States out of the pact which would have imposed U.S. emissions cuts.
But China, which recently passed the United States as the biggest source of CO2 pollution, has said it cannot agree to an emissions cap because that would hamper its efforts to raise standards of living.
Locke said it was important China, as the biggest developing country, and the United States, as the biggest developed country, set an example for others to follow in addressing climate change.
"That's why we're having these discussions to make it very clear that these issues are of paramount importance to the world," Locke said.
(Via Beijing newsroom; editing by Robin Pomeroy)
