Don't read too much into Intel's success: Eric Auchard
2009-07-15 00:37:00.0
Don't read too much into Intel's success: Eric Auchard | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Don't read too much into Intel's success: Eric Auchard
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Wed, Jul 15 2009
Tue, Jul 14 2009
Wed  EDT
) has cheered up investors by once again making forecasts about its financial performance. The trouble with reading too much into its rebound, however, is that this is largely due to productivity gains of its own making, rather than a broader awakening of demand.
To be sure, Intel's revenue, profit and margins surged past all published analyst expectations for the second quarter. Partly, this was merely the "snapback" that occurred after Intel throttled back production to as low as 25 percent of factory capacity in the first quarter, amid a glut of unsold chips and shriveling demand.
The bigger news was its answer to the question of what was happening in the second half: Third-quarter margins should improve to around 53 percent on revenue around $8.5 billion, and could move up toward historic high levels by year-end. The comments sent Intel shares up as much as eight percent and sparked broad-based buying in technology shares around the globe.
However, there is little here to bolster confidence in other bellwethers of the technology sector reporting this week. Intel is benefiting from healthy demand in China and -- to a lesser extent -- the United States, among consumers rather than businesses. But these are not swing factors for the likes of Nokia, IBM or Google.
) must defy the widespread evidence of weak corporate activity that Intel and others cite. But the company's reinvention as a business services provider makes it likely to once again produce stable results that say little about the overall health of the wider technology sector. Its sales of computers and storage could slip more than expected and currencies will hurt, but if contract signings hold up in its core services segment, IBM will remain a safe haven.
) is expected to show negligible revenue growth compared with a year ago. This is a dangerous season historically for the company and has led to repeated disappointments. Recent industry data shows paid search, the source of Google revenue, slowed faster than ever in the second quarter. Increased capital spending tied to network outages could be another negative factor.
The difference comes down to this: Intel has been investing for years in the transition to ever smaller 32-nanometre-scale chips that are far more efficient than the prior generation of chips at 45-nanometer scale. Even in the absence of fresh economic demand, efficiencies are once again working in Intel's favor. These are factors that other technology companies can only dream of.
