China disappointment could stoke U.S. dollar demand
2009-07-15 15:47:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Wed, Jul 1 2009
Wed  EDT
A steep decline in exports and imports in the world's third largest economy could weigh on emerging markets dependent on China and further underpin the U.S. dollar for the rest of the year.
In the last 12 months, the U.S. dollar has become a haven for investors as the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression hit markets. The greenback benefited from huge repatriation flows that came out of emerging markets.
"I think the market has become too optimistic about the ability of China to bail out the global economy," said Paresh Upadhyaya, portfolio manager at Putnam Investments in Boston. He helps oversee roughly $17 billion in assets.
"It will be difficult for China's exports to pick up in a noticeable manner because of a lack of demand from the West. This is a potential upside for the dollar."
Over the last six months, investors had pinned their hopes on China and its $2 trillion in currency reserves. The country went on a buying binge in commodities such from oil to copper, building inventories while prices were depressed.
That sparked a resurgence in risk appetite that fueled gains in commodities, equities, and emerging market currencies, and triggered a sell-off in the dollar. The market rally spurred the view that most economies were on the mend and China, with its commodity-buying spree, was leading the recovery.
That has changed in recent weeks. Evidence that China's commodity buying has waned has eroded the hopeful outlook, fueling flows back into the dollar.
The dollar index, a measure of the greenback's value against six currencies, has fallen 2.2 percent so far this year, but it has rebounded in June and recouped some of its losses in July after being heavily sold off in April and May.
Hedge fund managers, for one, have turned bullish on the dollar in July from last month, a Greenwich Alternative Investments survey showed. About 60 percent of asset managers gave a positive outlook on the greenback.
Many asset managers now believe a global recovery is still a long way away and if it does come, it will be gradual and a rebound in consumption will be slower.
"Even though most emerging market currencies broke out into stronger trading ranges against the dollar in the second quarter, that has clearly stalled and we see emerging market weakness continuing in the third quarter," said Win Thin, currency strategist, at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York.
Market participants say China is one of the key drivers of dollar sentiment. On Thursday, China is expected to release second-quarter gross domestic product data.
Economists polled by Reuters think China's economy grew 7.5 percent from 6.1 percent in the first quarter. That would still be a tad below the 8.0 percent level economists consider necessary to create enough jobs for China's growing population.
China's exports have also struggled, falling 21 percent year-on-year in June after a record 26.4 percent plunge in May. Imports, meanwhile, dropped 13.2 percent last month.
The commodity binge was apparently meant to expand infrastructure to meet demand for China's goods once the world recovers, analysts said. China did the same thing in the late 1990s when the Asian crisis hit, capturing huge market share when Asia started growing again. .
"China can buy all the commodities and build all the capacity they want and it would look good on GDP," said Jack Crooks, president of foreign exchange advisory firm Black Swan in Florida.
"But if demand isn't there, that creates excess capacity and lower profit margins for Chinese corporations."
The excess capacity that will largely sit in Chinese plants could force China to cut prices, prompting other nations to drop their prices as well and exacerbating the deflationary spiral the whole world is trying to avoid.
Since consumers in the West have curbed spending, China's shortfall in exports is now being partially filled by stimulus measures. China's capital investment alone courtesy of its stimulus plan accounts for 45 percent of GDP, which should make an 8.0 percent GDP growth forecast this year doable.
Economists say China needs to veer away from exports and focus on spurring domestic demand, but offsetting the demand from the U.S. isn't easy.
Gerard Lyons, chief economist at Standard Chartered, said China can only "partially make up for the slack in demand from U.S. consumers". In nominal GDP terms, Lyons pointed out that U.S. consumption of $10 trillion is about seven times China's roughly $1.6 trillion spending capacity.
"Despite the wonderful new buildings one sees all around in Beijing, it is important to stress that China is an emerging and developing economy. It is still poor."
