Clinton deplores Iran's actions but offers to talk
2009-07-15 11:43:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Wednesday deplored Iran's crushing of dissent after June's election but said the Obama administration still wanted talks with Tehran over its nuclear program.
"But we also understand the importance of trying to engage Iran and offering its leaders a clear choice -- whether to join the international community as a responsible member or to continue down a path to further isolation," Clinton said.
"Direct talks provide the best vehicle for presenting and explaining that choice," added Clinton.
Recovering from elbow surgery after a fall last month, Clinton has taken a lower public profile in recent weeks, canceling planned travel to Europe and leaving much of the diplomacy to her deputies and special envoys.
The speech, on the eve of a trip to Asia, was aimed at raising her public profile while outlining policy priorities that include talking to enemies such as Iran.
The former Bush administration's policy was not to engage Iran directly until it had met certain preconditions, including giving up uranium enrichment.
But Obama, who took over in January, says that approach failed to persuade Tehran to drop its nuclear ambitions.
"We know that refusing to deal with the Islamic Republic has not succeeded in altering the Iranian march toward a nuclear weapon, reducing Iranian support for terror, or improving Iran's treatment of its citizens," said Clinton.
Despite the U.S. policy shift, Iran has not yet responded to overtures by the United States and other major powers seeking to convince Tehran to give up sensitive nuclear work the West believes is aimed at building a bomb and Iran says is to generate power.
Clinton said the United States watched last month's election in Iran with great admiration but was "appalled" by the manner in which the government used violence to quell protesters who disputed the result.
"As we ... have made clear, these actions are deplorable and unacceptable," said Clinton.
France's President Nicolas Sarkozy was more pointed, saying Iran risked tougher sanctions if it did not agree to talks. However, China and Russia -- permanent members of the U.N. Security Council -- are likely to balk at more punitive steps.
Diplomats suspect Iran is buying time by stalling over getting into any substantive talks. Iran's foreign minister said last weekend that Tehran was preparing a new package of "political, security and international" issues to put to the West but offered no details.
Outlining other foreign policy priorities, Clinton said the international agenda was "unforgiving", with the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and conflict in the Middle East, as well as the threat of violent extremism and nuclear proliferation.
"We will remain clear-eyed about our purpose. Not everybody in the world wishes us well or shares our values and interests," said Clinton. (Reporting by Sue Pleming; Editing by David Storey)
