RPT-TOPWRAP 6-US, European optimism up, Asia wary of stimulus
2009-07-15 13:24:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. and European data released on Wednesday offered fresh hope the global recession had eased as Asia's top two central banks flagged the need to rein in emergency stimulus.
U.S. industrial output declined at a slower pace in June and New York state's factory survey posted its strongest reading since April 2008, positive signs for markets tugged by mixed data from both sides of the Atlantic this week.
European car sales showed the first monthly increase in over a year, thanks to incentives for junking old cars in some major economies, though analysts cautioned that was also due to disastrous numbers a year earlier. [ID:nLF30741]
A steep drop in fuel costs drove down euro-zone consumer prices for the first time year-on-year in June, which should let interest rates remain low and give consumers some more buying power. [ID:nLF124919]
U.S. stocks rallied, bolstered by strong quarterly results from Intel Corp (
U.S. stocks rallied, bolstered by strong quarterly results from Intel Corp (
) on Tuesday, which spurred optimism of a rebound in corporate profits. For more details, see [.N]
Global stocks, represented by the MSCI World Index .MIWD00000PUS, rose 2.5 percent. "The market is prepared to shake off weak economic data, preferring to focus on consensus-breaking results and upbeat outlooks from corporates," said Henk Potts, equity strategist at Barclays Stockbrokers. U.S. credit card giants Capital One Financial Corp (
) reported lower-than-expected defaults and delinquencies in June, potentially signaling American consumers' credit positions are not deteriorating as rapidly as feared. [IDnN15343757] U.S. government bonds' prices fell and their yields rose after the New York Federal Reserve Bank's Empire State general business conditions index improved to a reading of minus 0.55 in July from minus 9.41 in June -- which investors took as a sign the decline in the state's factory sector was easing. "It's still a tentative sign, but consistent with other reports showing that the recession may be near an end," said Gary Thayer, senior economist at Wells Fargo Advisors. The dollar dropped to a one-month low against the euro as the investors rushed into higher-yielding currencies and assets. Despite bright signs elsewhere, data showed unemployment in Britain hit its highest point since January 1997 in the three months to May. [ID:nLF150992] ASIA NERVOUS ABOUT OVER-HEATING Amid tentative signs of recovery in the West, top Asian nations worried about their economies over-heating with government stimulus packages. The Bank of Japan extended crisis funding support for businesses for another three months, but Governor Masaaki Shirakawa said improvements in markets had led it to stop short of a six-month extension into the new year. [ID:nT132248] China's central bank also signaled concern over the amount of money coursing through its economy, taking the latest of a series of small steps to tighten policy by telling banks they would have to buy special bills in September. [ID:nSP486673] "Financial conditions are improving as a trend. But at present, we decided it was appropriate to maintain the steps," Shirakawa told a news conference. "If conditions improve further, it might be appropriate to end or review the various steps at the end of the year." Many hopes for a global revival have centered on China, where lavish government stimulus spending appears to be having the desired effect on an economy clobbered by a drop-off in trade as the developed world slid into recession last year. A Reuters poll suggested the world's third-largest economy was on track to reach its 8 percent target for growth this year, while Asia's worst-hit economies Singapore and Taiwan would see a sharp turnaround in 2010. [ID:nSGN000111] (Editing by Jan Paschal)
