FACTBOX - What Opel's suitors have in mind
2009-07-15 11:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Germany sees Canada's Magna MGa.TO as front-runner to take over Opel but would reassess its position if another buyer for the General Motors GMGMQ.PK unit emerged, a government spokesman said. [ID:nLF266904]
China's state-owned carmaker BAIC for instance might still have a chance to clinch victory. Following are details on the potential buyers' plans for Opel:
Wants to expand its full-scale car assembly business. It envisions using some of Opel's plants to assemble more models for other car companies through outsourcing contracts. It forecasts high growth rates, particularly in Russia, home of its consortium partners Sberbank SBER03.MM and GAZ (
Wants around 20 percent of Opel, with Sberbank planning to hold 35 percent. Around 10 percent would be taken up by Opel workers and 35 percent will remain with GM.
Around 10,000 of the total 50,000 jobs across Europe would slashed. Some 25 percent of the cuts would be in Germany.
Magna is the only investor which has received the nod from the national government, works council and the various federal states where Opel's plants are located. But Magna and GM are still bargaining over distribution rights and plants in Russia. Among those opposing Magna are customers such as Volkswagen (
Sources say RHJ would be interested in buying over 50 percent of Opel and, like Magna, would like Opel workers to be a part-owner. The rest of the shares would be retained by GM.
Plans are for job cuts totalling less than 10,000.
Response from politicians and workers so far muted. States that house Opel's plants and works councils have formed a united front against RHJ, whom they suspect is just a proxy for GM.
Around 7,600 jobs would be cut Europe-wide, including 3,000 in Germany.
All are sceptical of BAIC's concept. They fear Opel, with its strong research and development activities, would only open the doors for a technology transfer to China.
Has temporarily withdrawn from the bargaining table but says it continues to be interested. Sources say Fiat is monitoring negotiations and could launch a last minute bid if any deal with the frontrunners falls apart. German Economy Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg backs Fiat's plans but the socialist SPD and works council have said they oppose Fiat's concept. (Reporting by Angelika Gruber; Writing by Marilyn Gerlach; Editing by David Holmes)
