UPDATE 2-Corrupt ex-Sinopec boss gets suspended death sentence
2009-07-15 04:40:00.0
(Reuters) - A former chairman of top Asian oil refiner Sinopec Corp (
) was sentenced to death on Wednesday with a two-year reprieve for accepting more than $28 million in bribes, one of the harshest penalties meted out to a senior Chinese official in years.
Chen Tonghai, 61, held a rank equivalent to a cabinet minister before he was abruptly removed from the helm of the state-owned refiner two years ago.
He took 195.7 million yuan ($28.6 million) in bribes, the official Xinhua news agency said, during a period when the company was rapidly expanding its plants.
The reprieve, announced by the Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People's Court, usually means the sentence will be commuted to life after two years' good behaviour.
"The government wants to send the message that it will not be lenient towards ministerial-level officials," said a Beijing-based industry executive who requested anonymity.
Chen, an engineer, headed a refinery in eastern China in the early 1980s and served as mayor of the booming coastal city Ningbo before becoming Sinopec chairman in 2003.
He had also served as deputy chairman of the State Planning Commission, later renamed the National Development and Reform Commission, which oversees economic planning.
"Chen took an extremely large amount of bribes; severe enough for a death sentence... But as he confessed and repented, provided tips about other people's criminal acts, and returned all the bribes, a reprieve was granted," Xinhua said.
Yu Weiping, vice-chairman of Yunnan Copper Group, China's third-largest copper producer, was sentenced to death in December for accepting bribes and embezzling about $10.3 million.
In 2006, Shanghai's former Communist Party boss, Chen Liangyu, a member of the decision-making Politburo, was jailed for 18 years for taking bribes and abuse of power after a scandal over the misuse of social securities funds.
Sinopec supplies nearly half the world's second-largest oil market and industry experts remembered Chen as a strong leader.
"We believed Chen could have been a strong candidate for the energy minister's job," said a Beijing-based oil consultant who provides services for Sinopec.
Many in the industry had hoped Beijing would set up an energy ministry similar to the U.S. Department of Energy to handle an increasingly complex and strategic sector. A weaker, semi-ministry-level National Energy Administration was set up in 2008 instead.
Chen was replaced by Su Shulin, formerly an oil explorer at rival CNPC.
"When he vanished, there was instant shock within the company," said an industry executive who had business encounters with Chen.
"But then the company moved on. His name was not mentioned any more. It was as if the man never existed." (Reporting by Chen Aizhu and Jim Bai; Editing by Nick Macfie
