China's Xinjiang offers rewards after deadliest unrest in four years
2013-07-02 02:22:00.0
(Reuters) - China announced rewards of up to 100,000 yuan ($16,000) on Tuesday for information leading the arrest of those responsible for the deadliest violence in four years in the vast far-western region of Xinjiang, dominated by Muslim Uighurs.
Many Uighurs in Xinjiang resent what they call Chinese government suppression of their culture, language and religion.
About 100 Uighurs had gone to Syria to fight alongside Syrian rebels, with some of them returning to Xinjiang to carry out attacks in support of an East Turkestan, the Global Times, a tabloid owned by the Communist Party mouthpiece, the People's Daily, said on Tuesday.
The rewards announced on Tuesday are "for those who provide clues of violent terrorist crimes, and those who play an important role in the solving violent terrorist crimes and the capturing of violent terrorist criminals," according to the Xinjiang government website.
Those who failed to report information or who assisted such criminals would be held criminally responsible, the announcement said.
(Reporting by Terril Yue Jones and Li Hui; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Suppression of their culture, language and religion¡±? China government take one child policy to slower population growth. But it is just limited to the Han group, all ethnic groups including the Uighur has right to give birth more children. We (I am Han race) also want to have brothers and sisters. Yes, I agree Han is the 92% of China population, but as to a single person, is it equal?
¡°Suppression of their culture, language and religion¡±? China government take one child policy to slower population growth. But it is just limited to the Han group, all ethnic groups including the Uighur has right to give birth more children. We (I am Han race) also want to have brothers and sisters. Yes, I agree Han is the 92% of China population, but as to a single person, is it equal?
It is well known China¡¯s diversity, food, language, building are different from place to place. For example, a Shanghai girl fails to chat with a Canton man speaking in local language. It is too much normal in China. Most chinese speak dialect at home and Mandarin outside. Most Ethnic and Han have dialect, why government especially suppress Uighur? It is really ridiculous. Extremist has right to refuse Mandarin or other language,for example English, but it is not good for his communication and development.
Following content may be not suitable and I am not nationalist. But I still decide to point it. Not only Uighur live in Xinjiang. The Han dynasty had established county in Xinjiang in year 60 B.C to protect silk route. Later, Hazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Russian etc came and live together here. Uighur group form in 12th century. In the beginning, Uighur people believe in Shamanism or Buddhism, and changed into Islamism gradually from 13th to 16th century. Most time, more than 10 ethnic group live here friendly, why some Uighur radical Islamic terrorist always fire building, kill people, break peace? Xinjiang is not your own Xinjiang, she is home of all people live here.
Jul 03, 20136:36am EDT--
