FACTBOX: China's up-and-coming cities for property investors
2009-07-14 03:43:00.0
(Reuters) - China's efforts to speed up economic development in the western, central and northern regions have helped second-tier cities such as Tianjin and Chongqing grow faster than cities like Shanghai and Beijing.
Population: 11.76 mln; GDP Growth: 16.5 pct
Port city in northeastern China about 120 km from Beijing. Under China's 11th five-year plan, Tianjin -- one of China's four autonomous municipalities* -- will be the center for the revitalization of the northeast once China's industrial base.
Property consultancy Jones Lang LaSalle (JLL) says Tianjin has the greatest potential to become China's fifth Tier-1 municipality after Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen.
Population: 6.13 mln; GDP Growth: 16.5 pct
) recently announced the construction of a $2.5 billion chip plant that is expected to employ 1,500 people when completed in 2010. Some people in Dalian speak Japanese and Korean and the city has several call centers serving the two countries.
Population: 12.71 mln; GDP Growth: 12.1 pct
Capital of Sichuan province and well connected to the rest of western China through network of roads and rail. The central government has named Chengdu and Chongqing key centers for the development of China's western region. International firms with operations in the city include IBM (
Sichuan is home to China's pandas and has strong potential for international tourism.
Population: 28.39 mln; GDP Growth: 14.3 pct
China's most populous city and one of the country's four autonomous municipalities. Property prices in Chongqing are lower than most big Chinese cities, offering investors potentially higher returns behind other cities.
Most Hong Kong developers, including Hutchison Whampoa (
Population: 7.59 mln; GDP Growth: 12.1 pct
Provincial capital city of eastern Jiangsu, one of China's richest provinces. It is next to Shanghai, China's wealthiest city and main financial hub. Property prices in the city soared in recent years, driven by rising income and higher prices in Shanghai.
Population: 9.1 mln (2006); GDP Growth: around 15 pct
Capital of Hubei province and scientific and education center of central China. Wuhan is also one of China's main steel-producing areas. CBRE describes Wuhan as "the most important transportation hub in inland China" because of its strategic location and hence a good spot for investments in factories and warehouses.
Hangzhou, a popular tourist destination about 200 kilometers from Shanghai, is already one of China's richest cities with a per capita income comparable to Tier-1 cities of Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen. The city is an important manufacturing base and logistics hub for China's eastern seaboard.
Port city in southeastern China that is right across the narrow strait of water separating Taiwan from China. It is one of China's important manufacturing bases in the southern region, mainly for electronics products. Major foreign companies with large operations in the city include Dell (
), Panasonic (
* China's four autonomous municipalities are Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin and Chongqing
Sources: local government websites, Jones Lang LaSalle, CB Richard Ellis, Reuters
(Reporting by Langi Chiang and Kevin Lim; Editing by Valerie Lee)
