Oil-hungry China moves to strenghten Ecuador ties
2009-07-13 16:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil-hungry China is moving to strengthen ties with OPEC-member Ecuador, part of a global trend in which the Asian giant is providing billions of dollars in financing to guarantee supplies of petroleum and other commodities.
Ecuadorean President Rafael Correa said on Saturday the country will receive $1 billion as advance payment for future oil sales to China. Details remained unclear on Monday. What was clear was that China, the world's second biggest petroleum consumer after the United States, has its eyes on Ecuador.
In addition, the leftist Ecuadorean government says it is in talks with Chinese companies interested in investing in the Manta air base, which the U.S. army is due to leave in September. Ecuador wants to build a commercial airport in Manta.
According to the Chinese customs office, China imported 326,000 tonnes of crude oil from Ecuador in the first four months of 2009.
Impoverished Ecuador is facing a liquidity crunch due to low oil prices in the first half of the year. The government's recent debt default has shut the country off from the international capital markets.
"The Ecuadorean authorities seem bent on deepening trade and financial ties with China," said Alberto Ramos, who analyses Ecuador for Goldman Sachs in New York.
"According to the authorities the government is also negotiating a separate $1 billion four-year loan with China," Ramos added. "The decline in oil prices has generated a visible cash crunch and the government is striving to find alternative ways to secure financing."
China's CNCP confirmed a $5 billion financing deal with Kazakhstan's state oil company KazMunaiGas KMG.UL in April.
And the China Development Bank [CHDB.UL] will lend $15 billion to Russia's state oil champion Rosneft (
In February China agreed to give $4 billion in financing to Venezuelan state oil company PDVSA, which has increased shipments to China to reduce Venezuela's traditional reliance on U.S. energy markets. (Editing by Walter Bagley)
