EU president Sweden says U.N. climate talks too slow
2009-07-13 05:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Global climate talks are progressing too slowly and too many countries are demanding action from others rather than acting by themselves, Sweden's Environment Minister Andreas Carlgren said on Monday in Beijing.
Sweden holds the rotating presidency of the European Union for the rest of the year, during which time global climate talks, culminating in a conference in Copenhagen in December, are supposed to agree on a successor to the Kyoto Protocol.
"The negotiations are too slow because too many are pointing at others and requesting them to do more," Carlgren told a briefing in Beijing on Monday.
The EU had no "plan B" beyond Copenhagen, he said.
"That's why the EU has said we'll reduce emissions by 20 percent regardless.
"So if other parties would start in this way, moving forward, we would achieve great things in Copenhagen," said Carlgren, adding that he had had a frank exchange with Chinese officials.
China has overtaken the United States as the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases because of its rapidly expanding economy and dependence on coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel.
Developing nations led by China and India say rich countries should aim for cuts in emissions, mainly from burning fossil fuels, of at least 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020.
They say that evidence of global warming, such as melting Arctic ice, has worsened since 2007.
China's official news agency last month accused a small number of developed countries of "constantly seeking to shirk their responsibilities".
The United States signed but never ratified the Kyoto Protocol, becoming the only major developed nation to remain outside the treaty.
Since winning last year's election, President Barack Obama has made fighting climate change a major policy focus and wants to introduce a cap-and-trade system to curb carbon emissions.
Kyoto held developed countries to a higher standard than developing countries, since the former were committed to caps on emissions, while the latter had no such obligation.
Carlgren said this time, everybody needed to make sacrifices.
"Even if developed countries reduced their emissions to zero, it would still not be enough," Carlgren said, adding that China shared that view.
"We still expect more from China, just as we know China expects more from developed countries."
(For more on the road to Copenhagen, please click on [ID:nL3602424]) (Reporting by David Stanway; Writing by Tom Miles; Editing by David Fogarty)
