Geithner to reassure Gulf allies on dollar assets
2009-07-13 09:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Wed, Jul 8 2009
Wed, Jul 1 2009
Wed, Jul 1 2009
Mon  EDT
A recent decline in Saudi foreign assets shows the purchase of U.S. treasuries by Washington's Gulf allies, five having currencies pegged to the dollar, at levels seen in the past decades should no longer be taken for granted.
Geithner, offering assurances on the United States' ability to pull out of recession, is combining a visit to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, the Arab world's largest and second-largest economies, with a trip to Europe.
He is unlikely to encounter any challenge to the dollar's global dominance on his visit to the world's biggest oil exporting region, analysts and diplomats said.
China and Russia have expressed concerns about the weakened U.S. currency staying as the only dominant reserve currency. But Beijing, which itself holds large quantities of U.S. assets, suggests any change would be a long-term affair.
"The U.S. is looking to reassure Saudi Arabia and the GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council) countries on the outlook of the dollar and U.S. investments given the challenges for the U.S. economy and fiscal position," said Monica Malik, a regional economist at EFG-Hermes in Dubai.
U.S. officials played down expectations that Geithner would pursue any major initiatives, but indicated that one of the aims was to ensure foreign investors would not lose faith in the United States as a primary target for their investments.
"We will want to reiterate that we're open to foreign investment from the region," a U.S. official said.
"There is already likely to have been a diversification of GCC reserves in terms of currencies over the last few years given the dollar weakness and the expanding trade with Asia and Europe," said Malik.
Saudi net foreign assets have fallen by around 183 billion riyals ($48.80 billion) since November, according to central bank data, as the world's biggest oil exporter dips into reserves built up over decades thanks to high crude prices.
Finance Minister Ibrahim al-Assaf told Reuters in May the G20 member kept diverse foreign exchange reserves, broadly reflecting trends in the kingdom's trade and needs.
A consortium including China Railway Construction Corp won a Saudi infrastructure deal worth $1.8 billion, while European aerospace group (EADS) just won its second defense contract in the kingdom, beating U.S. firms.
Another purpose of Geithner's visit was to make sure regional investors were not still put off by the political controversy that followed Dubai's DP World's acquisition in 2006 of a British firm that would have given it control over some U.S. ports.
"We have a new process post-DPW and we want to make sure the process is fair and transparent and predictable, that it focuses appropriately on real national security concerns," the U.S. official said.
