Japan's Suntory considering merger with Kirin
2009-07-13 07:26:00.0
Japan's Suntory considering merger with Kirin | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Japan's Suntory considering merger with Kirin
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Beers of Kirin Holdings (L) and Suntory Holdings are displayed at a supermarket in Tokyo July 13, 2009. Japanese brewer Suntory Holdings Ltd said on Monday it was considering a merger with larger rival Kirin Holdings Co, a deal that would create one of the world's largest beverage and food firms. Credit: Reuters/Kim Kyung-Hoon
Mon  EDT
) in a deal that would create one of the world's largest beverage and food firms.
), and give the two more pricing power in Japan's mature market.
"If a merger is realized, that would give them the market share to take leadership in pricing and help their soft drinks businesses -- a chronic weak spot in an ultra-competitive market" in Japan, said JP Morgan analyst Naomi Takagi.
"It's a huge positive if they can do it."
Kirin spokesman Mitsutake Matano declined comment on the possibility of a merger, repeating a statement that Kirin is working with Suntory on procurement, distribution and other business activities.
Kirin and Suntory are in talks to merge under a holding company, and aim to agree on the deal this year, the Nikkei business daily said, citing unidentified sources.
The merged firm would be the largest player in the Japanese beer and soft drink markets and one of the largest worldwide, with combined annual sales of 3.8 trillion yen ($41 billion), giving it more resources to seek acquisitions abroad.
Some analysts cautioned that a deal was by no means a sure thing, citing potential regulatory resistance to a merged entity that would command about half of Japan's beer market.
"It is not at all certain that a deal is really going to happen. The hurdles ahead are by no means small," said Mizuho Securities analyst Hiroshi Saji.
Shares of Kirin rose 7.8 percent to 1,392 yen while the Nikkei benchmark average
) climbed 2.5 percent to 1,395 yen.
If the deal does get regulatory approval, Kirin would comfortably nudge out Asahi Breweries's 37 percent market share. It would also capture Suntory's health and soft drink businesses in southeast Asia and in China, Mizuho's Saji said.
"I don't think Asahi or Sapporo are going to stand idly by," he said.
The two sides will ask for feedback from Japan's anti-trust regulator as early as this week, it said.
Japan's beer market has shrunk by 15 percent in terms of shipment volumes over the past decade, forcing the industry to slash costs and look overseas for growth.
Earlier this year Kirin, which held 37.5 percent of Japan's beer market in January-June, agreed to a $2.5 billion buy-out of Australian brewer Lion Nathan LNN.AX, bringing the total that the maker of Kirin Lager Beer has spent on acquisitions to 968.5 billion yen over the past three years.
Last year Suntory, which is almost wholly owned by its founding family, outmaneuvered both Kirin and Asahi with a more than 600 million euro ($836 million) deal for Danone's (
Suntory, which vies with Sapporo for a distant third place in Japan's beer market behind Kirin and Asahi, has a product lineup that includes Malt's beer, Dakara sports drinks, vitamins and a whiskey that actor Bill Murray endorses in his role in the 2003 film "Lost in Translation."
(Additional reporting by Ritsuko Shimizu; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
