UPDATE 2-Norske Skog to sell China mill stake
2009-07-13 05:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Norske Skog (
The sale entails an accounting loss of 255 million crowns ($39 million) but will reduce the Norwegian papermaker's gross interest-bearing debt by about 150 million crowns, it said.
The company, one of the world's biggest newsprint producers, has struggled for more than six years to climb out of a slump, as soft demand and overcapacity have kept prices down.
Potential Industries, which now holds a 34 percent stake in the mill, will take over all of Norske Skog's shares in SNP which has a newsprint production capacity of 145,000 tonnes and is one of the smallest mills in Norske Skog's global portfolio.
"The transaction entails that all debts and other commitments remain with SNP," Norske Skog said in a statement.
"We ... do not want to sell with a loss, but this is a mill that has been running with a deficit for seven of the last 10 quarters, so it is mostly about limiting further losses," head of communications, Tom Bratlie, told Reuters.
"I do not want to speculate about this now. But we have earlier said that we are open to additional transactions to reduce the company's debt," he said, adding that there were no specific plans at the moment.
"China is still the market in the world that has the best increase in demand for newspaper," he said, adding that overcapacity remained the main problem.
Norske Skog said it would focus on raising profitability in the rest of its activities in China, which consist of the newsprint mill Norske Skog Hebei, with a production capacity of 330,000 tonnes, and an administration and sales office in Shanghai.
"The sale of SNP frees up resources for the work to improve profitability at Norske Skog Hebei while at the same time streamlining sales and administration in China," Chief Executive Christian Rynning-Toennesen said in the statement.
Bratlie said it would rationalise the rest of the business, aiming to reduce costs and increase profitability.
Shares in Norske Skog were up 0.9 percent at 8.08 crowns by 0917 GMT, when the main Oslo bourse index .OSEBX was flat.
(Reporting by Aasa Christine Stoltz and Joachim Dagenborg; Editing by Greg Mahlich)
