China says embassy protests show riots organized
2009-07-13 02:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Demonstrations against Chinese consulates in Europe and the United States show that ethnic riots in the city of Urumqi last week were orchestrated, state media said on Monday.
Demonstrators threw eggs, Molotov cocktails and stones at several Chinese embassies and consulates, including in Ankara, Oslo, Munich and the Netherlands, the Xinhua news agency said, after reports of rioting in Urumqi, capital of energy-rich Xinjiang province.
"Supporters of the East Turkestan separatists started well-orchestrated and sometimes violent attacks on Chinese embassies and consulates in several countries soon after the riots occurred," Xinhua said.
"The attacks against China's diplomatic missions and the Urumqi riots seemed to be well-organized."
The official death toll stands at 184, of which 137 were Han Chinese, who form the majority of China's 1.3 billion population, and 46 were Uighur, a Muslim people native to Xinjiang and culturally tied to Central Asia and Turkey.
While security forces still blanketed Urumqi on Monday, more and more businesses are reopening.
"In general, things are slowly getting back to normal. I think the situation is getting better and under control," said one Han resident. But some Uighur residents remained wary.
A Uighur security guard, who declined to give his name, said that while he did not support the violence, he understood people's frustration.
"Look around you -- 90 percent of all the businesses are owned by the Han," he said, standing in Urumqi's main bazaar.
"All I can do is get a job as a security guard," complained the university graduate. "The Han here can't even speak Uighur."
China has blamed Rebiya Kadeer, an exiled Uighur businesswoman, for instigating the unrest.
Xinhua also blamed the World Uighur Congress, an umbrella group for organizations of exiled or overseas Uighurs, for the demonstrations at the embassies.
Deadly riots in Lhasa in March 2008, and a subsequent Chinese crackdown across the Tibetan plateau, also spurred a series of demonstrations at Chinese embassies in countries with a significant exiled Tibetan population.
Also on Monday, state media said officials who mishandle protests could be removed from their posts.
New rules on accountability issued over the weekend hold officials responsible if misconduct leads to serious accidents, group protests or other serious incidents, Xinhua said.
Penalties range from a public apology to suspension, forced resignation and dismissal.
(Additional reporting by Lucy Hornby and Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Benjamin Kang Lim and Dean Yates)
