FACTBOX-Strains abound in U.S.-China trade
2009-07-12 08:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun  EDT
Here's a list of trade issues that could arise during their visit, which is focused primarily on hopes of fostering cooperation with China to address climate change:
The U.S. trade gap with China hit a record $266 billion in 2008, but has narrowed this year as the U.S. recession has reduced demand for imports. The deficit with China totaled $84.6 billion in the first five months of 2009, compared with $96.3 billion in the same period last year.
After blasting China's currency practices during last year's campaign, President Barack Obama decided not to label China as a currency manipulator in his Treasury Department's first ruling on the subject in April.
The move pleased Beijing but disappointed U.S. manufacturers and labor groups, who believe that China gives its companies an unfair trade advantage by depressing the value of its currency, the renminbi, against the dollar.
China, which has some $2 trillion in U.S. Treasury holdings, has recently criticized the dominant role of the U.S. dollar as a global reserve currency and expressed concern about the huge U.S. budget deficit.
China has loudly protested a request by the United Steelworkers union for Obama to slap emergency import curbs on tires from China, which totaled $1.8 billion last year.
Obama faces a decision by September on the issue, which is seen as a test case for how he will handle China trade.
The U.S. International Trade Commission has recommended a three-year plan imposing a 55-percent duty on imports of Chinese tires in the first year, 45 percent in the second and 35 percent in the third.
Pending cases include industry requests for anti-dumping and countervailing duties on $2.6 billion in steel pipe used in oil production, $317 million in wire decking, $178 million in concrete steel wired strand and $90 million in steel grating.
Meanwhile, the United States and the European Union recently joined forces at the World Trade Organization to challenge Chinese export restrictions on raw materials used to make steel. They complain the curbs hold down costs for steel manufacturers in China and increase them abroad.
China launched a WTO case in April over U.S. legislation that bars it from exporting processed poultry to the United States, which the House of Representative recently voted to extend for a third year.
U.S. trade groups say China has recently stopped accepting imports of U.S. chicken -- the top export market for the product, worth almost $700 million a year.
U.S. information technology companies remain concerned about China's proposal to require all computers sold in China to come installed with an Internet filter to block access to pornography. Although China recently backed off the July 1 start date, a state newspaper later quoted a Chinese official who said the plan would eventually come into force.
Washington complained of the short timetable China gave companies to comply with the request and backed U.S. industry concerns the software was technically flawed, commercially unfair and raised censorship and network security issues.
