FTSE down, oils drag as U.S. sentiment weighs
2009-07-10 00:32:00.0
(Reuters) - UK blue-chip stocks ended a fourth consecutive week in negative territory on Friday as U.S. data heaped more gloom on the global economic outlook, with energy stocks weighing most on Britain's top share index.
closed down 31.49 points, or 0.8 percent, at 4,127.17, for a weekly loss of 2.3 percent, its lowest closing level since April 28.
"The fundamentals haven't been all that encouraging today -- the U.S. trade balance has contracted further showing waning demand domestically," said Giles Lee, senior dealer at CMC Markets.
Energy stocks slid as oil prices CLc1 kept below $60 per barrel, on track for its largest weekly fall since January.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), BG Group (
), Tullow Oil (
The latest report from the International Energy Agency predicted an increase in oil consumption in 2010, but expected it to stay negative in 2009 and saw limited demand for OPEC crude. [IEA/M]
Chevron's (
) warning about second-quarter results also weighed on the sector, with U.S. stocks dropping on jitters that an economic recovery and corporate profits will be anaemic.
INSURERS, DRUGMAKERS HIT
) was the index top faller, off 4.9 percent on lingering speculation that the life insurer is going to cut its dividend. [ID:nLA663897]
), Prudential (
), Legal and General (
Drugmakers also took a beating, with AstraZeneca (
), GlaxoSmithkline (
Miners were dealt a blow by weak metal prices, with Rio Tinto (
), Kazakhmys (
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Lonmin (
) was the second sharpest blue-chip faller, dogged by the detention of four employees by Chinese authorities for leaking China's "bottom line" in iron ore price negotiations, according to a source with knowledge of the probe. [ID:nSP473911]
Retailers were broadly higher, with traders citing the low interest rate environment and positive broker commentary from the previous session as supportive.
) was the top riser, up 2.5 percent, followed closely by Home Retail (
), up 2 percent.
), Kingfisher (
), Next (
Among other stocks in positive territory, publishing group Pearson (
