Econ gloom hits energy, drags FTSE to 10-week low
2009-07-10 06:56:00.0
(Reuters) - More gloom on prospects for the global economy sparked by weak U.S. corporate results depressed commodity prices, knocking energy stocks and dragging Britain's top share index to a 10-week low by midday on Friday.
was down 24.00 points at 4,134.66 after it closed 18.43 points higher on Thursday at 4,158.66. The index is on track for its lowest close since late April, down 2.4 percent this week, set for its fourth consecutive week in negative territory.
Energy stocks took the most points off the index as oil prices slid below $60 per barrel, on track for its largest weekly fall since January CLc1 as the demand outlook soured and on fears of new rules to curb futures speculation.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), BG Group (
), Tullow Oil (
"The oil price has come off in the last few weeks and that has chilled the mood for commodities," said Lars Kreckel, equity strategist at Exane BNP Paribas.
"In general I would expect them to meet or beat analyst expectations but it will be difficult to meet investor expectations," he said, adding that he expects defensive stocks and cyclical laggards to outperform.
Underlining the fragile state of the British economy, factory costs fell in June at their sharpest annual rate since 1997 and output prices dropped at their fastest in 7-1/2 years, in a sign inflation will fall sharply in the coming months. [ID:nLA422963]
Miners were hamstrung by weaker metal prices, with Kazakhmys (
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
), Anglo American (
), Lonmin (
) was the sharpest blue-chip faller, down 2.9 percent, dogged by the detention of four employees by Chinese authorities for leaking China's "bottom line" in iron ore price negotiations, according to a source with knowledge of the probe. [ID:nSP473911]
"Investors who made some money during the upturn in March, April and May are now reluctant to get back into the market and risk those gains," said Arifa Sheikh-Usmani.
Retailers were broadly higher, with traders citing the low interest rate environment and positive broker commentary from the previous session as supportive.
) was the biggest riser, up 3.8 percent, while Kingfisher (
), Tesco (
), Next (
Among other stocks in positive territory, publishing group Pearson (
) added 1.8 percent after Credit Suisse upgraded it to "outperform" from "neutral" and property developer Liberty International LII.L gained 1.1 percent after UBS upgraded it to "neutral" from "sell". (Reporting by Simon Falush; Editing by Hans Peters)
