G8 backs farmland code of conduct, details sketchy
2009-07-09 00:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan and the European Union will press G8 leaders on Friday to sign up for a code of conduct on foreign agricultural investments in poorer countries, but it is not clear how it might work.
The G8 and countries from Africa, Asia and Latin America will discuss a food security initiative on Friday that could result in pledges of up to $15 billion to boost agriculture in poorer nations, and the land issue is bound to be raised.
"We need to stop this culture of just grabbing land in poorer countries merely to steal their markets," EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso told Reuters in an interview.
"It is a complete scandal that in countries where people are starving, some investors are exploiting food exports. I have heard some specific reports of rich countries or not so rich countries preying on vulnerable nations."
The International Food Policy Research Institute, a Washington-based think-tank, says that since 2006 15-20 million hectares of land in poor countries were sold or were under negotiations for sale to foreign buyers.
Supporters of such deals say they provide new seeds, technology and money for agriculture in economies that have suffered from underinvestment for decades.
But the land-buying spree, particularly in Africa, has been criticized by aid groups which fear that poor countries, and their farmers, are not getting a fair deal.
The EU wants Friday's meeting to agree to flesh out concrete proposals to be discussed and possibly adopted at the U.N. General Assembly and then upcoming G20 meeting in September.
Japan, the world's largest net food importer, is pushing for a series of non-binding principles.
It says such a code should be based on prior informed consent by developing countries, an adequate compensation of the communities affected and an assessment of the impact of land deals on local food security and rural livelihoods.
"The question is how can we turn these deals into something positive and eliminate some of the risks," said David Hallam, deputy director for trade and markets at the U.N.'s Food and Agriculture Organization.
Japan, historically a big investor in agriculture in Brazil and Australia, said this week a regulatory approach is not desirable as it may deter "benign investment."
"Japan is concerned about the adverse press coverage of so-called land-grabs in Africa, with accusations of neo-colonialism," said Hallam. "That kind of coverage has already led some investors to reconsider and pull back."
