Shui On, Dutch Redevco agree $290 mln China JV
2009-07-09 07:02:00.0
Shui On, Dutch Redevco agree $290 mln China JV | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Shui On, Dutch Redevco agree $290 mln China JV
HONG KONG, July 9
Thu  EDT
HONG KONG, July 9
Shui On, which will own half of the 100,000 square metre shopping centre, said it expects to kick off construction on the project in the fourth quarter of 2010 and complete it by 2012.
The Hong Kong-based company, which has a land bank of 13.2 million square foot, is also on the prowl for other partners to co-develop its new projects.
"We are not looking for strategic partners for just the investment but also for the expertise. Redevco's expertise is retail, similarly we will look for others who specilise in office projects or serviced apartments," said Aloysius Lee, managing director, commercial.
In 2008, Shui On brought Hong Kong-based fund Winnigton Capital on board giving it a 25 percent stake in two of its residential projects in China.
The Shanghai-focused developer, taking advantage of the improved market sentiment, placed HK$2.04 billion (US$261.5 million) worth of new shares in June, to raise funds to expand its land bank and meet its working capital needs.
Redevco, which marked its foray into Asia with the retail project in Wuhan, hopes to grow its portfolio in the region to a "couple of billion dollars", said its chief executive, but the company will take its time with the expansion.
"We are obviously not in Asia to build just one shopping mall. We are also looking at India and set up an office in Delhi, but China is ten years ahead so the real opportunities are here now," said Jaap Blokhuis, CEO of the privately-owned Dutch company.
The company said it was looking for clarity beyond the 40 to 50-year leases introduced in the 1990s on commercial projects in China, where there is no freehold land.
Redevco, which has a 7.2 billion euros portfolio of mainly retail properties across Europe, said it was interested in establishing a presence in top Chinese cities including Beijing and Shanghai, but may not sign any new projects till the shopping centre in Wuhan is completed in 2012.
"China shows a lot of growth but that does not mean it is easy to make money there. There is no pressure on us in terms of time or money," said Blokhuis. ($1=6.832 Yuan) (Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Hans Peters)
