AIG in talks to sell big Alico unit to MetLife: report
2009-07-09 08:46:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Jul 9 2009
Tue, Jul 7 2009
Tue, Jul 7 2009
A statue stands atop Grand Central Station in front of the MetLife building in New York, October 8, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Lucas Jackson
Thu  EDT
) in a transaction that could help the stricken insurer raise more than $15 billion, the Financial Times said.
The preliminary talks over the unit known as Alico could break down, as they did earlier in the year when AIG and MetLife disagreed over the price, the newspaper said, citing people close to the situation.
AIG is selling assets to help repay $83 billion of loans from the federal government, which has a nearly 80 percent stake in the New York-based company.
According to the newspaper, AIG, after receiving its latest federal bailout in March, halted sales talks for all or part of Alico with bidders including France's Axa SA (
), Britain's Prudential Plc (
None of these entities is now interested, the newspaper said, citing the people.
Last month, AIG set plans to partially spin off Alico into a new unit partially owned by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which would take a $9 billion preferred stake.
While a spinoff could be a precursor to an initial public offering of Alico next year, a sale could allow the government to recoup some of its investment sooner.
Shares of AIG have fallen 43.5 percent this month, after the insurer conducted a 1-for-20 reverse stock split.
(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel, editing by Matthew Lewis)
