China starts investigation into Tetra Pak 'dominance': state media
2013-07-05 07:52:00.0
(Reuters) - China is investigating Swedish packaging giant Tetra Pak over the possible "misuse of its market dominance", state media reported on Friday, as authorities ramp up scrutiny of foreign firms in the world's No. 2 economy.
The State Administration for Industry and Commerce (SAIC) has launched the nationwide investigation, ChinaNews.com reported on its website citing unidentified sources.
Tetra Pak said on Friday that SAIC had asked the company for information concerning its business in China a few weeks ago, but did not elaborate.
"We will obviously continue to cooperate with them," Tetra Pak spokesman Christopher Huntley said.
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), the top economic planning agency, is already investigating six milk-powder producers including Nestle (
), for possible price-fixing and anti-competitive behavior.
The NDRC is also investigating costs and prices charged by drugmakers, including units of GlaxoSmithKline (
Tetra Pack opened for business in China in 1972 and its clients include China's biggest milk and beverage producers including China Mengniu Dairy Co Ltd (
), Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Co (
(Reporting by Samuel Shen and Kazunori Takada; Additional reporting by Mia Shanley in Stockholm; Editing by Louise Ireland)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Some years ago, I watched a Christian program which told the story of transformation a successful Chinese marketing executive experienced after she changed her career, immigrated and became Christian. That was before any of the milk scandal had come to light. However, another scandal was on the way, which has been over-shadowed by the poisoning in milk powder. Breast milk is by far the HEALTHIEST form of mil to feed babies. The American Pediatric Association has been advising parents to feed breast milk whenever possible except under rare medical conditions. In particular, in the United States, the baby formula companies had been chastised and forbidden from making false claims that baby formula, particularly foreign baby formula is more nutritious than breast milk. Yet, in China, there is apparently no such patient education program, at least certainly no effective one; otherwise, there should not be any of the recent mad scramble for baby formula. Parents who want to transmit antibodies to their newborn to protect them from infant diseases, expose them to antigens to decrease their risk of developing allergies, should ALL be spending much more energy in figuring how to breast feed. Even working moms can use breast pumps and freeze or store breast milk for their babies. Even having a diet that is, in part, breast milk, is still healthier for the babies than all formula milk. According to the testimony of that Christian Chinese former salesperson, she said that foreign companies often make patently false claims about the health benefits about infant formula in powder form. They were plain lies. The Chinese Government should start cracking down on false advertising of all products, but it seems that baby formula is one that should be on the top of the list.
Jul 06, 201311:28pm EDT--
As Tetra Pack has its products widely used in the milk industry, it will have a certain impact on the Swedish firm. On Thursday, Yao Jian, a spokesman for the Ministry of Commerce (MOFCOM), said China will further boost its domestic consumer demand by focusing on three aspects. Read more: http://www.dzhnews.com/detail/today/11/200000217362
Jul 07, 20139:57pm EDT--
Janeallen, It is not about breast milk. Most of the mothers are working mom and therefore not easy to breast fed their kids (they do not have as good of a working condition as people in US). A lot of them work far away from home and leave their newborns to the grand parents¡¯ care back in their home town. The last thing they need to worry about is false advertisement. It would be great if they can start with the safety of their ingredients.
Jul 08, 20134:06pm EDT--
