Asia Steel-China prices dip on subdued buying, output growth
2009-07-09 02:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices inched down this week on subdued buying from traders after hitting four-month highs, and as major steel mills weighed raising prices further amid deadlocked talks to fix the cost of iron ore imports.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil eased to around 3,655 yuan ($535) a tonne after rising to a four-month high of 3,677.5 last week in south and east China, registering around a 15 percent gain from April lows, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphics on China's steel prices, click:
"Although demand has slowly improved, strong production growth and expectations for weaker demand during summer season have weakened traders' buying interest," said a Chinese steel trader.
China's steel output is growing fast, threatening to put a halt to the recent price gains, which are largely driven by infrastructure activity and strong growth in fixed-asset investment.
"Infrastructure-driven demand is well above consensus expectations, largely caused by ample liquidity in China," said UBS analyst Hubert Tang after visiting China's steel manufacturing hub Hebei region.
"State and provincial projects are being rolled out at the fastest pace ever, and even property markets in hinterland cities are picking up. Fixed asset investment-driven demand could reach a historical high in 2009."
In May, China's fixed-asset investment in urban areas jumped at the fastest rate of 33 percent this year from a year ago, triggering solid growth both in steel output and demand.
Chinese banks extended a massive 1.53 trillion yuan ($223.9 billion) in new loans in June in a fresh show of support for the government's drive to hit its target of 8 percent economic growth in 2009. [ID:nPEK122994]
Encouraged by firm prices, Chinese mills are producing steel at almost full capacity and daily output stood at 1.5 million tonnes in June, equivalent to an annual production of 552 million tonnes, more than 10 percent higher than 2008 output. [ID:nSHA174967]
UBS has raised its forecast for China's crude steel output by 17 percent to 530 million tonnes this year.
Worries that rapidly growing output would lead to a massive inventory build-up and exacerbate market conditions during the dull summer season may further weaken buying interest from traders, who are already well stocked following steady purchases since April.
"Our recent visit to Shanghai and Beijing steel traders showed inventory building up by traders, which was about 20 percent higher than our last visit on June 11," CLSA analyst Scott Laprise said on Thursday.
A Shanghai newspaper reported on Wednesday that Chinese steel mills have finally given in on annual iron ore prices, conceding to a 33 percent cut for six months, although Rio Tinto and Chinese executives said talks were ongoing. [ID:nSYD462742] ($1=6.832 yuan) (Editing by Ben Tan)
