Valuations, reforms eyed as China share listings resume
2009-07-09 04:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China's first two initial public offerings (IPOs) in 10 months will list in Shenzhen on Friday but the usual volatility from speculative trading will likely be tamped down because of listing reforms and high valuations.
While a doubling in IPO prices is impressive by global standards, strong price gains are not unusual for Chinese firms, in particular, small caps with a limited number of shares offered and especially after a dry spell in IPOs.
China has reformed its equity primary-market system to ensure that major investors can only get a limited portion of IPO shares. The Shenzhen Stock Exchange has also introduce measures to crack down on excessive gains, reducing the chances of illegal share price rigging.
Relatively high valuations of the IPO shares may also dampen interest for some retail investors, analysts say.
"We will still see some die-hard punters who may simply not care about risks and firmly believe they can sell shares at even higher prices to others eventually," said senior stock analyst Ren Chengde at Galaxy Securities in Shanghai.
Guilin Sanjin 002275.SZ, a traditional Chinese medicine maker, raised 910 million yuan ($133 million) in an IPO on June 29 to fund technical upgrades and product development, it said in a statement published in the official Securities Times.
The Shenzhen bourse has adopted regulations this year stipulating that it will suspend trading in IPO shares for 30 minutes if prices rise or fall 20 percent, and another 30 minutes if they jump or dive 50 percent.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission's new rules this year have reduced administrative interference in IPO pricing, allowing the price earnings (PE) ratio of Guilin Sanjin and Zhejiang Wanma's shares to exceed 30 times their 2008 earnings.
"Any investors pushing prices of the newcomers too high will have the double risks of regulatory investigations and losing money due to relatively high valuations of IPO shares," said Western Securities analyst Cao Xuefeng in Chengdu.
Previously, the regulator from time to time gave instructions to firms on how to price their IPOs so as to ensure smooth sales of IPO shares. In some cases, it gave detailed requirements, such as pricing IPO shares around 20 times of historical earnings.
But at a PE ratio of 30-plus times, the two firms' valuations are only relatively high in a market where valuations are typically much higher than most global counterparts. The average historical PEs of China's drug producers is now at 50 times.
But since the start of this year, China's benchmark Composite stock index
) said on Monday it planned to raise up to 2 billion yuan in a public sale of new shares on the Shanghai Stock Exchange in mid-July to become China's first major IPO since last September.
State media on Wednesday said China State Construction Engineering Corp, the country's largest homebuilder, would raise as much as 42.6 billion yuan in a Shanghai IPO next month.
