PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - July 9
2009-07-08 16:52:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Tue, Jul 7 2009
Mon, Jul 6 2009
Wed  EDT
Seven Network SEV.AX, a listed investment vehicle 48.4 percent owned by Kerry Stokes, has purchased a 10.3 percent share in James Packer's Consolidated Media CMJ.AX, lifting its overall stake in the group to 15 percent. It is believed the A$180 million buy-up is part of Mr Stokes' long-held ambition to increase his role in the pay TV industry and ensure his involvement in any changes in the ownership of Foxtel, which is part-owned by Consolidated Media. Page 1.
Pressure is mounting for the Rudd government to allocate some of the permit revenue from its proposed emissions trading scheme to helping developing countries tackle climate change. However, Prime Minister Kevin Rudd says the Government will continue to direct all permit revenue to helping Australian businesses and households to adjust to a carbon price. Greens Leader Bob Brown has criticised the decision, saying the gap between what the rich nations are willing to offer and what developing nations demand continues to grow. Page 5.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) yesterday vowed to push for a higher minimum pay rise next year after the decision by the Australian Fair Pay Commission to impose a pay freeze on 1.3 million workers reliant on the minimum wage. "In next year's wage case, we will be seeking a restoration of what has been lost," ACTU secretary Jeff Lawrence said. Workplace Relations Minster Julia Gillard gave tacit support to the ACTU's approach, saying past pay rises would be a factor considered by the wage-setting panel. Page 1.
Treasurer Wayne Swan yesterday rejected calls for a government-owned "people's bank" that would challenge the market supremacy of the Big Four banks. The proposal, by a group of economists who argue that the global crisis has exposed flaws in Australia's financial system, suggests the state-owned bank be managed by the Future Fund. Opposition Leader Malcolm Turnbull also dismissed the idea, calling instead for an inquiry into the integrity of Australia's financial system. Page 5.
New figures reveal that almost half the water entitlements purchased by the Rudd government as part of the Murray-Darling buy-back program in 2008-09 will rarely flow into the main Murray system. The Lachlan, Gwydir and Macquarie catchments, purchased as part of the federal push to shore up water for the drought-stricken Murray system, all terminate in wetlands that don't flow into the river except in times of flood. New South Wales Irrigators' Council chief executive Andrew Gergson said the purchase of less reliable water sources reflected a lack of government strategy. Page 1.
South Australian Attorney-General Michael Atkinson yesterday announced new laws defining the conditions for removal of judicial officers of the Supreme, District and Magistrates courts. The amendments, which state that improper conduct not directly linked to performing the duties of office should be added to the grounds for removal, come in the wake of revelations concerning a South-Australian magistrate. Richard Brown, a magistrate who had child-sex charges against him dropped in May, continued receiving his salary despite not sitting on the bench since his arrest in 2006. Page 2.
Jesuit priest Frank Brennan says any attempt by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to lobby Pope Benedict XVI for the canonisation of Mary McKillop would be seen as "crass and counterproductive". Mr Rudd will meet his Holiness in Rome this morning where they will discuss various issues including MacKillop, religious freedom and ethical and moral elements of the economic crisis. "I can't see how anyone would see it as a lobbying exercise," says Father Brennan. Page 2.
A Federal Government plan to close the climb to the top of Uluru has sparked opposition from the Northern Territory Labor Government, who want to keep the world famous tourist experience. The 10-year draft management plan for Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park, released yesterday, reveals plans to end the climb, saying it is culturally inappropriate and dangerous. Australian Tourism Export Council managing director Matt Hingerty said the wishes of traditional owners should be paramount. Page 3.
The right-wing nationalist group Australia First will today become the first anti-immigration party since One Nation to gain enough members to contest a federal election. The party, which signed up its 500th member on Monday, plans to contest lower house seats in western and southern Sydney and expects to attract between 6 and 7 percent of the primary vote. Jim Saleam, the New South Wales director of Australia First, said the party aimed to take advantage of the instability and resentment of non-white labour that has emerged out of the recession. Page 1.
The residents of the New South Wales (NSW) Southern Highland's village of Bundanoon are initiating changes to replace bottled water with freely available water. NSW Premier Nathan Rees has requested the Department of Premier and Cabinet and the Department of Environment and Climate Change to investigate ways of reducing the consumption of bottled water with research showing that most plastic water bottles end up as waste or litter. The Federal Government released a discussion paper on a national waste policy last night. Page 3.
The National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) yesterday announced A$7 million in funding for 41 research projects into swine flu. The results of the campaign are expected by December and may help to combat the effects of the virus, which has already led to the deaths of three people in New South Wales. The NHMRC accelerated its selection process for the research grants, which usually take a number of months, to just over a week. Page 2.
THE AGE (www.theage.com.au) The Victorian State Opposition has questioned the Brumby government's plans for a new A$1 billion children's hospital in Melbourne, claiming it has put interior decorating ahead of sick kids. Documents released by the hospital's steering committee have highlighted concerns that the building plans, which include a two-storey aquarium, had not included enough space for patients and staff. However, a spokesperson for Health Minister Daniel Andrews maintained that the plans had enough flexibility in the design to cope with any extra demand. Page 1.
The Westpac-Melbourne Institute measure of consumer confidence has risen to the point that optimists now outnumber pessimists in all areas the index covers. Westpac chief economist Bill Evans supported the Rudd government stimulus package, saying the key is to restore confidence. International Monetary Fund forecasts to be released this morning upgrade the outlook for Australia, while the growth rate in China has also upgraded. Expectations for the United States have only slightly improved and those for Europe remain low. Page 2.
Social networking is the major reason why Australian children aged 16 and 17 spend an average of three and a half hours each day on the internet. New research by the Australian Communications and Media Authority of 800 people found that children aged eight to 11 spent 1.3 hours daily online, while 12 to 17-year-olds spent an average of 2.9 hours. Playing games was the younger groups main reason for using the internet, while the older group used social networking sites such as Facebook and MySpace. Page 3.
