UPDATE 2-Uniqlo owner Fast Retailing profit jumps, ups f'cast
2009-07-09 05:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Fast Retailing (
) lifted its forecast for the third time after posting another strong quarterly profit growth, buoyed by robust sales at its Uniqlo casual clothing chain.
The owner of Uniqlo is one of the few bright spots among major Japan retailers, with its flagship stores attracting price-conscious shoppers amid Japan's worst recession since World War Two.
Globally, clothing retailers with focus on low-cost and fast-moving fashion have weathered the economic downturn better than upscale chains, but Fast Retailing is faring even better than rivals such as H&M (
"(Fast Retailing's) products and strategy have been successfully catching the market's trend," said Naoki Fujiwara, a fund manager at Shinkin Asset Management.
Fast Retailing, which runs about 780 Uniqlo stores at home and 80 overseas, said its operating profit jumped 27 percent to 27.3 billion yen ($292.5 million) for its third quarter ended in May.
Same-store sales at Uniqlo stores in Japan grew a hefty 15.4 percent during the quarter, thanks to the popularity of its camisoles with built-in bras, T-shirts and other cheap basic garments.
In addition to brisk sales at Uniqlo, the company has overhauled its cut-rate g.u. chain, marking prices down even further and tempting consumers with offerings such as 990 yen ($10) jeans, about a quarter of the price of those at Uniqlo.
The chain, viewed as Uniqlo's answer to Gap Inc's (
) Old Navy brand, has seen its sales soar since then.
For the full year through August, the company now expects operating profit to grow 23.4 percent from a year earlier to 108 billion yen, up from 101 billion yen in the previous forecast and in line with an average forecast of 108.8 billion yen in a poll of 20 analysts by Thomson Reuters.
The firm has laid out aggressive overseas expansion plans, such as having 100 Uniqlo stores in mainland China and Hong Kong and 100 more in South Korea in the near future.
Currently, the company has 33 stores in China and Hong Kong and 27 in South Korea.
"Especially, in the China and Hong Kong area, we are preparing to open 100 stores a year constantly," Fast Retailing director Toshihisa Tokunaga said at the briefing.
Fast Retailing shares gained 20 percent in the 12 months to Wednesday, against an 18 percent decline in the Tokyo stock exchange's retail subindex.
On Thursday, its shares closed down 0.2 percent prior to the announcement. ($1=93.31 Yen) (Additional Reporting by Mariko Katsumura; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
