Australia's Sundance optimistic on talks with Hanlong
2012-10-14 21:57:00.0
Australia's Sundance optimistic on talks with Hanlong | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Australia's Sundance optimistic on talks with Hanlong
Mon, Oct 8 2012
Tue, Oct 2 2012
Mon, Oct 1 2012
Tue, Sep 18 2012
Sun  EDT
) is optimistic it will be able to conclude a sale of the company to China's Hanlong Group in a $1.4 billion deal that has dragged on for a year, Sundance's chairman said on Monday.
Hanlong, which cut its offer by a fifth in August, was due to have given Sundance a letter from China Development Bank confirming funding for the deal by October 1, but holidays in China and a failure to reach an agreement on conditions for the financing have delayed the process.
"We are working on it positively and we expect a positive outcome," Sundance Chairman George Jones told Reuters.
Sundance had hoped to wrap up talks with Hanlong by last Friday, but Jones and another person familiar with the talks said the two sides were still talking and had yet to reach any conclusion.
The source, who did not want to be named as the talks are confidential, declined to say what the sticking points are.
Hanlong targeted Sundance for its Mbalam iron ore project on the border of Cameroon and the Republic of Congo, one of several iron ore projects that China eyed to supply its steel mills.
However China Development Bank has appeared reluctant to back the private company's deal, repeatedly delaying approval, even after Hanlong cut its offer price following a slide in iron ore prices.
Sundance shares have been suspended pending the outcome of the talks. They last traded at A$0.34, a quarter below Hanlong's lowered offer of A$0.45, reflecting investors' doubts the deal will go ahead.
Hedge funds betting on the deal have been caught out, so much so that one fund, Senrigan Capital, an Asia-focused hedge fund backed by Blackstone Group (
), has put its investment in Sundance and four other hard-to-sell investments into a separate vehicle after suffering heavy losses.
(Reporting by Sonali Paul and Narayanan Somasundaram; Editing by Ed Davies and Richard Pullin)
