UPDATE 1-France's EDF seeks 20 pct tariff hike-report
2009-07-08 07:19:00.0
(Reuters) - France's EDF (
) will ask the government for permission to raise electricity tariffs by a fifth to help it reduce debt, Chief Executive Pierre Gadonneix said in an interview with Paris Match.
"In order for us to stop getting into debt, we would need a 20 percent rise in tariffs. This could be spread out over three years, for example, or for a bit longer," Gadonneix said in an interview due to be published on Thursday.
If the government refused such an increase, Gadonneix said that EDF, which is more than 80 percent owned by the French state, would have to slash investments.
EDF has plans to invest 7.5 billion euros in France in 2009 alone. On Monday, it closed an offer for a retail bond, which reportedly raised nearly 3 billion euros, and the group has been active in the debt market in recent weeks.
The group's debt stood at 24.5 billion euros at the end of 2008, up from 16.3 billion euros a year earlier following the acquisition of British Energy.
"The sums are simple. For example, an EPR (European Pressurized Reactor) costs 4 billion euros whereas if we prolong the life span of our reactors from 40 years to 60 years, the cost is 400 million euros per plant. This is therefore the most profitable investment for the French population," Gadonneix said.
The French nuclear safety authority, ASN, said on Tuesday it had agreed in principle for EDF to continue running its oldest nuclear reactors for up to 40 years. EDF wants the life span of its reactors to go up to 60 years, arguing that this had been granted for similar reactors in the United States.
Asked whether the EPR was not a priority for EDF, Gadonneix said: "The priority is to prolong the life span of our reactors, while ensuring that future generations benefit from the EPR technology.
"This is the reason why EDF supports and finances this technology in the countries where nuclear will develop, such as in China, the UK and the United States."
EDF shares were up 1.6 percent in early afternoon trade, outperforming a 0.6 percent fall in France's benchmark CAC 40 index
