UPDATE 5-MOVES-Deutsche Bank, Broadpoint, BNP Paribas, others
2009-07-07 18:10:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Monday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com
According to a person familiar with the matter, Deutsche Bank hired Brett Kellam from UBS AG (
) as regional executive for the New York office of private client unit Deutsche Bank Alex. Brown; and New York-based advisers Bill Grous, Steven Grill and Alex Christon and two sales assistants from Morgan Stanley (
Most recently, Hentschel was a real estate investment banker at Wachovia Securities.
Prior to this appointment, Mahala was co-head of hedge fund relationship management in the Americas. He will report to Samuel Hocking, global head of prime brokerage sales.
Prior to joining HighMark, Foreman was the group managing director and chief investment officer of U.S. equities at Trust Company of the West in Los Angeles.
Prior to that, Webster was executive managing director and general manager for Asia.
In addition, Emily Chan will join the company's public finance group as an associate, and James Robertson joined Stone & Youngberg's institutional sales & trading group as a vice president.
), America's largest provider of business information, nominated Christopher Del Moral-Niles as president of First American Trust, its savings banks.
Niles, who had previously served as treasurer for The First American Corporation, is expected to assume his new duties on October 1.
The Swiss banking giant's UBP Asset Management fund of funds hired Sara Sprung as its first-ever chief investment officer.
The unit also hired Jonathan Morgan as its head of research for alternative investment. Prior to that, he worked as head of the hedge fund group at Barclays Global Investors.
Aladdin Capital Holdings hired Merrill Lynch's head of emerging markets syndicate Carlyle Peake as part of the boutique investment bank's hiring spree, taking advantage of Wall Street struggles. [nN07308012]
The insurance brokerage firm appointed Peter Hutton as executive vice president of national sales, effective immediately. Prior to that, Hutton, 47, was regional president at its corporate synergies group.
Prior to that, he was vice president of client services group. Qualantone will replace Andrew Winterton, who left the company.
The asset management company promoted Brad Thompson as chief investment officer. Prior to that, he was senior vice president of portfolio management.
The institutional investment advisor hired Michael Kaicher as senior vice president of business development. Prior to joining Capital Advisors Group, Kaicher was a vice president and sales director at Evergreen Investments.
The investment bank appointed Chenyi Lu as senior analyst, covering education, media, and consumer companies located in China. He will report to Barry Tarasoff, Cowen's director of research.
Prior to Cowen, Lu worked at Brean Murray, Carret & Co, where he was a senior analyst covering U.S.-listed Chinese companies.
) hired Chris Tam as director in its fixed income and currencies sales team in Hong Kong, and Minako Endo as director head of institutional fixed income sales in its Tokyo office.
Tam joins RBC Capital Markets from Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong, where he was co-head, North Asia Wholesale Marketing. Endo joins RBC Capital Markets from Merrill Lynch in Japan, where she was Director of Non-Yen Bond Sales.
The company appointed Scott Baker to the newly created position of principal, reporting to the president and chief executive, and having responsibility for Perspecta's wealth management offering.
Most recently, Baker served as a principal for Cook Pine Capital, an investment management firm.
Bank of America-Merrill Lynch's head of Southeast Asia corporate and investment banking has left the firm, in a move that may hurt the firm's pipeline of deals in Indonesia, sources with knowledge of his departure told Reuters.
Roger Suyama, Merrill's point man for Indonesian mergers and acquisitions, left the company for personal reasons and is going back to the United States, one of the sources said. [ID:nSIN389544]
The organization appointed Stewart Macbeth as managing director, DTCC, and general manager of the Trade Information Warehouse. Macbeth will be based in DTCC's London office.
Macbeth was most recently managing director, global head of operations risk and business architecture at UBS (
The full-service commercial bank appointed Frank Besignano as business development manager at its private client banking office in Staten Island. Most recently, Besignano served as a retail market executive at Sovereign Bancorp Inc SOV.N (formerly Independence Community Bank.)
The specialist investment bank, which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ambrian Capital Plc AMBN.L, appointed Peter Davey to its mining team.
Davey, who was most recently managing director of Barnard, Jacobs, Mellet (UK) Ltd in London, will be responsible for expanding Ambrian's equity research coverage of the mining sector.
The credit-specialist asset manager appointed Folkert Jan van der Veer as senior credit analyst. He joins Cairn from Dresdner Kleinwort where he was responsible for credit research coverage of European financial institutions. (Compiled by Manasi Phadke in Bangalore, and Juan Lagorio in New York, additional reporting by Svea Herbst-Bayliss)
