Yen and dollar rise as taste for risk fades
2009-07-07 16:26:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Aug 13 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Wed, Aug 12 2009
Tue, Aug 11 2009
A staff at an exchange office updates the currency exchange rates displayed on its window in front of Royal Castle at Old Town in Warsaw June 4, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Kacper Pempel
Tue  EDT
Sterling fell as weak industrial output data reinforced doubts about a UK recovery, and the euro retreated, approaching $1.39 after having climbed above $1.40 following data showing a surprise increase in German factory orders.
When risk aversion rises, investors often cut holdings of stocks and higher-yield currencies and buy back the yen and dollars that were used to finance the trades.
"We've been getting very mixed signals, with some positive data and some very poor data, so it's extremely difficult to pinpoint direction," said Fabian Eliasson, vice president of currency sales at Mizuho Corporate Bank in New York.
"As a result, people are backing out of high-yield assets and into the yen and dollar. Now, the focus will turn to corporate earnings as the main driver for the market."
The dollar fell 0.6 percent at 94.72 yen while the euro fell 1.1 percent to 131.81 yen and 0.4 percent to $1.3914, according to Reuters data.
Sterling shed 0.9 percent to $1.6119 as data showed UK manufacturing output fell 0.5 percent in May, confounding expectations for a rise.
"The risk is clearly that the 'green shoots' are turning dry," said Michael Klawitter, senior currency strategist at Dresdner Kleinwort in Frankfurt.
EARNINGS, G8
Traders are bracing for second-quarter U.S. corporate earnings, which will be released in coming weeks. Analysts said poor results, especially from financial institutions, would likely crank up dollar demand.
"If bank earnings disappoint in any way or the S&P breaks crucial levels, traders will probably start reducing long positions in (high-risk currencies) and the dollar could be bid more," said Chris Turner, currency strategist at ING in London.
Analysts were also keeping an eye on this week's Group of Eight leaders summit that starts in Italy on Wednesday.
China, Russia and Brazil have said they will push their view that the world needs to start seeking a new global reserve currency as an alternative to the dollar, though they admitted such a shift would take time.
U.S. President Barack Obama and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin did not discuss oil prices or the dollar in talks in Moscow on Tuesday, according to a U.S. official.
(Additional reporting by Nick Olivari; Editing by James Dalgleish)
