TOPWRAP 7-More US consumer worries as Germany boosts hopes
2009-07-07 16:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Talk of another U.S. stimulus plan and data showing American consumers falling behind on their bills underscored worries about the global economy on Tuesday, overshadowing an upturn in German manufacturing orders that provided a glimmer of hope.
Soaring U.S. unemployment and a shrinking economy drove delinquencies on credit-card debt and home equity loans to all-time highs in the first quarter, the American Bankers Association said. [ID:nN07299679]
"The biggest driver is job losses," bankers' association chief economist James Chessen said. "Unfortunately, we're going to see higher job losses in the next year, and I expect elevated delinquencies."
Data showed orders in Germany, Europe's largest economy, rose at the strongest monthly pace in nearly two years in May, but economists said the yearly comparison would remain weak for some time yet. [ID:nL78809]
"This underscores expectations that we have the worst behind us. However, we shouldn't celebrate too much: If we stay on the current level, we would still have negative (annual) rates up until the end of the year," said HSBC Trinkaus economist Lothar Hessler.
The talk of a second stimulus plan added to concerns that the economy is not recovering as quickly as had been hoped, and investors sent U.S. stocks to their lowest levels in more than two months [.N] on worries about upcoming quarterly earnings.
"The name of the game is to move from a policy-driven recovery, which we have now ... to a self-sustaining growth," Gurria said in an interview. But that remains a big leap, he said before leaders of nations that produce 90 percent of world gross domestic product meet in Italy starting on Wednesday.
"You go headfirst into nosedive if you do not have the structures that hold up self-sustaining growth. It's not there; it's as simple as that," said Gurria, who heads the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a club of mostly wealthy nations. [nLAG003586]
China, Russia and Brazil will use the summit of the Group of Eight to push their view that the world needs a new global reserve currency as an alternative to the dollar. [ID:nL741542]
U.S. House of Representatives Majority Leader Steny Hoyer said Washington should be open to the possibility of a second stimulus package to further boost the economy, echoing a comment in Singapore by an economic adviser to President Barack Obama. [nSP535668]
"I think we need to be open to whether we need additional action," Hoyer told reporters, although he said it was too early to know whether the $787 billion, two-year package approved in February was having the desired impact. [nN07219394]
A European Commission study warned that Europe's economy might shrink further due to the economic crisis if the right policies were not implemented and if Europe failed to resolve problems in the financial industry. [nL6314194]
Governments around the world have poured trillions of dollars into combating the worst recession since the 1930s Depression, but unemployment is steadily rising and a recovery is likely to be drawn out.
Miguel Angel Fernandez Ordonez, a member of the European Central Bank's Governing Council, said that despite a large level of uncertainty, the global economy is expected to return to growth at the beginning of 2010.
"Today, most of the institutions which produce forecasts agree the global economic recovery will be seen at the start of next year. But the levels of uncertainty are enormous," he said. [nMAB000217]
News from Asia painted a sunnier picture. China's economy should grow 7-7.5 percent year-on-year in the second quarter, picking up to 8 percent in the third and 9 percent in the final three months of the year, said Zhang Jianhua, head of the Chinese central bank's research department. [ID:nSHA7950]
As China gains pace, Premier Wen Jiabao and his economic advisers agreed at a recent meeting that Beijing would stick to its moderately easy monetary policy stance in the next few months, an informed source told Reuters. [nPEK25371] (Reporting by Reuters correspondents around the world; Writing by Patricia Zengerle, editing by Gerald E. McCormick, Tim Dobbyn and Leslie Gevirtz)
