Japan security environment tougher than ever: PM Noda
2012-10-14 07:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda told his navy on Sunday that Japan's security environment was tougher than ever, underscoring tension with China over a territorial dispute and the threat of North Korea's weapons programs.
"It is needless to say that the security environment surrounding Japan is getting tougher than ever," Noda told about 8,000 servicemen and women, mostly from the navy, from aboard the destroyer Kurama.
Noda, supreme commander of Japan's military known as the Self-Defence Forces (SDF), was speaking during a fleet review off Kanagawa prefecture, south of Tokyo.
His remarks were relayed to ships gathered in the area -- about 40 vessels, including the U.S. cruiser Shiloh, were present for the review. About 47,000 U.S. troops are based in Japan.
Noda braved occasional bouts of drizzle to review destroyers, submarines, minesweepers and fuel supply vessels that passed in front of him while SDF helicopters and P-3C anti-submarine patrol planes flew overhead.
The disputed group of islands, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, are located near rich fishing grounds and potentially huge oil and gas reserves.
Patrol vessels from Japan and China have been keeping a wary watch on each other in the East China Sea near the islets, raising concerns that an unintended collision or other incident could develop into a broader clash.
Japan's Coast Guard had planned to send one of its patrol ships to the naval review, but it canceled the vessel's participation because the heightened tensions prompted it to allocate more ships to the area.
Japan is also wary of North Korea's nuclear and missile projects, with its territory lying within the range of Pyongyang's missiles.
North Korea has conducted three rocket tests since 2006 for what Pyongyang says are satellite launches, though Japan and Western countries suspect they are intended to test missiles. The North has also conducted two nuclear tests.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
With an aggressive rogue state right next door, PM Noda is exactly right. He should be looking at increasing the size of the JSDF. The rest of SEA is reaching the same conclusion. Many of them ¨C even relatively poor states like Indonesia ¨C are increasing their defences against that rogue state.
Oct 14, 20129:36am EDT--
Oct 14, 20129:59am EDT--
The Japanese government triggered the world wars in Asia in early 20th century. Nowadays, it remains aggressive to defeat its neighbouring nations both militarily and politically. Japan has strong naval force and air force with advanced technological support. It claims that the disputed islands belong to Japan. It told Mongolia and other irrelative counties on the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA)that those disputed Islands not belong to Korea and China respectively. It triggers the Island dispute and war crisis but it underestimates the reactions of the neighbouring nations. The Japanese government should be accused of threatening the security environment and the regional peace.
Oct 15, 20126:52am EDT--
