More U.S. consumer worries as Germany boosts hopes
2009-07-07 11:53:00.0
(Reuters) - An upturn in German manufacturing orders provided a glimmer of hope for global economic recovery on Tuesday, although more bad news about U.S. consumers and slumping oil prices underscored worries.
Soaring U.S. unemployment and a shrinking economy drove delinquencies on credit-card debt and home equity loans to all-time highs in the first quarter as a record number of consumers fell behind on their bills, the American Bankers Association said.
"The biggest driver is job losses," Bankers' Association Chief Economist James Chessen said.
"Unfortunately, we're going to see higher job losses in the next year, and I expect elevated delinquencies."
Data showed orders in Germany, Europe's largest economy, rose at the strongest monthly pace in nearly two years in May, but economists said the yearly comparison would remain weak for some time yet.
"This underscores expectations that we have the worst behind us. However, we shouldn't celebrate too much: If we stay on the current level, we would still have negative (annual) rates up until the end of the year," said HSBC Trinkaus economist Lothar Hessler.
Investors remained cautious, however, after numerous warnings from policymakers that global economic recovery was still far from secure and with frustration growing over banks' still-sluggish lending to businesses and consumers.
Stocks slipped in New York, as worries about upcoming quarterly earnings and another day of declines in crude oil prices drove down energy shares. .N European shares also slipped in afternoon trading, tracking the U.S. slump
"The name of the game is to move from a policy-driven recovery, which we have now ... to a self-sustaining growth," Gurria said in an interview. But that remains a big leap, he said in remarks before leaders of nations that produce 90 percent of world gross domestic product meet in Italy this week.
"You go headfirst into nosedive if you do not have the structures that hold up self-sustaining growth. It's not there; it's as simple as that," said Gurria, who heads the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a club of mostly wealthy nations.
Words of caution also came from a member of the panel advising U.S. President Barack Obama on tackling the economic crisis. "We should be planning on a contingency basis for a second round of stimulus," Laura D'Andrea Tyson told a panel in Singapore, noting that February's $787 billion package was too small in her view.
And a European Commission study warned that Europe's economy might shrink further due to the economic crisis if the right policies were not implemented and if Europe failed to resolve problems in the financial industry.
"There is also a risk that potential growth rates in the post-crisis era will be permanently lower than their pre-crisis levels either as a direct consequence of the crisis ... or due to inappropriate policy responses," the report said.
Governments around the world have poured trillions of dollars into combating the worst recession since the 1930s Depression, but unemployment is steadily rising and a recovery is likely to be drawn out.
Miguel Angel Fernandez Ordonez, a member of the European Central Bank's Governing Council, said that despite a large level of uncertainty, the global economy is expected to return to growth at the beginning of 2010.
"Today, most of the institutions which produce forecasts agree the global economic recovery will be seen at the start of next year. But the levels of uncertainty are enormous," he said.
News from Asia painted a sunnier picture. China's economy should grow 7-7.5 percent year-on-year in the second quarter, picking up to 8 percent in the third quarter and 9 percent in the final three months of the year, said Zhang Jianhua, head of the Chinese central bank's research department.
As China gains pace, Premier Wen Jiabao and his economic advisers agreed at a recent meeting that Beijing would stick to its moderately easy monetary policy stance in the next few months, an informed source told Reuters.
(Reporting by Reuters correspondents around the world; Writing by Patricia Zengerle, editing by Gerald E. McCormick)
