Tech distributors look to Asia as U.S., Europe falter
2009-07-07 09:57:00.0
Tech distributors look to Asia as U.S., Europe falter | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Tech distributors look to Asia as U.S., Europe falter
Mon, Jul 6 2009
Mon, Jul 6 2009
Wed, Jul 1 2009
A 12-inch wafer is displayed at Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company (TSMC) in Xinchu January 9, 2007. Credit: Reuters/Richard Chung
Tue  EDT
Even though some analysts say they are seeing signs of a recovery in technology spending around the world, several of the largest distributors of electronic components and computer products -- Ingram Micro (
), Avnet Inc (
Hammered by a free fall in sales and margins in Europe and North America, these firms are now making small moves into Asia, a highly splintered market dominated by local players.
As of now, around a fifth of their revenue comes from Asia, with the rest coming from North America and Europe.
"Asia, specifically China, is the one place where there is clear demand growth taking place - I believe this is where our growth will be the fastest," Avnet's chief executive, Roy Vallee, told Reuters in an interview.
For rival Arrow, Asia will grow two to three times faster than the rest of the world, Chief Financial Officer Paul Reilly said.
"We could actually see a point in time 10 years from now where in fact Asia-Pacific could be something like 30 percent of our mix," Reilly said.
In the quarter ended April 4, Arrow's sales in the region grew 13 percent from a year earlier, accounting for 18 percent of its total revenue.
Information technology shipments though global distribution channels in Asia are expected to show single-digit growth in the June quarter on a constant currency basis, compared with a 10 percent drop in European shipments, brokerage Raymond James said a recent research note.
Avnet, which entered China in 1995, gets almost 70 percent of its Asia-Pacific revenue from the country.
Last quarter, Asia-Pacific sales for Avnet fell 9 percent from a year earlier to form 20 percent of total revenue.
"Ingram Micro has been aggressively pursuing the distribution business in Asia-Pacific given shrinking margins in the U.S.," Credit Suisse analyst Robert Cheng wrote in a note to clients.
The company recently acquired Vantex Technology Distribution Ltd, an Auckland-based distributor of retail point-of-sale, barcoding, mobile and wireless technology, from ProvencoCadmus Ltd PVO.NZ.
For now, the companies are making small moves into Asia.
"It's a very fragmented and diverse market. The majority of the markets is small business," Gartner analyst Tiffani Bova said.
Another challenge for these companies in markets such as China and India is that they need more local sales offices to gain market share, but the sales locations are often far-flung with sparse infrastructure.
Smaller players are taking advantage of this void, leading to more fragmentation of the market, analysts said.
) is one of the local players giving competition to distributors. Taiwan's WPG Holdings (
"Short-term it's going to be small steps," said Longbow Research analyst Shawn Harrison.
For someone making a foray in Asia, the initial margins would be typically lower as they do not have the scale to generate effective returns, Harrison said.
While the later half of the year could see a few small acquisitions by the U.S.-based tech distributors, there may not be any "windfall acquisitions" in the region, unless financial markets loosen up enough to signal signs of a global recovery, he said.
(Editing by Mike Miller, Himani Sarkar)
