Top China delegate pulls out of IMF meet amid islands row
2012-10-10 07:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The International Monetary Fund said on Wednesday that China's central bank governor will not lead the Chinese delegation at the IMF's semi-annual meeting this week, in what appeared to be a snub to host Japan.
Zhou Xiaochuan's failure to attend the meeting comes after relations between China and Japan have slumped to their worst in years over their competing claims to sovereignty of some islands in the East China Sea.
The row has been marked by violent protests and calls for boycotts of Japanese products in China. Japanese car makers, including Toyota Motor, later reported a tumble in auto sales in the world's biggest car market.
"We were informed two days ago that Governor Zhou's schedule might require him to cancel his lecture in Tokyo," an IMF spokeswoman said. "It has now been confirmed that his deputy Yi Gang will represent him."
"The Tokyo meeting is an extremely important international summit," Japanese Finance Minister Koriki Jojima said at a press conference. "It is deeply regrettable that the representatives of the (Chinese) authorities are not participating."
The IMF comments confirm a report on Tuesday by Chinese state news agency Xinhua that China's delegation will not be led by its most senior finance officials.
According to Chinese protocol, only the most senior officials usually lead such trips. China's delegation will be led by Yi Gang, vice head of the People's Bank of China, and Vice Finance Minister Zhu Guangyao, Xinhua said.
The disputed group of islands, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, are located near rich fishing grounds and potentially huge oil-and-gas reserves. Taiwan also asserts its sovereignty over the uninhabited islets.
Japan is scheduled to host the IMF and World Bank annual meetings for the first time in nearly half a century. About 20,000 people are expected to attend the events, which end on Sunday, making it one of the world's largest international conferences.
"If he (Zhou) is not coming, it is regrettable that a representative of the Chinese authorities does not participate in this important international meeting in Tokyo. At all events, Japan-China economic relationship is very important and Japan will continue to communicate with China from a broader standpoint," said a Japanese government official.
Earlier this week, Xinhua also reported that China's state-owned banks Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), Bank of China, China Construction Bank and Agricultural Bank of China, will not attend the IMF and the World Bank meetings.
Tim Condon, head of Asian research at ING, said Zhou's absence was a way for Beijing to express its displeasure over the islands row and would not have a material impact on the country.
"It's very symbolic and attention grabbing, but doesn't really inflict any economic harm," he said. "It would be very easy for China to escalate the matter if they wanted to and inflict economic damage."
Tokyo and Beijing have traded increasingly sharp words in the dispute, which has seen both countries send patrol boats to waters near the disputed islands, raising concerns that an unintended collision or other incident could escalate into a broader clash.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda said in late September that his country will not compromise on the islands, saying they were "an inherent part of our territory in light of history and also under international law."
(Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneka in TOKYO: Koh Gui Qing in BEIJING; Editing by Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
cry babies¡­. pamper them everyone, they need attention all the times¡­.
Oct 10, 20124:38am EDT--
Is China governed by children? This is so petty it is funny. Let the ¡®top China delegates¡¯ stay away. Nobody will miss them, the world can get along just fine without them, and they only make themselves look stupid.
Oct 10, 20127:39am EDT--
Good news. Not olnly does the CCP endevour to eliminate any friends, it also now seems to be determined to make enemies. And @spacetime. Japan does not stand alone. Your attitude towards the ¡®little countries¡¯ is no different than ministers from China who have said similiar things. You look down on everyone. Arrogant, haughty and not worth dealing with. China¡¯s foreign minister Yang Jiechi, facing a barrage of complaints about his country¡¯s behaviour in the region (asia-pacific). ¡°China is a big country and other countries are small countries and that is just a fact.¡± See what I¡¯m saying. This is why the CCP has no place at the table with others.
Oct 11, 20121:36am EDT--
