Rwandan leader urges G8 to consult poor nations more
2009-07-06 14:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Rwandan President Paul Kagame urged leaders of the Group of Eight on Monday to consult poor nations more, saying some in the developing world were skeptical of economic recipes handed down by rich countries.
"I invite those in the leadership of the G8 to recognize that others have something to offer, especially on the issues that affect their own lives," Kagame said in a speech to the G8 Africa Business Forum.
"Together we need to develop broad and more effective consultative processes that genuinely integrate our vision of our own destiny into your plan," he said.
African government officials and business leaders are meeting in London before G8 world powers begin a three-day summit in the central Italian city of L'Aquila on Wednesday.
"Some think that the rhetoric of free markets is a cover for protecting the commercial interests of wealthy nations. They see that we in poor nations are forced to eliminate subsidies even as you subsidize your own sensitive sectors," he said.
"They see that China and India ... are the ones managing unprecedented growth and consequently eradicating poverty at the highest rates the world has ever seen," he said.
Zambian Vice-President George Kunda also talked of China's growing influence in Africa, warning Western countries they risked losing out in the race for resources.
"We are exploring for oil in Zambia. If you (the West) do not come forward, the Chinese are there," he told the conference.
Beijing and Chinese companies have pledged tens of billions of dollars to Africa in loans and investments, mostly to secure raw materials, and China-Africa trade has surged.
"When you go to the traditional partners (to seek a loan), the issue of conditionality comes in. They will talk about governance, human rights, corruption. With the Chinese, there are hardly any conditions that they put," Kunda said.
"There must be timeliness in intervention, there is a need to introduce some flexible mechanism to support countries going through the painful process of transition," he told the conference.
(Reporting by Carolyn Cohn and Adrian Croft; Editing by Richard Williams)
