UPDATE 3-MOVES-Bank of America, Citigroup, Marsh, Cinven
2009-07-06 16:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Monday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com
Bank of America Merrill Lynch has appointed Steven Baronoff, a former Merrill executive, chairman of global mergers and acquisitions. The bank has named Stefan Selig, former vice chairman of global mergers and acquisitions, executive vice chairman of global corporate and investment banking.
To read more, double click on [ID:nN06276965]
) has hired Eric Noll as executive vice president of its transaction services business. Noll, who will join July 13, comes from Susquehanna International Group.
Law firms Bingham McCutchen and McKee Nelson have signed a letter of intent to combine under the Bingham McCutchen name. The combination will bring together 1,000 lawyers from Bingham's 12 offices in the United States, United Kingdom and Asia and 120 from McKee Nelson's offices in New York and Washington.
The law firm Arent Fox LLP said it hired Maidie Oliveau as counsel in its Los Angeles office, adding a West Coast presence to its sports practice. Oliveau, 55, established LawSports, a boutique firm, in Los Angeles in 1990, and has since 1997 been an arbitrator for the Court of Arbitration for Sport.
London-based private equity firm Cinven named Hugh Langmuir managing partner, replacing Robin Hall, who has been named executive chairman.
KBS Capital Markets Group, an affiliate of private equity real estate company KBS Realty Advisors, hired Greg McGowan as a regional vice president responsible for New York state, upper New Jersey and southern Connecticut. McGowan was previously at Lincoln Financial Distributors.
AlixPartners, a restructuring, consulting and financial advisory firm, hired David Head as a managing director in its information management services practice. Head, based in Detroit, joins from Huron Consulting Group.
The independent investment bank said Marshall Cohen and Bruce Rohde were elected to the company's board on July 2.
), TD Ameritrade AMTD.O and TriMas Corp TRS.N.
The company said David Bell, who specializes in providing financial restructuring and advisory services, has joined the firm. Prior to joining Capstone, Bell was a managing director in the workout and restructuring group of Deutsche Bank (
Wilson Feng, a former senior banker for Merrill Lynch, has been picked to run the China's newly established $1.46 billion nuclear investment fund, two sources briefed on Feng's new job said.
To read more, double click on [ID:nHKG55100]
The bank named Shengman Zhang as chairman of Asia Pacific, Stephen Bird and Shirish Apte as joint chief executives of Asia Pacific, and Bill Mills and Alberto Verme as joint chief executives of Europe, Middle East and Africa.
Zhang, formerly a managing director at the World Bank, joined Citigroup in 2006 as vice chairman of global banking and chairman of the public sector group.
Bird was most recently the chief executive for North Asia. Apte moves to Asia Pacific after serving as the chief executive of Citi's Central and Eastern European region.
Mills was most recently the chief executive for Western Europe, Middle East and Africa. Verme was most recently co-head of global investment banking, based in Dubai. [ID:nHKG271322]
Nicholson is currently chairman of Marsh's middle market business in Scotland, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. He will undertake his new responsibilities in addition to his current role.
The independent specialist investment boutique appointed Raymond Foo as a senior analyst. Foo would be based in Hong Kong, where Veritas is establishing a local operation, the company said. Foo joins from Brevan Howard Asset Management.
The firm has appointed John Crozier as it new global head of technology, media, telecom and IP, effective immediately.
Crozier is a partner at Linklaters since 2000. He takes over from Tim Schwarz, who retired from the firm on April 30. MARKEL INTERNATIONAL LTD
The specialty property and casualty insurer, a unit of Markel Corp (
), has appointed Philippe Tamwelius as a senior liability underwriter for Markel International Sweden. He will be based in Markel's Stockholm office.
