Rio sells U.S. food packaging unit for $1.2 billion
2009-07-06 17:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Jul 6 2009
In this file photo Rio Tinto's Chief Executive Officer Tom Albanese (R) listens to new chairman Jan du Plessis answer a question during a news conference after the company's annual general meeting in Sydney April 20, 2009. Rio agreed on Monday to sell its Americas food-packaging assets for $1.2 billion to packaging group Bemis Co Inc, raising yet more much-needed cash for the indebted miner. Credit: Reuters/Tim Wimborne
Mon  EDT
Rio Tinto, which only last week raised $15.2 billion in one of the world's biggest rights issues, will sell its Food Americas flexible packaging assets to U.S.-based Bemis for $1 billion cash, with the rest in equity.
"Any packaging assets that Rio is getting rid of on its balance sheet is good," Olivia Ker, a research analyst at Merrill Lynch, said after the news. Monday's announcement takes Rio's expected proceeds from asset sales this year to $3.7 billion, and analysts say Rio would be encouraged to sell other noncore assets in the coming days.
"The rest of the packaging business is certainly on the cards, the rest of the coal division is still on the cards," Ker added.
The deal moves Rio Tinto closer to extricating itself from near-disastrous consequences of its 2007 acquisition of Canadian aluminum and packaging company Alcan. Bought near the height of the commodities boom, Alcan left Rio Tinto with $38 billion in debt. Rio Tinto had hoped to repay some of the debt by quickly selling the packaging assets, but the global financial crisis delayed that plan as asset prices tumbled.
"The transaction multiple is reasonable, with Bemis dramatically increasing its critical mass," said Ghansham Panjabi, an analyst with Robert W. Baird & Co.
"But, more importantly, this will act as a lightning rod for further consolidation in the (packaging) industry."
Rio Tinto said Alcan's remaining non-aluminum assets were still on the auction block, with their book value likely to be written down ahead of their sale.
) was still in talks to buy some of the remaining packaging assets from Rio, which Citigroup estimates could fetch more than $2 billion.
Rio Tinto shares closed down 7 percent in London on Monday, outpacing the British mining index .FTNMX1770, which was hit by a slide in metals prices. Bemis shares closed up 5 percent at $25.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
'SOLID VALUE'
"The sale of the Food Americas division is the first significant step in reducing the asset portfolio acquired with Alcan," Rio Tinto Chief Financial Officer Guy Elliott said in a statement. "The transaction represents solid value given the challenging financial environment."
Analyst Michael Rawlinson at Liberum Capital in London said the price for Food Americas was decent. "We believe the market has been expecting $2 billion-$3 billion for the entire Alcan packaging business, therefore we consider the price Rio has received for U.S. food packaging stand-alone looks attractive."
The assets being sold by Rio include 23 facilities, more than 90 percent of which are located in the United States, Canada and Mexico. The business posted 2008 sales of more than $1.5 billion.
"We thought it was really important for Bemis to stay an investment grade company, which really set the stage for what we could afford to go after," Theisen said in an interview. "These assets fit -- they're very complementary to our current business, operate in an area that we're familiar with, and we targeted these assets from the beginning."
The deal, which is expected to close by the end of 2009, will generate annualized savings of $65 million for Bemis and boost its earnings per share beginning in 2010. Bemis also expects a tax benefit of around $100 million from the deal.
"The synergies here are the key," JP Morgan analyst Claudia Shank Hueston said in a research note, who said the price was at the high end of her expectations. "At just over 4 percent of sales, the $65 million target is higher than what we have seen in many other flexible packaging transactions, but given the significant business overlap, at first blush, the target does not sound wholly unreasonable."
(Additional reporting by Eric Onstad in London and Euan Rocha in Toronto; editing by Peter Galloway, Tim Dobbyn, Gary Hill)
