FACTBOX: Participants and agenda of G8 summit in Italy
2009-07-06 14:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Leaders from the Group of Eight major industrial nations and the main developing economies will hold talks from July 8-10 in the central Italian city of L'Aquila.
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi says it will group leaders representing 90 percent of the global economy, with 40 countries and international organizations expected to attend.
WEDNESDAY, JULY 8TH
G8 - The first day of the meeting will group the leaders of the Group of Eight nations -- United States, Britain, Germany, Italy, France, Russia, Canada and Japan -- plus European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso and current EU president Sweden.
They will issue a statement on the situation of the world economy, exit strategies from the financial crisis, climate change and development, particularly in Africa. They will discuss a charter for global financial regulation, dubbed "global standards" by the Italian presidency.
There will be a separate political statement following a dinner for G8 heads of government, expected to mention the situation in the Middle East, Iran, North Korea, piracy off Somalia, terrorism and nuclear proliferation.
G5 - Separately, the leaders of the Group of Five nations -- China, India, Brazil, South Africa and Mexico -- are due to hold parallel talks on the first day and issue a statement.
THURSDAY, JULY 9TH
G14 - The Group of Eight and Group of Five will hold joint talks, with Egypt attending as special guest of the Italian presidency.
A first joint statement by the two groups, dubbed the G14, is expected to focus on the response to the financial crisis, efforts to break a deadlock in the Doha Round of world trade negotiations, and relations between the two groups.
At the request of China, the G14 may discuss proposals for a new global reserve currency as an alternative to the dollar.
MAJOR ECONOMIES FORUM (MEF) - Thursday will also see a meeting of U.S. President Barack Obama's initiative to tackle climate change, the 17-member Major Economies Forum (MEF).
This includes the G8 and the G5, as well as Australia, Indonesia, South Korea and the European Union. Its members account for roughly three quarters of global emissions.
The United Nations will also attend the talks, while Denmark will attend as the host of December's U.N. climate change talks in Copenhagen. The MEF will issue a statement on climate change.
FRIDAY, JULY 10
G14 + AFRICAN NATIONS - On the final day, talks will be broadened to include African nations. In addition to South Africa and Egypt, the meeting will also include Angola, Nigeria, Senegal, Algeria and Libya, whose leader Muammar Gaddafi currently holds the chair of the African Union.
Discussions will focus on aid, food security and progress toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Talks will include the head of the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), International Energy Agency (IEA), World Trade Organization (WTO) and International Labour Organization (ILO), World Food Program (WFP), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
The Italian G8 presidency will give a final news conference, estimated to be at 11 a.m local time (0900 GMT), when other national leaders may also hold individual news briefings.
PROTEST - Anti-globalization protesters are due to hold a demonstration in the city of L'Aquila, but this is expected to take place once most of the heads of government have left. There could be wildcat protests nearby or in Rome and a demonstration against a U.S. airbase in the northern Italian town of Vicenza on July 4 is also being presented as an anti-G8 event.
