EU's Barroso seeks two degrees Celsius pact at G8
2009-07-06 00:34:00.0
(Reuters) - European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said on Monday he will press the United States and other nations to limit global warming to no more than 2 degrees Celsius at this week's Group of Eight summit.
The United States, Japan, Russia and Canada have yet to be convinced that a 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) limit -- favored by European G8 nations Germany, Britain, France and Italy -- is the necessary threshold beyond which climate change will reach danger levels.
"We go to L'Aquila with a number of key objectives. We will insist on the need to respect the 2 degrees Celsius target," Barroso told a news conference ahead of the summit in the Italian city devastated by an earthquake in April.
"This in turn means that developed countries must reduce emissions by at least 80 percent in the same period and underpin these efforts through robust and comparable mid-term reductions," he said.
A substantive MEF agreement this week would go a long way in defining a new U.N. climate treaty due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December, to replace the Kyoto Protocol.
"Developed countries have a special responsibility to take the lead. But this is not going to be enough," Barroso said.
"The emerging economies, for example, where growth in emissions is surging, must also join in the effort. We must all do our part, in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities."
Last year, industrialized nations in the G8 agreed at a summit in Japan to a "vision" of halving world greenhouse gases by 2050, but developing countries including China, India and Brazil did not adopt that 2050 goal. G8 sources said it was unclear whether MEF nations would reach an agreement this week and envoys were scheduled to hold a special pre-summit meeting on Tuesday aimed at ironing out differences.
"There are still some very thorny issues to be resolved before Wednesday on climate and we need to see how we can get an agreement with developing countries," one senior G8 source said.
Climate change threatens higher seas and more floods and droughts. For example, the Amazon rainforest may die at 4 degrees Celsius or more warming, scientists say.
