BUY OR SELL - LCD shares: More gains or is the boom over?
2009-07-06 05:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Leading LCD makers have jumped in the last few months on stronger-than-expected consumer demand for flat-screen TVs, outperforming gains in the electronics sector.
The display industry is recovering from one of its worst downturns as billions of dollars from China's stimulus package and resilient North American markets help boost demand for televisions and computers.
South Korea's LG Display Co Ltd (
), the world's No 2 player, has risen more than 60 percent so far this year and third-ranked Taiwan's AU Optronics Corp (
), the world leader in LCD screens and TV sets, added to the bullish tone on Monday when it forecast strong second-quarter profits. Analysts attributed this to likely high margins in LCD TVs. [ID:nSEO324424]
But with some concerns over a likely oversupply in the sector later in 2009 as makers from Samsung to smaller Taiwanese rivals ramp up capacity, can the industry still shine in the second half?
SAMSUNG, LG DISPLAY TO GAIN
LCD names linked to TV powerhouses, such as Samsung and LG Display, are set to gain further, analysts and fund managers said. On top of their strong customer base, South Korean makers are also better positioned to secure glass than Taiwanese rivals hit by shortages in raw materials.
"Consumer spending is holding up in key markets such as the United States and China," said Kim Hyung-wook, a fund manager at KB Asset Management.
Japan's LCD-related shares such as Sharp Corp (
Many in the sector are betting on sustained strength, pointing to healthy sales of LCD TVs in North America, as well as a boom in purchases of TVs in China, helped by government subsidies.
Last month, research firm DisplaySearch raised its forecast for 2009 LCD TV sales, predicting a 21 percent rise in shipments. [ID:nSEO106017]
"The glass shortage can linger into the fourth quarter and LCD prices should continue rising until September," said Nam Dae-jong at Midas Asset Management.
The sales outlook beyond the seasonally strong third quarter was uncertain, analysts said.
"Visibility is still low for the fourth quarter, although a collapse like last year's (fourth quarter) is unlikely," said Jae H. Lee, a Daiwa analyst. "There will be a slowdown, and LCD companies may lower plant utilisation again."
Nomura analyst James Kim has a "reduce" rating on LG Display and AU, predicting swift deterioration in the fourth quarter.
"While LCD TV buyers have increased their focus on factors like picture quality, pricing remains a critical element in influencing purchasing decisions," research firm iSuppli said.
ISuppli pointed out TV sales had softened in June when pricing deals offered in April and May disappeared. "Once the price deals went away, demand went away." (Editing by Marie-France Han and Anshuman Daga)
