Nikkei dips in light trade, awaits earnings, data
2009-07-05 23:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average fell 1.6 percent on Monday with investors lacking the conviction to push shares higher after the Nikkei's surge to an eight-month peak last month.
) , Japan's second-biggest retailer, initially fell by more than 1 percent after the Nikkei business daily said it likely logged a 2 billion yen ($20.83 million) net loss for the three months to May, but later shed its losses to edge higher. [ID:nT265353]
) and other shippers fell after the Baltic Exchange's main sea fright index .BADI, which tracks rates to ship dry commodities, dropped more than 4 percent on Friday, dented by softer demand for goods. [ID:nL3440007]
Moves in the Nikkei were subdued, with investors awaiting upcoming economic data and corporate earnings for hints on direction, market analysts said. "There are few reasons to actively sell shares when their prices take a dip because the economy is improving, albeit gradually," said Hideyuki Ishiguro, a supervisor in Okasan Securities' investment strategy department. But with U.S. and Japanese company earnings to be announced over the next few weeks, there is no compelling reason to chase share prices higher at this point, Ishiguro said.
Alcoa's earnings could be a focal point, since the company's performance is seen as offering hints on broader economic conditions, said Yumi Nishimura, a deputy general manger at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
Another focal point in the near term will be the U.S. Institute for Supply Management's non-manufacturing index due later on Monday, market analysts said.
lost 154.80 points to 9,661.27, below its 25-day moving average, now around 9,800.
The Nikkei has lost some momentum after reaching an eight-month high of 10,170.82 in June, but is still nearly 40 percent above a trough hit in March.
Trading volume was light, with 0.8 billion shares changing hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, down from last week's morning average of just below 1 billion shares.
), which rose 1.4 percent to 283 yen.
The chemicals and cement manufacturer edged higher after Daiwa Institute of Research lifted its rating to "2" from "3", citing a marked improvement in its sales, driven by a recovery in demand in China and the rest of Asia.
Investors seem reluctant to chase share prices higher at this point, and are probably looking to sell on any rallies, said Daisuke Uno, chief strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp. Some recent data including the Bank of Japan's tankan survey of business sentiment released last week may be making investors cautious, Uno said.
The tankan showed that confidence among big manufacturers improved from a record low hit three months ago. But it also showed that big firms plan to cut capital spending by 9.4 percent in the financial year to March 2010, a bigger cut than the market had expected. [JPBCLG=ECI]
Nishimura at Daiwa Securities SMBC said Sunday's election result by itself was unlikely to be a direct trading factor for the Nikkei. But some investors may start to take a wait-and-see stance until the general election takes place, she said.
Shipping firms retreated, with Nippon Yusen falling 4.2 percent to 393 yen and Kawasaki Kisen (
Retailer Aeon was 0.1 percent higher at 896 yen after having fallen as low as 878 yen. (Additional reporting by Shinichi Saoshiro; Editing by Michael Watson)
