Q+A-Malaysian opposition leader Anwar on trial again
2009-07-05 20:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim will go on trial on sodomy charges on July 8, the second time he has faced what he says are politically motivated allegations of homosexual sex, which is against the law here.
Anwar's first conviction for sodomy came in August 2000, when he was sentenced to nine years in jail. That came on top of a six-year sentence for corruption which began in April 1999.
The case is due to start on July 8, although an evidence discovery process by the defense could delay it. Anwar, 61, has a top legal team and the last, more complex, trials lasted 14 months.
In Malaysia, there is no jury and a single judge sits. If found guilty Anwar could face 20 years in jail.
WILL THERE BE A REPEAT OF MASS PROTESTS?
When Anwar was forced from office in 1998 by then premier Mahathir Mohamad, tens of thousands took to the streets at the height of the Asian financial crisis that crippled Malaysia. Even though the economy is expected to contract by up to 5 percent this year, there has been no mass social unrest.
Despite protests, there is no real groundswell that could turn Malaysia into the next Thailand.
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE OPPOSITION IF ANWAR IS JAILED?
Malaysia's opposition alliance, despite its election successes in 2008 and in recent by-elections, appears to be in one of its periodic bouts of arguing. A row in an Islamist party over whether it could join the government has opened divisions.
Anwar is the glue that holds the sometimes uneasy alliance of Islamists, a mainly ethnic Chinese party and reformers together. If he is sidelined, the government might be able to prize the opposition apart. That would ensure the National Front government, which has ruled for 51 years, would remain in power through elections due in 2013.
WHAT WILL BE THE IMPACT ON THE GOVERNMENT AND NAJIB?
Anyone who believes Anwar is innocent will not change their minds as a result of this trial. The case will likely come down to video footage of Anwar entering an apartment block, disputed DNA evidence and his word against that of his accuser.
The last trial saw a mattress lugged through the court. This one could see a carpet produced as evidence, according to a news portal backed by one of the government parties.
The trial could harden opposition to Prime Minister Najib Razak, who is seen by the opposition as a hard-liner and who they accuse of involvement in the murder of a Mongolian model, which Najib has denied and for which no evidence has been produced.
HOW WILL TRIAL AFFECT ECONOMIC REFORMS?
While the trial is unlikely to have an immediate impact on markets, it could create uncertainty over Najib's plans for reforms. Investors will want to see implementation, which has not matched Malaysia's rhetoric in recent years, and the trial, especially if it is perceived as unfair, could undermine the reform drive.
Those reforms are not likely to boost markets in the short term and Najib faces big economic constraints after years of overspending, including this year's big budget boost.
Malaysia is running one the Asia's largest budget deficits at a projected 7.6 percent of gross domestic product in 2009. Its business model, built on cheap labor, had run out of steam even before the U.S. credit crunch caused the global economic downturn that hit Malaysia's exports.
As a result of steadily rising budget deficits borrowing needs have risen sharply, causing Malaysian bonds to trade wider than Thai bonds, by around 100 basis for 5-year paper.
Malaysia's stock market .KLSE has underperformed emerging Asia this year .MIAPJ0000PUS and portfolio investors withdrew 12.2 billion ringgit in the first quarter of 2009.
WILL MALAYSIA'S IMAGE SUFFER AGAIN?
Likely international condemnation from the U.S. and others over Anwar's trial and negative press cover means Malaysia's overseas image will be hit. Anwar is well-known both in the West and in influential Muslim countries like Turkey and Indonesia.
In 1998, then-U.S. Vice President Al Gore irked Malaysia when he backed Anwar at a regional summit in Kuala Lumpur.
The West is mired in an economic crisis and countries with deep pockets now are led by China, so criticism be more muted.
