China signals will cut off credit to rebalance economy
2013-07-05 07:21:00.0
(Reuters) - China said on Friday it would cut off credit to force consolidation in industries plagued by overcapacity as it seeks to end the economy's dependence on extravagant investment funded by cheap debt.
In a statement from the State Council, or cabinet, Beijing laid out broad plans to ensure banks support the kind of economic rebalancing China's new leadership wants as it looks to focus more on high-end manufacturing.
President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang have flagged for some time that the rapid growth of the past three decades needs to shift down a gear, and analysts said Friday's announcement was a signal that they intended to press on with reforms despite evidence of a sharper-than-expected slowdown.
"The guideline shows China's policymakers will focus more on economic restructuring to stabilize the economy rather than providing more liquidity to support economic growth," said Li Huiyong, an economist at Shenyin Wanguo Securities in Shanghai.
The slowdown in the world's second-largest economy has started to put pressure on some businesses.
On Friday, China Rongsheng Heavy Industries Group (
), China's largest private shipbuilder, appealed for financial help from the government and big shareholders, after cutting its workforce and delaying payments to suppliers.
The State Council said it would ensure credit kept flowing to businesses that it thought had competitive products, but it would work with banks to oversee a gradual winding down of other businesses.
"The government will adopt differentiated policies based on the varied situations in the industries plagued by overcapacity," it said.
Friday's announcement was the latest sign that China's policymakers are determined to bring debt-fuelled expansion under control, after the central bank allowed a cash crunch last month that sent short-term lending rates to record highs.
Ma Tao, an analyst with CEBM Group, an institutional investment research firm in Shanghai, said sectors such as construction materials, steel and aluminum suffered from overcapacity, as well as high debt and financing costs.
"The recent credit crunch also served as a catalyst for their cash flow problems to emerge as liquidity has not been eased," said Ma.
The State Council also said that, in future, so-called wealth management products issued by banks would have to be linked to specific projects, rather than being mixed together with banks' other pools of credit.
Explosive credit growth, particularly in the opaque shadow banking system, is seen by analysts as one of the biggest risks to China's economy, along with a frothy property market and the run-up of debt by local governments.
Underlining the last of those risks, a senior official said on Friday that the government did not know precisely the extent of local governments' debt, and warned that it could be more than previous estimates.
Estimates of local government debt range from Standard Chartered's 15 percent of the country's GDP at end-2012 to Credit Suisse's 36 percent. Fitch put the figure at 25 percent when it downgraded China's sovereign debt rating in April.
"Currently, <according to> nationwide surveys, I think this number will rise," Zhu said, defending the debt as mostly geared toward fuelling infrastructure projects.
(Additional reporting by Shao Xiaoyi and Michael Martina in Beijing, Clement Tan and Umesh Desai in Hong Kong and Ruby Lian in Shanghai; Writing by Alex Richardson; Editing by Simon Cameron-Moore)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Chinese lending rates have subsided since late June¡¯s mild panic, but the Chinese financial system remains short on cash. As a result, weak companies are beginning to fail. The pace of these failures will pick up in the coming months, as the government¡¯s avowed policy is to allow firms within certain industries to fail in order to reduce overcapacity. The Chinese government believes that it is engineering a soft landing, but there is no such thing as a gentle end to a credit bubble. ? Full post with charts, links and images: http://dareconomics.wordpress.com/2013/07/05/around-the-globe-07-05-2013/ ?
Jul 05, 20131:53pm EDT--
Dareconomics have to be daring because Japan¡¯s debt is 230% of its GDP.
Dareconomics have to be daring because Japan¡¯s debt is 230% of its GDP.
The Japanese Government owes most everything to the Japanese people. The Chinese Government, on the other hand, has assumed too much debt for failed businesses previously. So it is not only healthy but necessary for China to do what it is doing ¡ª to instill the healthy lessons that all successful businesses have to learn about risks, and losses. Both China, Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, Koreans should, however, all re-balance their fishing industries by joining hands like OPEC countries successfully joined hands to maximize their profits, in accordance to well acknowledged Nobel Economics Prize Game Theory calculations.
Jul 06, 201312:05am EDT--
