North Korea raises stakes with new missile launch
2009-07-03 22:41:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea test-fired two Scud missiles on Saturday, South Korea's Yonhap news agency said, raising the stakes in its military moves and further stoking regional tensions already high due to its nuclear test in May.
If the report is accurate, the launch would mark an escalation by the reclusive North, which has fired several non-ballistic, short-range missile since the May 25 nuclear test. Reclusive North Korea is barred by United Nations resolutions from firing ballistic missiles such as the Scud.
"North Korea fired two missiles, which appeared to be a Scud type," Yonhap quoted an anonymous South Korean official as saying. "The missiles are estimated to have the range of about 500 km (310 miles)."
A South Korean Defence Ministry source said the North fired two missiles off its east coast that travelled for about 400 km, which would indicate it fired ballistic missiles.
North Korea is thought to have at least 600 Scud-type missiles that include the Hwasong-5, with a range of about 300 km and the Hwasong-6, with a range of about 500 km. (For a factbox on the North's missile arsenal, please click on [ID:nSEO94899]).
Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary Takeo Kawamura issued a statement that said the latest missile launch: "is a serious act of provocation against the security of neighbouring countries, including Japan," Kyodo news agency reported.
COINCIDENTAL TIMING?
In 2006, North Korea test-fired its long range Taepodong-2 missile and other ballistic missiles while the United States celebrated its July 4 Independence Day national holiday.
The South Korean official quoted by Yonhap said the North's latest move appeared to be intended to send a message to the United States.
"The missiles fired on July 2 were analyzed to be part of military drills, but today's missiles seem to have political purposes in that they were fired a day ahead of the U.S. Independence Day," the agency quoted the official as saying.
U.N. sanctions put in place after the North's nuclear test in May were aimed at halting its trade in missiles systems, which are a vital source of foreign currency for the cash-short state.
The U.S. envoy who coordinates sanctions against the North, was in China earlier this week to enlist Beijing's help in getting tougher with North Korea. [ID:nSEO208700]
China is the North's biggest benefactor and trade partner whose help would be essential for an effective sanctions regime, analysts said. [ID:nPEK49793]
Daniel Pinkston, with the International Crisis Group in Seoul, said the test helps the North's military in its ability to fire off missiles and could also be linked to the sanctions.
"The sanctions raised the cost of products such as missile systems. Buyers, who are taking increased risks, want to be assured about the quality and reliability of the product," said Pinkston.
North Korea fired a rocket it said put a satellite into space in April. U.S., South Korean and other officials said the launch was a disguised test of the long-range Taepodong-2 missile, which could hit U.S. territory, and nothing was put into orbit.
The North has raised tension in recent months by saying it has started a programme to enrich uranium, which could give it a second path to a nuclear bomb, threatening to attack the South, and extracting plutonium at its ageing Yongbyon nuclear plant.
Analysts said the moves may be aimed at securing internal support for leader Kim Jong-il, 67 and thought to have suffered a stroke a year ago, as he prepares the ground for his youngest son to succeed him at the head of Asia's only communist dynasty. (Additional reporting by Aiko Hayashi in Tokyo and Seo Eun-kyung in Seoul; Editing by Alex Richardson)
