Rio wraps up rights issue
2009-07-03 05:46:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Jul 3 2009
Fri, Jul 3 2009
Fri, Jul 3 2009
A bull dozer works on a mound of salt at Rio Tinto's Dampier Salt Limited production facility at Port Hedland, about 1,600 km (960 miles) north of Perth, Australia May 27, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Tim Wimborne
Fri  EDT
) wrapped up one of the world's biggest rights issues on Friday, saying its Australian shareholders had taken up 94.76 percent of their entitlements to the new shares.
On Thursday, UK shareholders had taken up 96.97 percent of the deeply discounted, fully underwitten $15.2 billion rights offer, the fifth-biggest on record, putting the indebted Anglo-Australian group on a firmer financial footing.
), J.P. Morgan Cazenove (
), Macquarie (
), Deutsche Bank (
), Morgan Stanley (
), RBS (
The underwriters of the two legs of the rights issue were paid a 2.75 percent fee, or around $420 million in total, and are now also making a substantial extra profit by selling the small portion of shares that were not taken up by existing investors.
In the UK, banks sold the "rump" on Thursday at 21 pounds, a 50 percent profit on the London rights-issue price. The stock closed in London on Thursday at 20.35 pounds.
In Australia, banks will be looking on Friday to offload about 7.87 million shares, worth about A$407 million ($324 million) at Thursday's closing Australian share price of A$51.75.
Rio Tinto's Australian shares have been halted from trade pending the sale of the rump Australian stock.
Rio needed to raise the money to cut a $38 billion debt mountain it accumulated when it bought Canadian aluminum group Alcan at the top of the commodities market in 2007, an acquisition that opened one of the 136-year-old firm's darkest chapters.
) then briefly fell into the arms of its major shareholder, Chinese state-owned aluminum group Chinalco, before finally calling off the $19.5 billion Chinalco deal.
In the end, encouraged by a share-market rally and its investment banks, Rio Tinto opted for the rights issue and a cost-cutting iron ore joint venture with BHP Billiton.
(Reporting by Mark Bendeich and Denny Thomas; Editing by James Thornhill)
