FOREX-Euro off lows as market seeks direction after jobs
2009-07-03 02:19:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro struggled back from its lowest levels in a week on Friday, after a wave of sell orders compounded losses made on bleak U.S. jobs numbers, and it found support as some investors judged it may have slipped too far.
Dealers said the euro hit stop-loss sell orders around $1.3980, and possible hedge fund selling, in the crossover between late U.S. trade and the start of the Asian day, sending it down to $1.3927
The euro and currencies such as the Australian dollar, which have benefited from investor hopes for economic turnaround, had already weakened on Thursday after data showed U.S. employers cut 467,000 jobs in June, far more than expected. [ID:nN01210643]
But analysts said market players then bought the euro back on Friday, helping it off the lows, although it was still weaker than before the employment data and investors were still dismayed the jobs numbers spelled a slower recovery than hoped.
"The risk in the very short term is that maybe we could see some corrective activity. But I don't think we're going into serious risk aversion mode," said Sharada Selvanathan, a currency strategist at BNP Paribas in Hong Kong.
on EBS, after shedding more than 1 percent on Thursday. It had hit a one-month high above $1.4200 earlier in the week.
The euro dropped as far as 133.58 yen EURJPY=R on Friday, extending a fall of nearly 2 percent on Thursday, but had edged back to 134.44 yen later in Asian trade.
It had also faced selling pressure after comments from European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet the previous day that euro-zone activity would likely remain weak for the rest of the year. The ECB left its benchmark refinancing interest rate at a record low of 1 percent, as expected. [ID:nL2512532]
, holding well within a range of 93.50-100 that has limited it since mid-April.
With the jobs data out of the way, traders said focus was shifting to the Group of Eight meeting on July 8-10 and the U.S. corporate earnings season that kicks off next week.
"Market players will watch China's comment on an alternative global currency. This is something that could take about 50 to 100 years, but the country's comment could still affect the market, even very briefly," said Tsutomu Soma, a senior manager in the foreign securities department at Okasan Securities.
China has been talking about diversification of the international currency system, and said it would be "normal" for the issue to be raised at next week's G8 summit. [ID:nPEK137542]
"As for U.S. company earnings, the poor jobs data likely dampened over-optimism and the tolerance for the downside might have increased," Soma said.
RALLY OR STALL?
A rally in riskier currencies against the euro and yen has stalled in the past month as investors have fretted that, along with stock markets, it has got ahead of the economic recovery.
Traders said after the jobs data investors cut long positions in these currencies against the yen and dollar, helping drive both higher, and analysts say investors need stronger evidence of economic turnaround to push on with the more pro-risk trades.
With volumes thin due to a U.S. holiday, price movements were choppy, with some driven by short-term speculators, and the market in general was struggling for direction.
, according to Reuters data, although it is still below an eight-month high of $0.8265 set in early June.
It fell more than 2 percent against the yen on Thursday but was clawing back those losses on Friday, up 0.9 percent from late U.S. levels at 76.60 yen AUDJPY=R.
The Aussie is expected to remain strong at $0.80 in the next month, according to a Reuters poll published on Friday, underpinned by speculation that interest rates at home have bottomed.
Investors are also likely to show continued demand for high-yielding New Zealand assets, with the kiwi dollar
expected to rise to $0.6400 in a month's time, from around $0.6300 now. [ID:nSYD392864]
"The supportive outlook for commodity prices and positive interest rate differentials should keep the Aussie well supported and one does not rule out a near-term move above $0.81," Kenneth Broux, an economist at Lloyds TSB, said in the poll.
"Strong demand from China for Australian commodities may also help the Aussie to outperform in the near term." For an index of FOREX POLL stories, click on [ID:nL2134628] (Additional reporting by Rika Otsuka and Aiko Hayashi; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
