Food security fears drive fund farm investments
2009-07-02 13:04:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Aug 10 2009
Sun, Aug 9 2009
Tue, Jun 30 2009
Tue, Jun 30 2009
Thu  EDT
But the emergence of the asset class is not without pitfalls with the provision of food always highly political and a tentative global economic recovery potentially threatened by the H1N1 flu pandemic, fund managers said.
Some international development organizations have expressed concerns that farmers' rights in developing nations could be compromised by what some see as a "land grab."
"The case for farmland can be summed up in two words as far as we are concerned, food security," Susan Payne, chief executive of Emergent Asset Management, said at three-day World Agri Invest Congress which concluded on Thursday.
Payne said there were great financial rewards from investing in farmland, citing factors such as a shrinking supply of arable land due to climate change, increased production of biofuels and the rapid rise in the global population.
Meat consumption in China is also on the rise, further straining available resources. It takes several pounds of grain to produce a pound of meat.
"If the sector hasn't established credibility as an asset class by that stage (the lock-down) it could kill it before it gets started," Swanger said.
The transfer of hundreds of thousands of hectares of land in Africa, Latin America, Central Asia and Southeast Asia has raised concerns in the international community.
"Lands that only a short time ago seemed of little outside interest are now being sought by international investors," a recent report released by several international groups including the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, said.
"This is rightly a hot issue because land is so central of identity, livelihoods and food security," it added, noting rising agricultural commodity prices were making the acquisition of land an increasingly attractive option.
Fund managers at the conference, asked to opt for the most attractive areas to invest, mainly targeted regions with abundant resources of water.
"Water is absolutely key for farming investments," Payne said, adding countries such as India and China would face growing shortages of water over the next 10 years.
"It (Africa) is the lowest hanging fruit, no question for me," Payne said.
Mark McLornan, founder of Agro Terra, also said Africa could be attractive, although investments could face a "long, bumpy road." His company is heavily invested in Argentina.
McLornan said Argentina's advantages included soils that did not need potash, an expensive fertilizer, and there was also accurate data on rainfall dating back about 30 years.
"I know I can increase yields through accurate data," he said.
Swanger recommended investing in Australia, particularly its dairy sector, among developed countries while for a more transformational opportunity his tips included Kazakhstan and parts of Brazil.
