CORRECTED - UPDATE 3-Peace named StanChart chairman, to quit Experian
2009-07-02 00:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Asia-focused bank Standard Chartered (
) named John Peace as its permanent chairman on Thursday, prompting him to step down as chairman of financial data company Experian (
Peace, 60, has been acting chairman at Standard Chartered since January, when Mervyn Davies stepped down at short notice to become a Treasury minister.
Peace, a veteran of retail and financial services who attended Sandhurst Military Academy and is a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, will quit as chairman of Experian once a new chairman is found. He will remain chairman of Burberry Group (
"John Peace clearly knows an awful lot about financial services and information, I'm sure he'll be a good choice for Standard Chartered," said Nick Bubb, retail analyst at Pali International.
The appointment rules Peace out of the running for the chairman's role at part-nationalised Lloyds Banking Group (
), which he had been linked to.
) chairman Win Bischoff is the hot favourite to land that role, although the search is still in progress.
He has held a number of top roles in financial services and retail, including experience in Asia and elsewhere. He has been on Standard Chartered's board since August 2007.
Most of his jobs have been linked to retailer GUS GUS.L and its spin-offs. He was GUS chief executive for six years from 2000, after joining the company in 1970.
In 1980 he co-founded CCN, a trading company formed by GUS to provide information services to retailers and other lenders. CCN later became Experian, a FTSE 100
firm, where he was CEO and then chairman when it was demerged in 2006.
"The group is in excellent shape, as you can see from our recent trading update, and I look forward to continuing to work with our great management team and board," Peace said.
The bank's growth has been mainly organic, but it has made periodic acquisitions. It is in talks to buy some of Royal Bank of Scotland's (
) Asian assets, including in China and India, according to people familiar with the matter.
By 1130 GMT, Standard Chartered shares were up 1.1 percent at 1,193 pence, Experian was up 0.5 percent at 457.5p and Burberry was up 1.9 percent at 428.5p.
(Additional reporting by Victoria Bryan; editing by Simon Jessop)
