Malaysia c.bank sees solid, long-term dollar role
2009-07-02 11:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar will remain the dominant currency for the foreseeable future but that is not stopping other regions like Asia from developing their financial markets, said Malaysia central bank governor Zeti Akhtar Aziz.
Speaking on the sidelines of a forum, Zeti said Europe and Asia were doing their part to create other options than the dollar for investment purposes and that Asia's efforts were focused in part on building a regional bond market.
"It is not just China, but other countries in Asia, coming together to build a regional bond market so that we can invest some part of our savings," Zeti told Reuters, adding that she was not simply speaking about savings managed by central banks.
"But... the U.S. dollar, the U.S. financial markets will continue to be the most important market for some time to come."
The leading role of the U.S. dollar has faced increasing questions after China suggested a few months ago how the dollar could be replaced as the world's main reserve currency.
Turning to the domestic economy, Zeti said reforms unveiled by the government earlier in the week would undoubtedly help draw in greater amounts of foreign direct investment.
On Tuesday, Malaysia's prime minister, Najib Razak, told a conference in Kuala Lumpur that the government would end rules on foreign investment in most sectors of the economy.
Malaysia would open up the investment management and brokerage industry, as well as property, ending requirements for 30 percent ownership by ethnic Malays, he had said.
"This will help because it will deal with a perception issue more than the reality," she said. "This is what international investors have been looking forward to."
Investment flows into Asia's third most export-dependent nation MYEXP=ECI, have dried up and the country has been overtaken by neighbouring Thailand in terms of direct investment since 2001 and portfolio flows turned negative to the tune of 92.3 billion Malaysian ringgit ($26.24 billion) in 2008. ($1=3.517 Malaysian Ringgit) (Reporting by Tamora Vidaillet; Editing by Toby Chopra)
