Xstrata-Anglo lifts Goldman, D.Bank in M&A tables
2009-07-02 07:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Xstrata's unwanted approach to rival miner Anglo American led to a late reordering of the world's top mergers advisers in the first half, restoring Anglo adviser Goldman Sachs to the No.1 spot above Morgan Stanley.
), Lazard (
), and UBS (
), who are also advising on the suggested stock-for-stock deal, also climbed in the final first-half league tables from Thomson Reuters, compared to preliminary data released last week.
Overall the final data showed announced M&A fell 40.2 percent, compared with the same period in 2008, to $941 billion, marking the slowest first half since 2004.
Thomson Reuters ranks Xstrata's proposal -- which Anglo says lacks "strategic merit" and has "totally unacceptable terms" -- as the first half's fourth-largest deal. It classifies it as a $42.5 billion "intended" deal.
) regain first place for announced mergers and acquisitions (M&A) advice, which it held in the first half of last year, as it worked on $343.1 billion of deals. Morgan Stanley (
), not an adviser on the deal, slipped to second by deal value with $331.1 billion of work.
) adviser UBS rose to 8th from 9th in the preliminary data. Among Xstrata's XTA.L advisers, JPMorgan (
) remained in third place, Deutsche Bank gained two places to fourth, and Lazard rose one place to seventh.
If a deal is eventually struck despite Anglo's rebuff, it could yield further mandates in M&A and equity capital markets for Xstrata's advisers, even though as a stock-for-stock deal it would not require debt financing.
In a letter to Anglo, Xstrata said a combined group would "immediately be able to access equity markets to raise further capital" and could potentially sell non-core assets or seek joint-venture partners to raise extra liquidity.
Rio Tinto's (
), and abortive link-up with China's Chinalco, involved a slew of banks. Seven of Rio's banks are now working on its $15 billion rights issue, for which Rio is paying about $430 million in fees. (Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
