GLOBAL MARKETS-U.S. jobs data hits stocks, boosts dollar
2009-07-02 08:56:00.0
GLOBAL MARKETS-U.S. jobs data hits stocks, boosts dollar | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
GLOBAL MARKETS-U.S. jobs data hits stocks, boosts dollar
By Jeremy Gaunt, European Investment Correspondent
By Jeremy Gaunt, European Investment Correspondent
LONDON, July 2
Thu  EDT
LONDON, July 2
The Labor Department said U.S. employers cut 467,000 jobs in June, while the unemployment rate rose to 9.5 percent from 9.4.
The world's biggest economy was expected to have lost 363,000 non-farm jobs, while the unemployment rate was seen ticking up to 9.6 percent. [ID:nN01511504]
"It looks like the economy was still losing substantial momentum as the second quarter came to a close. This report is weak across the board," said William Sullivan, chief economist at JVB Financial Group.
After pushing stocks up by more than 21 percent in the second quarter, investors have been looking for evidence of a sustainable economic recovery before buying stocks further. MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS was down 0.8 percent, having posted the biggest gains in its 21-year history in the three months to end-June.
The European Central Bank, as expected, kept interest rates unchanged at 1 percent. It was weakened further on the day after ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet said euro zone activity was likely to remain weak for the rest of the year.
Moody's also downgraded euro zone member Ireland's ratings to Aa1 from Aaa over concern about its debt.
The focus now will turn to next week's Group of Eight summit in Italy after G8 sources told Reuters that Beijing has asked for a debate on proposals for a new global reserve currency and the issue could be referred to briefly in the summit statement.
China's Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei said he had not heard of such a request but he said China hoped for diversification of the international currency system in the future and it would be normal for the issue to be raised at the G8 summit.
"The overall economic sentiments are very weak so oil prices could see more selling pressure. Furthermore, prices have also jumped more than 40 percent in the last quarter, so investors would be happy to lock in profits," said Benson Wang, trader at Commodity Broking Services in Sydney. (Additional reporting by Natsuko Waki)
; for the MacroScope Blog click on
; for Hedge Hub click on
