INTERVIEW-NEC Elec, Renesas to keep advanced plants
2009-07-02 07:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese NEC Electronics Corp (
) and Renesas Technology Corp will both keep their advanced 300-millimetre chip-making plants after they merge, the newly appointed president of NEC Electronics said.
Nobody needs to decide between NEC Electronics's Yamagata factory in northeast Japan and Renesas's plant in Hitachinaka outside Tokyo, Junshi Yamaguchi said in an interview.
"Both will remain," Yamaguchi said on Thursday, adding usage rates for both were rising. "Using these advanced lines will actually reduce costs."
The two loss-making chipmakers plan to unite operations in April to survive and grow as sales fall faster than their ability to cut costs, but analysts have said their diverging technologies would force them to keep duplicate facilities.
NEC Electronics, the world's 11th-largest chip maker, has slashed jobs and capital spending and merged factories, but still faces its fifth straight year of losses.
The deal with Renesas, the world's sixth-biggest chipmaker, is aimed at helping it focus resources on products with high market share and profitability, cut development costs and, according to government sources, apply for public funds.
"We need to have high profit magins, like some other chip makers. If we just gain scale and don't make profit, there's no point in existing," said Yamaguchi, who in May said a chip maker needed a 10 percent profit margin to survive.
He said nothing had been decided on whether or not it, Renesas or the merged company would need to raise money.
Product overlap at the two chip makers was about 20-30 percent now, Yamaguchi said, adding the figure could change as the companies use different process technologies.
The merger will create Japan's biggest semiconductor maker and the world's third largest after Intel Corp (
), on the basis of sales at the end of March.
A lift in demand for flat TVs, DVD recorders and other consumer electronics, especially in China, are nudging up orders and factory usage at NEC Electronics.
Factory use at NEC Electronics, which makes chips for Nintendo Co Ltd's 7974.OS Wii game console and Toyota Motor Corp's (
) Lexus luxury car, is expected to hit over 60 percent in July-September, up from over 50 percent in April-June and 43 percent in January-March.
But Yamaguchi said it was too early to call a true recovery, as higher unemployment rates in the United States dents spending power.
"The worst is over, but we have to see what the orders are in September and October to read how much things will get better," he said. "I don't think global chip demand will recover their peak in 2007 until 2011 or 2012."
To shave costs, NEC Electronics needs to keep capital spending at a minimum and consider outsourcing more chips, with the exception of chips used to control car functions, he said.
"We need to keep automobile chips in-house, because it is important that we are in control of their quality and supply," he said. "Demand for chips for hybrids and electric cars is going to jump."
NEC Electronics, 65 percent owned by NEC Corp (
) has forecast a loss of 82.6 billion yen ($855 million) for the year to March 2010. Unlisted Renesas, owned 55 percent by Hitachi Ltd and 45 percent by Mitsubishi Electric Corp (
), is expected to log a net loss of a little less than 90 billion yen.
NEC Electronics shares closed down 3.7 percent, against a 0.5 percent fall in Tokyo's electrical machinery index .IELEC.T.
(Additional reporting by Reiji Murai; Editing by Dan Lalor)
((mayumi.negishi@thomsonreuters.com; +81-3-6441-1812; Reuters Messaging: mayumi.negishi.reuters.com@reuters.net))
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com))
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nL2707774
