TOPWRAP 8-U.S., Europe economic stats point to choppy recovery
2009-07-01 16:53:00.0
(Reuters) - The shrinkage in U.S. manufacturing slowed in June, but a gloomy U.S. jobs report and evidence from Europe and Asia suggest a global recovery will be choppy this year, if it occurs at all.
Rising unemployment is emerging as the biggest challenge to a resumption of growth, which governments' around the world are trying to stoke with record low interest rates and by pumping trillions in cash into their economies.
A report of 473,000 U.S. private-sector job losses in June was greater than expected, but less than the 485,000 jobs slashed in May and the smallest number for a month since last October. [nWEN0143]
The report, by payroll giant Automatic Data Processing (
), precedes the more-widely watched and broader U.S. nonfarm payroll report for June out on Thursday. A Reuters poll of economists forecasts the government's report to show a loss of 363,000 jobs and the unemployment rate rising to 9.6 percent from 9.4 percent in May.
Economic recovery "is just going to be a long process," said Rick Meckler, president of Libertyview Capital Management in New York. "What you are seeing, over and over, is that employment will probably be one of the last things to turn."
With the second half beginning Wednesday, the thesis that the global economy will muster a recovery before 2010 is being put to the test.
U.S. manufacturing contracted for a 17th month in June, albeit at a slower pace, the Institute for Supply Management said on Wednesday. [ID:nTAR001055]. A fourth-straight monthly rise in pending home sales added to hopes a three-year U.S. housing slump would end in 2009. [nL1898212]
) reported sales fell 10.9 percent from the year-earlier month, the best showing among large manufacturers, while Toyota said sales plunged 31.9 percent.
Euro zone manufacturing activity continued to shrink in June but less than initially thought, as the Markit Eurozone Manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index rose to 42.6 from 40.7 in May. It was the highest score since September but still far from the level of 50 that separates expansion from contraction. [nL1596673]
"The focus right now is really on the jobs, and inflation and budgetary concerns," said William Larkin, a bond portfolio manager at Cabot Money Management in Salem, Massachusetts. The manufacturing data is "second tier," he said.
Asian data excluding Japan were more encouraging than the news from Europe, with China's manufacturing sector extending a steady if unspectacular recovery in June, and South Korea's exports falling much less than expected.
But in Japan, business morale improved in June less than expected, plagued by doubts about the global economy.
"Japanese firms are facing a more severe situation than market players think," said Susumu Kato, chief economist at Calyon Capital Markets Japan. [nT53503]
In Britain, manufacturing activity fell at its slowest pace in more than a year in June as output rose for the first time in 15 months, a survey showed. Service sector output fell at its slowest pace in six months. [nL1191245]
Mixed global reports continued in Germany, however, where engineering orders fell by 48 percent in May in real terms from the previous year, the industry association VDMA said on Wednesday. In the March-May period, orders were down 47 percent from a year ago. [nBAF001719]
But German retail sales rose unexpectedly by 0.4 percent month-on-month in May, their third consecutive increase in a sign that slower inflation is encouraging consumers to spend despite the threat of job losses. [nL1633593]
European Central Bank Governing Council member Axel Weber said the world economy would not return to growth before mid-2010. "I don't think we'll see a return to positive growth before the middle of next year," he said in a documentary to be aired on German television. [nWEA9068]
World stocks began the third quarter on an upbeat note, with European and emerging market shares rising on Tuesday around 1 percent. [MKTS/GLOB]. U.S. blue chip stocks rose about 0.7 percent to 8504.
"More and more evidence is accumulating to suggest that the decline in economic activity is coming to an end," Barclays Wealth said in a note.
Optimists were encouraged by the Chinese official purchasing managers' index for June, which rose to 53.2 from 53.1 in May, adding to evidence across Asia that the regional economy is finally pulling out of a deep dive. [nPEK138883]
(Reporting by Reuters bureaux worldwide, editing by Philip Barbara)
