Corn firm with oil after plunge to 4-month lows
2009-07-01 10:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Chicago corn futures were higher on Wednesday, supported by rising crude oil, as the market steadied after plunging nearly 8 percent to a four-month low on an unexpected increase in a U.S. planting estimate.
Front-month soybeans extended gains on tight old-crop supplies and fresh buying by China, the world's top importer.
The U.S. Agriculture Department surprised the market on Tuesday with a report that 87.035 million acres (35.2 million hectares) were planted with corn, topping the average analyst forecast for 83.961 million acres.
"We don't see a follow through selling in corn, it's quite steady," said Genichiro Higaki, head of proprietary fund management team at Sumitomo Corp in Tokyo.
"Some people may think it's a good buying opportunity ahead of the most critical period for corn."
) slashed its corn, soy and wheat price forecasts after the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported larger-than-expected increases in planted area this year.
Grains were also influenced again by outside markets, which rebounded from losses on Tuesday.
U.S. crude oil climbed back above $71 a barrel, supported by a report showing a larger-than-expected fall in U.S. crude stocks, and share prices rose on renewed hopes of an improving economic outlook.
Chicago Board of Trade July corn rose 1.29 percent to $3.52-1/4 a bushel by 6:59 a.m. EDT. On Tuesday, the contract had slid 7.8 percent, its steepest fall in seven months, to close at a lowest level since March 3.
The July soybean contract rose 1.61 percent to $12.46 a bushel. New-crop November, which fell in the previous session on larger planted area, rose as investors saw a buying opportunity.
"Even with the increased planted acreage, soybean demand and supply will be very tight next year," said Higaki. "Soybeans could be bought more easily compared with corn."
The tight soybean situation was underscored by news that private exporters reported the sale of 113,000 tonnes of U.S. soybeans to China for delivery during the 2008/09 marketing year.
Wheat prices, meanwhile, gained ground after falling on Tuesday on spillover pressure from corn as well as a bigger than expected USDA estimate for wheat sowings.
CBOT July wheat was up 1.61 percent at $5.19-1/2, recovering from a two-month low at the previous close.
On Euronext, benchmark November milling wheat added 1.79 percent to 142.00 euros a tonne after hitting a more than six month low on Tuesday at 138.25 euros.
"Buyers have steadily come back into the market after we touched a low for this year," a Euronext trader said.
Wheat operators will be watching for the results of the latest import tender held by Egypt, due to be announced about 9:30 a.m. EDT.
Competition in the new tender was again seen as being between French wheat -- bought by Egypt in its previous tender -- and cheaper Russian grain, with the outcome hard to call.
"The Americans are still out of the picture on price even after their fall yesterday," the Euronext trader said.
(Corn, soybean, wheat U.S. cents per bushel)
(Writing by Gus Trompiz; Editing by Keiron Henderson)
