GLOBAL MARKETS-Stocks rise on data, dollar slips on China news
2009-07-01 16:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Upbeat U.S., Chinese and European manufacturing data on Wednesday helped boost global stocks and commodity prices, except for oil, while safe-haven assets like the U.S. dollar and government bonds fell.
The dollar extended declines after a report said China has asked to debate proposals for a new global reserve currency at next week's Group of Eight summit in Italy, G8 sources said. For related news click ID:nLAG003567
Also on Wednesday, oil prices fell after government data showed a rise in U.S. gasoline inventories ahead of the July 4 Independence Day holiday, traditionally the peak of the U.S. summer driving season.
But reassuring data from the United States, China and Europe signaled to many investors that the global economy, shackled by a deep recession, is on the road to recovery.
A day after stock markets around world wrapped up their best quarter in a decade, investors plowed new money into equities, boosting growth-sensitive sectors like energy, industrials, technology and materials, among other areas.
"We think the economy has bottomed out and we'll see some positive GDP this quarter," said Maury Fertig, chief investment officer of Relative Value Partners in Northbrook, Illinois.
The Dow Jones industrial average .DJI rose 57.06 points, or 0.68 percent, at 8,504.06. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index .SPX gained 4.01 points, or 0.44 percent, to 923.33. The Nasdaq Composite Index .IXIC ended up 10.68 points, or 0.58 percent, at 1,845.72.
Natural resource and energy stocks rose as copper for September delivery HGU9 rose 2.6 percent, nickel jumped 6.1 percent and zinc gained 2.9 percent.
Among miners, Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold Inc climbed 0.92 percent and Alcoa Inc rose 0.19 percent.
The weak dollar helped spur commodity prices, along with data showing that China's manufacturing sector extended a steady recovery in June.
"It's all about the dollar and it's all about the confidence in the Chinese recovery to continue," said Michael Pento, chief economist with Delta Global Advisors in Huntington Beach, California.
Interest rates that banks charge each other for dollars, euros and sterling marked record lows as investors await the European Central Bank's policy meeting on Thursday. The ECB is widely expected to keep rates on hold at a lifetime lows.
The dollar fell to a three-week low against the euro. A slowing in the deterioration in the euro zone's manufacturing economy for the fourth straight month indicated the bloc will contract by much less in the second quarter.
The ICE Futures' dollar index .DXY, a measure of the greenback's value against a basket of six major currencies, fell 0.6 percent to 79.649.
U.S. crude settled 58 cents lower at $69.31 a barrel, after rising as high as $71.85. London Brent crude fell 51 cents to settle at $68.79 a barrel.
Gold climbed as the China news about a reserve currency sent the dollar reeling, highlighting the status of gold as a hedge against a falling U.S. currency.
Asian stock markets were mixed. The broad MSCI index of Asia-Pacific shares excluding Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS edged down 0.2 percent. Tokyo's Nikkei share average .N225 fluctuated heavily before closing 0.2 percent lower.
