Brazil stocks up on commodities, currency jumps
2009-07-01 11:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks rallied on Wednesday, bouncing back from losses in the previous session, and the country's currency jumped, fueled by stronger-than-expected June trade surplus data.
rose 1.4 percent mid-morning to 52,177 points, erasing Tuesday's 1.3 percent loss.
Helping lift the market were gains in heavyweight oil and mining companies, bolstered by rallying world commodities prices. U.S. crude oil futures jumped 2.6 percent and copper HGN9 rose 3.1 percent.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, rose 1.6 percent against the dollar to 1.932 reais, gathering strength after Brazil posted a June trade surplus of $4.63 billion, nearly double the previously reported $2.6 billion surplus for May.
VOLATILITY IN STORE?
But analysts said the market could weaken later in the day, if investors proved unsettled by weaker-than-expected U.S. economic data released on Wednesday.
"There's a lot of information coming throughout the day," said Pedro Galdi, an analyst with SLW Corretora, in a phone interview. Tuesday's losses gave equities space to rise today, but the data could lead to volatility, he noted.
"The truth is that the markets are a volatile moment, with no defined trend in the short term," said analyst Julio Hegedus in the report.
A lingering question remains the fate of iron ore contracts in China, where a June 30 deadline came and went without a final decision. China has been pushing for steep cuts to iron ore prices, with big miners resisting. Chinese steel mills on Wednesday reportedly offered a compromise on ore pricing. For details see [ID:nSHA134901].
PETROBRAS, VALE GAIN
), the world's largest iron-ore producer, were up 2.41 percent to 30.57 reais.
Manufacturing in China notched another month of growth in June, according to Wednesday data. That, too, could help Brazil, as China's growth has been considered a possible engine for global economic recovery. See [ID:nPEK138883].
Petrobras will reopen 10-year global bonds as early as Wednesday, a source with direct knowledge of the deal told Reuters. The company sold $1.5 billion of the same bonds in February. See [ID:nSAQ002309].
Yields on Brazilian interest rate futures contracts slid slightly. The yield on the contract due in Jan. 2011, among the most heavily traded in the morning, dipped 0.4 percentage points to 9.98. (Editing by W Simon)
