Nikkei dips 0.2 pct, Orix and ANA slide
2009-07-01 03:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average slipped 0.2 percent on Wednesday, with Orix Corp (
) gained after China's official purchasing managers' index (PMI) for June showed the country's economic recovery is on more solid ground.
Response to the Bank of Japan's quarterly survey of business confidence was mixed, with some analysts saying it had no impact on the market, but others, noting lagging capital spending, saying it was slightly negative. [JPBCLG=ECI]
"It seems there was some large-lot selling in futures," said a portfolio manager at a Japanese asset management firm.
While the reason for such selling was unclear, such moves may reflect profit-taking or hedge-selling by institutional investors, the portfolio manager said.
fell 18.51 points to 9,939.93, beginning the new quarter on a negative note.
In the April-June quarter, the benchmark index jumped 23 percent for its best quarterly gain in about 14 years.
The BOJ's tankan corporate survey showed that confidence among big manufacturers pulled back from a record low hit three months ago, as exports and output improved from a severe downturn late last year. [JPBCLG=ECI]
But it also showed that big firms plan to cut capital spending, a key driver of the economy, by 9.4 percent in the financial year to March 2010, against the market's median forecast for a 6.9 percent fall.
"Basically, the tankan showed that things aren't all that good in the near term but seemed encouraging for the longer term, making its overall impact neutral," said Kenichi Hirano, operating officer at Tachibana Securities.
Orix fell 4.8 percent to 5,530 yen after three sources said Japan's biggest leasing firm and a major property investor plans to raise about 100 billion yen ($1 billion) through a public share offering. [ID:nT112949]
Five sources said All Nippon Airways, Japan's No. 2 airline, plans to raise more than 150 billion yen ($1.6 billion) in a public share offering, sending its shares tumbling 5.9 percent to 317 yen. [ID:nT105398]
ANA said after the close that it would raise up to 182.6 billion yen ($1.9 billion) in a public offering to use for capital spending including new planes, adding that it had raised its order for Boeing Co (
Whether there will be more public offerings hinges on what firms think of the economic outlook, said Shoji Hirakawa, chief strategist of equities research at UBS Securities Japan.
If companies think the economy will recover, they may feel the need to raise money for capital spending, he said. "The impact on the market is positive," Hirakawa said about the public offerings. "They are doing this because the economy has improved enough or share prices have risen sufficiently to conduct financing."
Construction machinery makers rose after the China PMI data, with Komatsu rising 1.8 percent to 1,519 yen and Hitachi Construction Machinery (
) gaining 1.6 percent to 1,600 yen.
Brokerage CLSA's China Purchasing Managers' Index rose in June to an 11-month high of 51.8 and China's official purchasing managers' index for June also showed China's economic recovery is on more solid ground. [ID:nBJB000639] [ID:nBJB000638]
"Since Japan exports a lot to China, such data is positive for Japanese shares," said Hideyuki Ishiguro, a supervisor in Okasan Securities' investment strategy department.
The incoming head of the bank to be formed by the merger, Norito Ikeda, said the new entity will apply for more public money if necessary. [ID:nTFD006285]
Aozora is majority owned by United States-based Cerberus Capital Management CBS.UL, while Shinsei is about one-third owned by U.S. buyout firm JC Flowers and Co.
Before the announcement, Shinsei rose 1.3 percent to 157 yen and Aozora gained 1.3 percent to 151 yen.
Trade was active, with 2.3 billion shares changing hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section compared with last week's daily average of 2.2 billion.
Declining shares outnumbered advancing ones 845 to 716. (Additional reporting by Takeshi Yoshiike and Elaine Lies; Editing by Joseph Radford)
