UPDATE 3-Naspers core profit edges up, shares surge
2009-06-30 00:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Media company Naspers Ltd (
) added more than half a million new pay-TV subscribers, lifting its full-year core earnings by 4 percent in line with expectations and sending its shares 3.31 percent higher on Tuesday.
The company said core headline earnings per share, which the company views as the best measure of its underlying performance, rose to 1,179 cents, in line with its own forecast for a 0-10 percent increase.
"When people experience economic pressure, they spend more time at home and pay-TV is an affordable form of entertainment," Koos Bekker, Naspers chief executive, said in a statement.
During a conference call, Bekker said the firm would support a secondary listing of Tencent (
), in which Naspers owns 35 percent stake, on the Shanghai bourse once regulations in China ensured local Chinese and particular Tencent customers would be able to acquire stock.
Tencent added 1.2 billion rand to Naspers' core headline earnings compared with 615 million rand in the previous year.
Naspers, which owns stakes in companies in China, Brazil, Russia and Europe, said it would continue to look at buys.
"The types of acquisitions we may look at may include both bolt-on purchases and free standing acqusitions, more of the former than the latter in terms of numbers," said Bekker.
Naspers said headline EPS, which strips out certain one-off and non-trading items, slid 23 percent to 826 cents, at the bottom end of its prediction for a fall of 15-25 percent, due to a higher accounting charge related to recent acquisitions.
Shares in Naspers jumped 3.31 percent to 203 rand, beating a weaker Top-40 index
"I think overall a positive sets of results. Their strategy is a right one and research has shown that a lot of revenue growth potential is in social networking or Internet type businesses," said a Johannesburg-based media analyst.
As part of its strategy, Naspers had bought Hungary-based online auction firm Vatera.hu, and acquired a 37 percent interest in China's newspaper publisher Xin An Media.
Its Internet unit, which includes Allegro in eastern Europe, China's Tencent and Russia's mail.ru, doubled revenue to 3.8 billion rand, benefiting from the inclusion of new acquisitions.
"We aim to have long term growth and we expect that to come mostly from the Internet business," Bekker said. (Reporting by Gugulakhe Lourie; Editing by David Cowell)
