UPDATE 2-Corning lifts forecast for Q2 LCD glass volume
2009-06-30 11:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Specialty glass maker Corning Inc (
) raised its forecast for second-quarter sales of LCD glass, citing strong demand for flat-screen televisions especially in China.
Share reaction was muted, however, as analysts said investors had expected the move by Corning and were concerned that the improvement in demand might be short-lived.
"To some extent investors fear a repeat of what happened in 2008 when Corning was bullish in the first half but saw a fall off in demand for glass in the second half," said Morgan Keegan analyst Paul Bonenfant, but added that he did not agree with that view.
Corning kept its estimate for the global LCD market between 2.1 billion and 2.2 billion square feet of glass this year, but noted this forecast could be topped if strong demand for LCD TVs, particularly in China, continued.
Bonenfant said his estimate is for a market slightly above the high end of Corning's forecast for 2009 and he predicted a 15 percent increase in volume demand next year.
Corning shares fell 1.35 percent to $16.05 in morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange, in line with the broad market. The stock had risen nearly 1 percent in early trade.
Corning also expects second-quarter volume at Samsung Corning Precision Glass Co., Ltd., its venture with Samsung Electronics (
), to be up about 50 percent sequentially compared with its previous target for a 40 percent increase.
"Second-quarter glass demand is much stronger than we anticipated even a few weeks ago," Corning Chief Financial Officer James Flaws said in a statement on Tuesday.
"While retail LCD TV sales growth in the United States had slowed somewhat in April after a very strong first quarter, reports that we have received indicate a significant upward spike in domestic LCD TV sales in late May and the first three weeks of June," Flaws added.
Corning expects third-quarter LCD glass shipments to be consistent with the improved second-quarter forecast, leaving the company with capacity constraints as demand will be higher than its manufacturing ability. Thus, it will prioritize supplies for long-term supply agreement customers.
Corning said second-quarter glass price declines were more moderate than the first quarter's fall. Third-quarter pricing at its wholly owned business and its venture would to be roughly the same as in the second quarter.
"This is a good thing," said Bonenfant. He estimated second quarter glass prices to be in the low single-digit percentage range, which is typical for a strong market and compares with price drops of close to 10 percent in the first quarter.
Corning said it was too soon to issue an estimate for the fourth-quarter, in which glass demand typically falls because television manufacturers have already bought the glass needed for products aimed at the year-end shopping season.
"But if retail demand for LCD TVs continues to be stronger than forecasted, we could see a more muted seasonal decline for LCD glass demand," Flaws said.
Because of improving demand, the supply-chain had to expand after significant contractions seen in the first quarter. Corning said it has begun shipping glass from melting tanks that were restarted earlier in the quarter.
"We expect some further supply-chain expansion as the industry prepares for the seasonally stronger fourth quarter," he said.
Corning said it would release its second quarter results on the morning of July 27. (Additional reporting Tiffany Wu; Editing by Derek Caney)
