Foxconn's iPhone plant paralyzed as thousands strike: report
2012-10-05 19:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Thousands of workers went on strike Friday at a Foxconn plant in China that makes Apple Inc's iPhone 5, paralyzing production of the smartphone, rights advocate China Labor Watch reported.
The reported strike comes at a crucial time for the U.S. corporation, weeks after kicking off its largest-ever global rollout of the smartphone. Apple is already struggling with supply constraints, analysts say.
Citing workers, the labor group said 3,000 to 4,000 workers began their strike at Foxconn's Zhengzhou complex in the afternoon, incensed by over-exacting quality controls as well as demands they work through the week-long "Golden Week" holidays, which began Monday.
Tensions have boiled over repeatedly in factories operated by Foxconn, the Taiwanese contract manufacturing giant that employs more than a million and makes most of the world's iPads and iPhones. Last month, thousands rioted at its Taiyuan facility in northern China, disrupting production for about 24 hours and underscoring the potential for labor unrest.
"In addition to demanding that workers work during the holiday, Foxconn raised overly strict demands on product quality without providing worker training for the corresponding skills," the Watch said in a statement on its website (
"Additionally, quality control inspectors fell into conflicts with workers and were beat up multiple times by workers. Factory management turned a deaf ear to complaints about these conflicts and took no corrective measures."
Foxconn Technology Group of Taiwan, the trading name of Hon Hai Precision Industry Co, is the world's largest contract maker of electronics for global brands such as Hewlett Packard Co, Nokia and Dell Inc.
Apple and Foxconn have come under fire for poor working conditions and wages at plants across China. In response, they have organized an audit of factory conditions, raised wages, improved safety and reduced overtime, among other measures.
(Reporting By Edwin Chan; Editing by Richard Chang)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
You mean that workers around the world are starting to stand up for a living wage and fair labor practices? Maybe the US Corporate megaliths are going to have to start moving jobs back into the US to save money.
Oct 05, 20129:43pm EDT--
You probably won¡¯t like it when conditions reach the point where it becomes profitable to manufacture smart phones and computers in the U.S.
Oct 05, 201210:24pm EDT--
Good point ChicagoFats. The sad reality is, that a good quality of life in the West is predicated on a cheap source of goods, which basically means that lots of people in the world are living on poverty levels so that we can enjoy our nice quality of life. In essence we in the West and Westernized Countries such as Japan and S. Korea, all share in this dirty little secret.
Good point ChicagoFats. The sad reality is, that a good quality of life in the West is predicated on a cheap source of goods, which basically means that lots of people in the world are living on poverty levels so that we can enjoy our nice quality of life. In essence we in the West and Westernized Countries such as Japan and S. Korea, all share in this dirty little secret.
Alternately, we could all be in poverty (well most of us, except the rich) and pay a month¡¯s salary for an iphone, like they all do in China.
Oct 05, 201210:50pm EDT--
