WRAPUP 2-Iron ore talks set for overtime as China holds out
2009-06-30 11:14:00.0
(Reuters) - China and big miners were deadlocked in 11th-hour negotiations over annual iron ore prices on Tuesday, officials said, probably spelling the end -- at least temporarily -- of a four-decades-old pricing regime.
The general secretary of the China Iron and Steel Association, Shan Shanghua, said China would carry on with the negotiations, something no other steel-producing country was willing to do.
In comments on the website of China Central Television, Shan also said the profits of his members were already razor-thin and China's steel industry would certainly make losses if they accepted the price agreed by their Japanese counterparts.
A source at CISA and a senior executive at the country's No.2 steel mill both said earlier the negotiations are likely to continue past the June 30 deadline for extending annual supply contracts, pushing China, which buys half of the world's traded iron ore, onto the volatile spot market.
) has stuck by that deadline for agreeing on prices for 12-month contracts that run from April 1, showing no inclination to go lower than the one-third price cut it agreed with Japan and South Korea and saying it is ready to sell to its customers on whatever basis they prefer.
It remains to be seen whether the two sides manage to reach a deal in the coming weeks that would allow them to restore the supply security offered by annual contracts, or turn entirely to trading the main ingredient for making steel on the spot market, opening the door to a potentially huge derivatives market.
"The two parties are still holding their requests and have not been closing their demands. So I cannot say if there is any room for each party to concede," Tian Zhiping, the vice-general manager of Hebei Iron and Steel Group, told Reuters.
In reality the shift is already underway -- Rio has sold half its ore on a spot basis this year, and No.3 iron ore miner BHP Billiton (
), Wuhan Iron and Steel (
That's a risk the industry is prepared to face to drive home its demands for a bigger break on prices after a collapse in steel demand drove many mills into the red, caught between record-high 2008 iron ore and falling steel prices.
"We made a statement in late May that we would not accept the price reached by Japanese steel mills and Rio Tinto, so we will keep negotiating," a source at the lead negotiator China Iron and Steel Association told Reuters. "Therefore, we are still in the negotiations until an official statement is made."
But spot iron ore prices to China have risen by a fifth in just a month, and now trade at a 4-month high above $80 a tonne on a delivered China basis, equivalent to around $65 free on board -- higher than the contract price of $61 that the Japanese and South Korean mills secured, giving miners the upper hand.
RIO: BALL IN CHINA'S COURT
"We will continue to deliver ore to our customers (after June 30) as we have in weeks past and as we will in weeks and month to come, but under what arrangements is something only the customers can decide," Rio Tinto spokesman Gervase Greene told Reuters.
Last year, talks dragged on until June 24 before the first deal was struck, but this year China and global miners are so far apart it threatens to end the decades-old annual benchmark.
The negotiating power of China, which wants a 40-45 percent price cut, has been sharply undermined by a recovery in both steel and iron ore prices, and many analysts have predicted talks would continue with the lapse of the deadline.
"I won't be surprised if the standoff continues as price action over the past month does not suggest we will see much change to current market dynamics," said Su Aik Lim of Fitch Ratings in Beijing.
Small Chinese mills, eager to fix production costs and prepare for demand upturn, have already signed private deals, ignoring threats from CISA that it would not recognise the deals and revoke import licenses.
Massive iron ore stockpiles built up in China after record imports this year will provide some immediate buffer for mills if supplies come to an abrupt halt, especially as Europe begins to see a recovery in steel output, which would increase ore demand.
"Under this scenario, the Chinese strategy of not signing a benchmark would backfire," said Merrill Lynch analyst Tom Price.
Exporters in India, historically the biggest source of spot market supply, reported steady demand from China on Tuesday, with the benchmark 63.5 grade of iron ore little changed around $58-$61 a tonne FOB, suggesting no sense of panic buying.
"Chinese inquiries are there, but prices are stable," said a miner cum exporter in India's southern state of Karnataka.
For a PREVIEW of the talks [ID:nSEO56621] (Additional reporting by David Stanway and Tom Miles in BEIJING, Miyoung Kim in SEOUL and Ruchira Singh in MUMBAI; Editing by Michael Urquhart, Jonathan Leff, Anthony Barker)
