Island plans by Tokyo's nationalist governor may stoke fresh China tensions
2012-10-03 23:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara, a fiery nationalist whose failed bid to buy a group of disputed islands ignited a crisis with China, is pushing ahead with a plan to build structures there to hammer home Japan's claim, officials involved told Reuters.
Although such a move is not imminent, it would be certain to strain Japan's already shaky relations with China and could prompt a rebuke from the Obama administration, which has urged both sides to ease tensions by setting aside the dispute.
Ishihara's gambit appears aimed at forcing a new showdown in the island dispute with China. It is based on the view that Japan's main opposition -- the conservative Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) -- is likely to take power in an election in the coming months and that it would be receptive to his hard-line policies, two officials close to Ishihara said.
Akiko Santo, a member of the House of Councillors from the LDP, said Ishihara would try to win support from a new government to use about $19 million he has raised from contributors to build some basic infrastructure on the islands.
Ishihara's deputy, Naoki Inose, has confirmed the plan.
They claim that construction of a lighthouse, radio transmitter or basic harbor facilities would increase safety for Japanese fishermen. It was not clear how -- or even whether -- such private funds could be used for construction on government property.
Ishihara set off the slide in Japan-China relations with his initial bid to buy the islands, ensuring his next steps in the dispute will be scrutinized.
Narushige Michishita, an associate professor at the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies in Tokyo, said Ishihara's push could "re-create the situation we have just gone through -- strong reaction from China followed by demonstrations and attacks on Japanese companies."
Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda's nationalization of the islands was intended to keep them from Ishihara and to head off a more damaging confrontation with China.
But the Japanese government's move triggered a wave of protests in China that shuttered Japanese factories and stores, disrupted trade and prompted Beijing to strengthen its own claim to the disputed territory.
'SACRED TERRITORY'
China has claimed the islands as its "sacred territory" and says its claim predates Japan's. Patrol ships from the two countries have been circling in a standoff in the waters off the disputed islands, raising concern that a collision or other incident could escalate into a bigger clash.
Now an independent, Ishihara has been governor of Tokyo since 1999. A former LDP member and author, he is best known for writing "The Japan that Can Say No," a 1989 book that urged Japan to step away from reliance on the United States.
The LDP is expected to capitalize on frustration with Noda's government and his Democratic Party of Japan, which took power in 2009 but has been criticized for its response to last year's earthquake and nuclear disaster and its economic stewardship.
Last month, former prime minister Shinzo Abe was elected to lead the LDP as the party heads into an election that could be called before year end. Abe's selection as his chief aide, Shigeru Ishiba, is a defense expert who has argued Japan should take stronger action to protect territory it claims in disputes with China and South Korea.
"The funds will be used when something can be done together with the LDP," said Santo, an Ishihara ally who had tried to broker Tokyo's effort to buy the islands from the family that has owned them since the late 1970s.
Ishihara, 80, had said on September 11 -- the day the national government signed a contract to buy the islands -- that the Tokyo government could hand over the money it raised "if the next administration agreed to build a minimum of infrastructure" on the disputed territory.
Noda, 55, said last month his priority was to "maintain stable administration" over the islands and questions of any construction on the property should be taken up later.
"We are already maintaining and controlling (the islands) in a calm and stable manner," Japan Foreign Koichiro Gemba said on Wednesday when asked about proposals to build on the islands.
By contrast Abe, 58, said during his campaign for LDP leadership that he would consider setting up a shelter for fishing boats and facilities where civil servants can stay permanently to strengthen Japan's control over the islands.
Now that Abe has taken the LDP's helm, his stance on territorial disputes will be reflected in the party's policy, an LDP official in the party's policy planning wing said.
"I think Abe and Ishiba are of the same mind here (as Ishihara)," Santo told Reuters. "Of course, all of this depends on the LDP taking back power in the next election."
(Additional reporting by Kiyoshi Takenaka, writing by Kevin Krolicki; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
By now, the whole World can see clearly how belligerent and expansionist Japan is. We should stop it before it¡¯s too late.
Oct 03, 201212:48am EDT--
I marvel at why Hilary Clinton failed to condemn the following provocations by Japanese politicians: (1) paying tribute to Japanese class I war criminals from WWII, who are official allies of Adolf Hitler. (2) unilaterally provoking the haunted memories of billions of descendants of victims of Japanese war crimes, for which Japan never paid reasonable reparations like Germany was made to pay. (3) rubbing salt into deep war crime wounds by commemorating, glorifying war crimes by choosing the anniversary of the invasion of Manchuria for the commemoration (4) belittling, slandering war victims and their descendants who are still suffering the legacy of the devastation of the infrastructure and deprivation of the life and support of family members, amounting to tens of millions. (5) repeated distortion of historical facts by NHK to the American and international audience who are naive about the truths of Asian history (6) unfairly manipulating the stories of atomic bombs, thousands of them, to stifle any and all of the tens of millions of heart wrenching stories of the crimes against humanity committed by Japanese militaristic leaders against Asians, who are, even now, unfairly subjected to racist putdowns in Japanese rhetoric, explicitly, as well as subtly. (7) distortion of American understanding of military conflicts in Asia to vilify Chinese people as a military threat, even though China has never invaded Japan, nor did it invade Korea or Vietnam with the intention to occupy, to massacre, to rape as Japanese did( see the documentation of former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger¡¯s book, On China) (8) misuse of NHK to provide a distorted view of Asian history, to stifle the fair opportunity of tens of millions of victims of Japanese unceasingly crimes against humanity in Asia, done with the justification of racist theories of the superiority of Japanese culture over other Asians. (9) distortion of the gratitude of Cambodia for China¡¯s protection of Cambodia from invasion of Vietnam (see Kissinger¡¯s book, On China) as (a)Cambodia siding with China only for economic benefits
I marvel at why Hilary Clinton failed to condemn the following provocations by Japanese politicians: (1) paying tribute to Japanese class I war criminals from WWII, who are official allies of Adolf Hitler. (2) unilaterally provoking the haunted memories of billions of descendants of victims of Japanese war crimes, for which Japan never paid reasonable reparations like Germany was made to pay. (3) rubbing salt into deep war crime wounds by commemorating, glorifying war crimes by choosing the anniversary of the invasion of Manchuria for the commemoration (4) belittling, slandering war victims and their descendants who are still suffering the legacy of the devastation of the infrastructure and deprivation of the life and support of family members, amounting to tens of millions. (5) repeated distortion of historical facts by NHK to the American and international audience who are naive about the truths of Asian history (6) unfairly manipulating the stories of atomic bombs, thousands of them, to stifle any and all of the tens of millions of heart wrenching stories of the crimes against humanity committed by Japanese militaristic leaders against Asians, who are, even now, unfairly subjected to racist putdowns in Japanese rhetoric, explicitly, as well as subtly. (7) distortion of American understanding of military conflicts in Asia to vilify Chinese people as a military threat, even though China has never invaded Japan, nor did it invade Korea or Vietnam with the intention to occupy, to massacre, to rape as Japanese did( see the documentation of former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger¡¯s book, On China) (8) misuse of NHK to provide a distorted view of Asian history, to stifle the fair opportunity of tens of millions of victims of Japanese unceasingly crimes against humanity in Asia, done with the justification of racist theories of the superiority of Japanese culture over other Asians. (9) distortion of the gratitude of Cambodia for China¡¯s protection of Cambodia from invasion of Vietnam (see Kissinger¡¯s book, On China) as (a)Cambodia siding with China only for economic benefits
(b)invasion of Vietnam by China Hilary Clinton is doing humanity a great disfavor. The failure to allow equal opportunity to voice the heart wrenching Asian holocaust inflicted in China, while supporting the repeated stories of Caucasians suffering the holocaust under the Nazis, is PURELY RACIST. No other explanation can justify such egregious double standard.
The victims were human beings. The crimes against humanity were committed before China fell into the hands of the Communists; therefore, the repeated misuse of the ideological differences between the west and communism in China to justify putting down the true haunting stories of Japanese cruelty should never be allowed by NHK on public TV in America, particularly not be allowed to be presented without fair countervailing, fair retort on PBS, with MY tax dollars.
Oct 03, 201212:52am EDT--
Oct 04, 20121:07am EDT--
