Facts about China-North Korea ties
2009-06-30 03:45:00.0
(Reuters) - China remains North Korea's most important partner, but the North's recent nuclear test and its other threats to raise regional tensions have frayed ties.
China was a vital supporter of the North Korean Communist forces in the Korean War, sending soldiers across the border from October 1950. After the armistice China's support continued, and in 1961 the two countries signed a Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance, which calls for either to aid the other if attacked. It remains in force.
North Korea has been wary of its much larger neighbor and Chinese officials and analysts say Beijing's sway over Pyongyang is more limited than some Western governments assume.
In October 2006 North Korea conducted its first nuclear test explosion, defying pleas from Chinese leaders. Beijing condemned the test and backed U.N. Security Council Resolution 1718, which authorized sanctions against North Korea and demanded it halt nuclear weapons and ballistic missile activities.
After the North staged its second nuclear test on May 25, Beijing backed a Security Council Resolution 1874, authorizing tougher sanctions on Pyongyang, including a ban on its arms exports.
China has sought to defuse international confrontation over North Korea by hosting six-party talks since August 2003. The irregular negotiations bring together North and South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia, seeking to end the North's nuclear weapons ambitions in return for aid.
China's trade and aid have become crucial to North Korea's survival, especially as Pyongyang's ties with South Korea have frayed. Last year, trade between China and North Korea reached $2.79 billion, up 41.3 percent on 2007. Of that, China's exports to the North were worth $2.0 billion.
In the first give months of 2009, their trade was worth $847 million, a fall of 4.3 percent on the same period last year, with Chinese exports to the North falling by 11.6 percent.
China is not specific about how much of this trade is really aid, and it does not give separate statistics on aid.
China's 1,416-km (880-mile) border with North Korea includes stretches of rivers that freeze over in winter, and in recent years many North Korean refugees have crossed over, sometimes then making their way to other countries.
In past years, outside groups estimated their numbers to be from tens of thousands to 300,000 or more. More recently, stronger border controls and reduced famine in the North appear to have reduced arrivals.
(Sources: Reuters; Chinese Ministry of Commerce website www.mofcom.gov.cn; "China Monthly Exports & Imports"; International Crisis Group; Andrew Scobell, "China and North Korea: From Comrades-in-Arms to Allies at Arm's Length"; U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea)
(Reporting by Chris Buckley, Editing by Dean Yates)
