UPDATE 2-China iron ore talks deadline to slip
2009-06-30 04:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Iron ore price talks between Chinese steel mills and global miners look likely to drag on past the Tuesday deadline, with little sign the two sides are moving closer to breaking the deadlock.
A source at the China Iron and Steel Association and a senior executive at a steel mill both said the negotiations are likely to continue into Wednesday, pushing China onto the volatile spot market to source its ore.
"We made a statement in late May that we would not accept the price reached by Japanese steel mills and Rio Tinto, so we will keep negotiating," a source at the lead negotiator China Iron and Steel Association told Reuters.
"Therefore, we are still in the negotiations until an official statement is made."
Tian Zhiping, the vice-general manager of China's second-largest steelmaker Hebei Iron and Steel Group, also said the two sides will not reach agreement in by the June 30 deadline. [ID:nSHA64200]
"The two parties are still holding their requests and have not been closing their demands. So I cannot say if there is any room for each party to concede," Tian told Reuters.
A failure to strike a deal would mean China having to buy most of its ore on the spot market, but in reality the shift is already underway -- Rio has sold half its ore on a spot basis this year.
It would also put Chinese mills in a unfavourable position against regional rivals in Japan and South Korea, which have fixed their cost with a 33 percent price cut with Rio Tinto (
Rio Tinto, which effectively set the deadline, has maintained it is ready to sell to its customers on whatever basis they prefer, but has shown no inclination to go lower than the price cut it agreed with Japan and South Korea.
"We will continue to deliver ore to our customers (after June 30) as we have in weeks past and as we will in weeks and month to come, but under what arrangements is something only the customers can decide," Rio Tinto spokesman Gervase Greene told Reuters.
"They want a benchmark system that is well below spot... Symbolically, we are in uncharted territory."
Last year, talks dragged on until June 24 before the first deal was struck, but this year China and global miners are so far apart it threatens to end the decades-old annual benchmark pricing system for the steel-making raw material.
The negotiating power of China, which wants a 40-45 percent price cut, has been sharply undermined by a recovery in both steel and iron ore prices, and many analysts have predicted talks would continue with the lapse of the deadline.
"I won't be surprised if the standoff continues as price action over the past month does not suggest we will see much change to current market dynamics," said Su Aik Lim of Fitch Ratings in Beijing.
Spot iron ore prices to China have risen by a fifth in just a month, and now trade at a 4-month high above $80 a tonne on a delivered China basis, equivalent to around $65 free on board.
That's higher than the contract price of $61 that the Japanese and South Korean mills secured, encouraging miners to take a harder line with Chinese steel mills.
Small Chinese mills, eager to fix production costs and prepare for demand upturn, have already signed private deals, ignoring threats from CISA that it would not recognise the deals and revoke import licenses.
Massive iron ore stockpiles built up in China after record imports this year will provide some immediate buffer for mills if supplies come to an abrupt halt, especially as Europe is seeing some signs of recovery in steel production, which would increase iron ore demand.
"Under this scenario, the Chinese strategy of not signing a benchmark would backfire," said Merrill Lynch analyst Tom Price.
For a Reuters poll on likely outcomes, click [ID:nSP482567]
For a PREVIEW of the talks [ID:nSEO56621] (Additional reporting by David Stanway and Tom Miles in BEIJING and Miyoung Kim in SEOUL; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
