PRESS DIGEST - British business - June 29
2009-06-28 23:42:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun  EDT
Commercial property group London & Stamford LSP.L has posted pre-tax profits of 20.1 million pounds in its first full financial year since its initial public offering in November 2007. The company was the only listed property business to generate value for shareholders in the period, which saw it acquire a City office for 74 million pounds and 15.7 percent stake in Sheffield's Meadowhall shopping centre for 53 million pounds.
The owner of The Living Room and Prohibition chains looks set to undergo a pre-pack administration before being sold. The Reuben brothers will pay around 50 million pounds for Premium Bars & Restaurants. The brothers, who also happen to be the company's biggest shareholders, are expected to run the business with the backing of Northern Racing, their racecourse group.
Clifford Chance risks losing its position as the largest law firm in the world to American rival Skadden and Baker & McKenzie as it prepares to announce a five percent slump in revenue for the latest full year. David Childs, managing partner of the British group, has recently indicated profits could fall even more sharply, with industry sources suggesting its performance could contract by up to a third. Such a development would see Clifford Chance fall below the benchmark level of one million pounds per partner. Of the UK's top law firms, Clifford Chance is likely to be hit hardest by the collapse of the financial sector because of the size of its banking practice.
Low Carbon Accelerator LCA.L, the Aim-listed investment fund focused on environmental technology, has raised ten million pounds through a placing managed by RBS Hoare Govett. Funds from the placing will be used to "accelerate the growth" of companies that the closed ended fund has invested in. The placing saw 41.6 million shares issued at 25 pence each, representing an 18 percent discount compared with the price of its shares before the fund-raising was announced on June 22.
Private equity group Doughty Hanson has been forced to write off 85 million pounds after Setanta went into administration last week. The Irish group collapsed with the loss of over 200 jobs after rescue talks failed. The loss is a blow for Doughty Hanson, which has made 118 acquisitions totalling 24 billion pounds since its inception 24 years ago. A spokesman said the exposure was relatively small in light of larger and more successful investments made elsewhere. Other investors, including founders Leonard Ryan and Michael O'Rourke and investment group Balderton, will also incur a share of losses totalling 450 million pounds.
The Treasury will pay PricewaterhouseCoopers 4.8 million pounds to calculate the amount of compensation that Bradford & Bingley's (
) former shareholders are owed. The government ended its search for an independent valuer last week when it appointed Peter Clokey, partner and head of valuation at the auditors, to determine shareholders' compensation. However, the task risks legal action from private B&B shareholders, who have threatened such a move if they consider the award to be too low. Treasury documents say Clokey is charging on an hourly basis "subject to a limit of 4.8 million pounds".
) is strengthening its defence against an unwanted merger approach from rival Xstrata XTA.L by seeking investment from Chinese mining group Chinalco [ALUMI.UL]. Anglo is also said to be looking for a new chairman, with National Grid chairman Sir John Parker being mentioned as a possible successor to Sir Mark Moody-Stuart. The mining group recently rejected a 41 billion dollar "merger of equals" with Xstrata, describing the terms as "totally unacceptable".
) has developed a technique for toughening soft wood. The technique, marketed under the trade name Accoya, enables soft wood to be used as a substitute for hard wood, which would take longer to grow, is more expensive and rarer. The Netherlands-based facility operated by the firm's Titan Wood subsidiary has an interim design capacity of more than 40,000 cubic metres annually, following recent process improvements. Tomorrow's full year results are expected to be in line with previous upbeat trading statements.
The findings of the TUC's annual fund manager voting survey show he majority of institutional investors did not challenge the remuneration reports of leading banks in the run-up to the 2008 financial crash. According to the report, HSBC (
) was the only bank whose remuneration report received less than 60 percent backing from the survey's respondents.
A new report, which suggests the cost of honouring public sector pensions is equal to 85 percent of the UK's GDP, is expected to spark renewed calls for reform of the system. The report's authors, the British-North American Committee, accuse the UK, U.S. and Canadian governments of underestimating the cost of providing pensions due to a reliance on exaggerated projections of investment returns over the next 40 years. The report also cites the OECD's warning that governments risk social unrest if they do not address the inequality that exists between the public and private sectors
) on Monday, in an effort to reach a resolution on the 1.4 billion pound contract for the London to Edinburgh route. The route has become a financial millstone for the group but transport minister Lord Adonis is adamant that there will be no favourable renegotiation of the franchise. He has not ruled out invoking a cross default clause, which would force the group to hand back its c2c and National Express East Anglia franchises if it walks away from the seven and a half year contract.
) has closed its alternative energy headquarters and made cuts to its clean energy budget, in a move likely to be unpopular with environmental critics. The decision to move alternative energy operations back in-house comes with the news that clean energy boss Vivienne Cox is stepping down to spend more time with her children, although industry insiders have speculated on whether her leaving is due to frustration with the lessening importance of the division. While the clean energy budget has been cut, from 1.4 billion dollars last year to between 500 million and one billion dollars this year, spending is still in line with original plans to invest eight billion dollars by 2015.
