Bolt set for showdown with rival Powell
2009-06-26 23:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Olympic gold medalist and world record holder Usain Bolt will resume battle with his Jamaican rival Asafa Powell in front of a passionate home crowd on Saturday in the Caribbean Island's national championship.
Bolt, who is the world's fastest man having run 9.69 in Beijing last year, barely broke sweat as he cruised through his heat in a time of 10.14, while Powell also took it easy with his 10.36.
Bolt, who also holds the Olympic gold and world record time in 200 meters, was frustrated by four false starts in his race.
"That was a little annoying because I started to get cold again so I couldn't really explode out," he told reporters.
"I just wanted to get out in front and stay there and I was able to do that," he said.
The pair will have to be alert on Saturday, though, with places in Jamaica's squad for August's world championships in Berlin up for grabs.
Michael Frater, Steve Mullings, Marvin Anderson and Yohan Blake, all winners of their respective heats, are eyeing spots on the team, and with just the top four granted a slot in the relay side, there will be plenty at stake.
Powell, who has struggled with an ankle problem of late, described himself as "not 100 percent fit" in pre-race comments while Bolt, who has not run a 200 meters this season, is focusing on getting up to speed in that event.
In the women's 100 meters, which did not feature preliminary heats, the true depth of Jamaican sprinting is on display with all the top three from Beijing facing off.
Gold medalist Shelly-Ann Fraser is up against the pair who shared silver in China, Kerron Stewart and Sherone Simpson.
There will be an intense battle for the top three spots though with Simpson not having competed since knee surgery last year and Aleen Bailey, Simone Facey and Sheri-Ann Brooks all fancying their chances of an upset.
Veronica Campbell Brown, who is not competing in the 100 meters as she has a wildcard to defend her title in Berlin, is focusing on Sunday's 200 meters race.
