Global stocks slide on high saving rate fear
2009-06-26 16:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Global shares slid on Friday after a record U.S. savings rate sparked concerns it may erode consumer spending and slow recovery, while the U.S. dollar fell following China's call for a super-sovereign reserve currency.
The weakness in equity markets helped boost the allure of fixed-income assets. U.S. Treasuries and euro zone government debt prices rose, sending U.S. benchmark yields to their lowest level in nearly four weeks, and Bund futures hit a one-month high.
Crude oil prices fell more than $1, pressured by the weakness on Wall Street and news that top African oil producer Nigeria would halt fighting with rebels in its energy-rich Niger Delta.
Data showed that while U.S. consumer spending and income both rose in May as government stimulus spread through the economy, much of the money was being socked away.
U.S. savings jumped to a record annual rate of $768.8 billion, the highest level since records began in 1959, and the saving rate climbed to a more than 15-year high of 6.9 percent.
"I don't think it is going to be any surprise that savings have to come up, that the consumer has to deleverage," said Henry Smith, chief investment officer of Haverford Trust Co in Philadelphia. "This is not a short-term phenomenon. This is going to play out over several years."
Smith said the savings rate is more data that shows "this expansion will be characterized by a below-average, slower expansion.
But the technology-heavy Nasdaq outperformed, helped by a nearly 16 percent surge in shares of Palm Inc PALM.O after it posted a narrower-than-expected loss Thursday and said demand was strong for its new Pre smartphone.
closed down 34.01 points, or 0.40 percent, at 8,438.39. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
slid 1.36 points, or 0.15 percent, at 918.90. The Nasdaq Composite Index
rose 8.68 points, or 0.47 percent, at 1,838.22.
The CBOE Volatility Index .VIX, often called Wall Street's fear gauge, fell to 25.93, its lowest close since September 12, just before the collapse of Lehman Brothers precipitated enormous stock declines across the world.
European shares closed lower as drugmakers fell, led by Sanofi-Aventis (
), while commodity-related shares retreated as they tracked lower crude and metal prices.
"Over the course of the day, sentiment has seemed to have dissipated," said Peter Dixon, strategist at Commerzbank. "I also think it is a bit of a reaction to the negative day in the U.S. Investors just want to sell and take profits."
Bond investors shrugged off the personal income data and focused instead on a tame reading of price pressures in the same report, suggesting the Federal Reserve's super-easy monetary policy has yet to spur inflation.
Bonds also were still on a firm footing after this week's record auction of $104 billion, calming worries over the mounting U.S. debt.
The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note was up 5/32 in price to yield 3.52 percent. The 2-year U.S. Treasury note was unchanged in price, yielding 1.11 percent.
Next week, the euro-zone market will see roughly 16 billion euros of supply, which will be more than offset by redemption payments amounting to around 24 billion euros, traders said.
The 10-year Bund yield was at 3.388 percent, after earlier easing to a six-week low of 3.383 percent, Reuters charts showed.
DOLLAR TUMBLES, OIL DROPS
China's central bank did not mention the U.S. dollar by name but said it was a serious defect that one currency should tower over all others.
The sheer size of China's holdings of U.S. debt means such remarks are likely to continue to put pressure on the dollar.
"The Chinese own a tremendous amount of U.S. Treasuries," said Fabian Eliasson, vice president of currency sales at Mizuho Corporate Bank in New York. "They are obviously worried about inflation and losing value on their investments."
The dollar was down against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY down 0.70 percent at 79.842.
The euro was up 0.57 percent at $1.4065, while against the yen the dollar was down 0.70 percent at 95.17.
An amnesty offer in Nigeria reversed early sharp gains in the oil market, which followed a statement by Nigerian rebels that they had blown up a wellhead in a Royal Dutch Shell (
Asian shares rose as higher oil and metals prices boosted resource stocks. MSCI's index of Asian stocks excluding Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS climbed 1.9 percent but remains below eight-month highs scaled at the start of June. Japan's Nikkei average
ended up 0.8 percent at 9,877.39.
(Reporting by Richard Valdmanis, Doris Frankel, Vivianne Rodrigues, Burton Frierson in New York; Christopher Johnson, Ian Chua and Joanne Frearson in London; Writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Leslie Adler)
