Gold rises slightly as dollar broadly drops
2009-06-26 15:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold futures ended slightly higher on Friday, losing some of their initial upward momentum based on a broadly weaker dollar, and the metal could continue to be rangebound because of weakened investment demand.
The price of gold has largely moved in a broad range between $920 and $940 this week, as the combination of the resurgent dollar and easing inflation worries put a damper on bullion's rise.
Analysts said that the recent encouraging U.S. data had hampered gold's rise, as the danger of fresh crises in financial markets appeared less imminent.
"One of the reasons gold has been bought has been as an insurance premium against inflation, or against systemic risk from another camp of investors," said Peter Fertig, an analyst with Quantitative Commodity Research. "At least for the latter group, their need to hold gold has clearly been reduced."
Spot bullion was at $940.60 by 2:25 p.m. EDT, up from $938.55 quoted late on Thursday in New York. Earlier in the session, it hit a two-week high above $948.20 per ounce -- last seen June 12, when the dollar tumbled against a basket of currencies.
NEW RESERVE CURRENCY?
China's central bank renewed its call on Friday for the creation of a super-sovereign reserve currency to reduce the dollar's global domination.
On Thursday, the head of the economic department of China's Communist Party policy research office said the country should buy more gold, and that purchasing land in the United States was a better option for China than buying U.S. treasuries.
However, market watchers said it was unlikely that the dollar's world reserve currency status would be challenged in the foreseeable future.
Inflows into gold-backed exchange-traded funds waned, reflecting weak fundamental demand for gold from retail investors and the jewelry market.
Holdings at the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, SPDR Gold Trust, fell 0.5 percent to 1,125.74 tonnes as of June 25, down 5.5 tonnes from the previous business day.
On the supply side, South Africa's Gold Fields Limited (
For next week, the metal should see less liquidity and more short-term volatility because of thinner volume related to the U.S. Independence Day and Canada Day holidays, said George Gero, vice president of RBC Capital Markets Global Futures.
In other precious metals, spot silver firmed to $14.12, against $14.01 quoted late in New York on Wednesday, while platinum climbed to $1,199, against $1,184.50 and palladium strengthened to $244.50 from $242.00.
(Additional reporting by Chikako Mogi in Tokyo; Editing by Christian Wiessner)
