HIGHLIGHTS-BIS central bankers meeting in Basel
2009-06-28 13:46:00.0
Track China's Leaders
BASEL, Switzerland, June 28
Sun  EDT
BASEL, Switzerland, June 28
ZHOU XIAOCHUAN, CHINESE CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR
"Our foreign exchange reserve policy is always quite stable and consistent, that is to say that for the purpose of liquidity and safety and the returns, so I think you should realise that it is very stable. There aren't any sudden changes."
"What we are discussing is that Brazil's president Mr Lula and our president Mr Hu talk about the possibility and gradual development to use our local currency for some trade settlement and ... investment, that's the major thing. It's not necessarily to use a currency swap."
"Let's wait another day or another two days, we are going to decide it on Wednesday.
"But certainly, the inflation rate is going down, it is going to be quite low for the time being..., it is going even closer to the very low end of our target. Yes, there is still room to move but how big and when is another question."
"If it were done, then it would be either stay or downwards, but not up."
"We are, of course, like any other countries in the world very much looking into a larger, better and speedier recovery next year.
"And hence while we have to care for the economy and consumption growth and keep it growing like what it has been, we also would have to look at the next year's move of the recovery, how far and how fast it is going to start pushing some inflation pressures.
"But the majority of central bankers think we haven't seen any threat from inflationary pressures coming soon. We are not going to see it this year and (it) may not be (the case) until quite late next year."
"Everybody understands that while we are doing all we can to stimulate the economy both from the fiscal and monetary side, that does not mean that we don't have in mind in the future what needs to be done. But we haven't talked very specifically about that yet."
"Central banks all over the world like ministries of finance all over the world are facing these unprecedented events and we have all responded with unprecedented measures, unconventional measures, and hence we do understand that there are challenges ahead as to how we can go back to our normal lives, but it is not something that is the first priority now.
JASSEM AL-MANNAI, DIRECTOR GENERAL, ARAB MONETARY FUND
"You have China, Russia proposing we should think about a more international reserve currency other than the dollar. America, through this crisis, accumulated huge debt. It's a heavy burden on the dollar. These developments could affect negatively the dollar. These developments are very important and you cannot just ignore them."
GUILLERMO ORTIZ, MEXICO CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR, BIS BOARD CHAIRMAN
"It may be premature to go into a lot of details about exit strategies at this point; it's important to have that subject in mind but I think that we are not out of the woods yet. One important question is whether these green shoots actually take root and the incipient recovery which we see in some parts of the world is sustainable."
MARIO DRAGHI, GOVERNOR BANK OF ITALY, FINANCIAL STABILITY BOARD CHAIRMAN
"Exit strategies ought to be credible. To be credible you have to have both the banking system repaired before you start to tighten monetary policy and you want the economy showing convincing signs of a sustained recovery. A lot has been done to reassure markets that we would not view any systemic failure of the sort we saw with Lehman repeat itself. I don't think we are losing momentum (on regulatory reform). It's not time for pausing."
