UPDATE 1-Fed's Fisher: exit strategy to come at right time
2009-06-26 16:20:00.0
(Reuters) - An end to the Federal Reserve's easy monetary policy will not be as simple as raising interest rates, and the timing of the policy shift will involve critical judgement calls, a Fed policymaker said on Friday.
"At the right point, there will be an exit strategy," Richard Fisher, president of the Dallas Fed, told reporters after speaking to a business group in Dallas.
Fisher said the U.S. economy is poised to return to growth, most likely very late in 2009, but that the recovery will not be strong at first.
"We may get a little growth thaw in the second half ... but green shoots are not growing like kudzu," Fisher said in reference to a fast-growing legume often seen in the southeast United States. "I have been forecasting a slow recovery. Not a V-shaped snapback, nor even a U-shaped one, but a very slow slog," Fisher said.
Among the positives for growth, credit market conditions have improved on several measures, durable goods orders seem to have hit bottom, retail sales are no longer plunging, and consumers are less pessimistic, he said.
Still, with the jobless rate almost certainly headed to 10 percent, inflation should not create an immediate headache for policy-makers, Fisher said.
BATTLE READY?
The Fed's plan to end its highly accommodative policies once the economy recovers has become a major issue recently for investors.
Some fear that if the Fed does not act quickly enough to reverse a variety of innovative credit-easing programs that have flooded the economy with cash, and to raise benchmark interest rates from near-zero levels, inflation could spike.
Former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan waded into the debate on Friday, calling inflation "the greater future challenge" beyond getting the global economy back on its feet. Inflation could flare up in 2012, Greenspan wrote in the Financial Times.
"We are developing exiting strategies," Fisher told reporters. "They're not ready to be articulated yet, but they will be laid out at an appropriate time."
Fisher declined to characterize this week's moves to tweak some of the Fed's programs -- extending a number of lending programs until February, while letting others lapse -- as a step toward an exit strategy.
"Right now, yields are somewhat subdued," he said.
The yield on the benchmark U.S. 10-year Treasury note US10YT=RR, which climbed from about 3.08 percent in mid-May to 4 percent in early June, is now near 3.5 percent.
Still, interest rates are at risk of rising in the face of massive supplies that will be needed to cover the large U.S. budget deficit -- a policy challenge for the Fed, he said.
Fisher told reporters that "whatever the market clearing price is of Treasuries, it will be worse if the Fed is perceived as monetizing the deficit," which could drive up future inflation and push interest rates higher.
A day after Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke was grilled by lawmakers on his actions surrounding Bank of America's purchase of Merrill Lynch, Fisher defended his leader.
"It's easy to second-guess a general after the war has subsided," Fisher said, terming Bernanke an "exemplary public servant" who "applies very considered judgement."
The Fed, under Bernanke's stewardship, has prevented another economic depression in the United States, Fisher said.
Fisher said new regulatory powers being proposed for the Fed by the White House are not much different from the emergency role the central bank has played over the past couple of years. The proposals "provide us with the tools we need," he said.
Fisher also brushed off a new push by China for a new "super-sovereign" reserve currency to reduce the U.S. dollar's global domination.
"I don't see the dollar being supplanted as the leading currency in the world," Fisher said. (Editing by James Dalgleish)
