Google, WPP see signs of hope amid Cannes gloom
2009-06-26 13:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Emerging markets such as China, digital advertising and the promotion of green technology have stood out as rare bright spots amid the gloom at the annual Cannes advertising festival this year.
Most executives who attended the week-long gathering said that 2009 was likely to remain tough but that when a recovery comes, it will be led by the likes of China.
Digital advertising online is also projected to grow 8.6 percent in 2009 while the global ad market is expected to fall 6.9 percent, according to ZenithOptimedia.
"We're going to depend a lot on what happens in China," Martin Sorrell, chief executive of the world's largest advertising group by revenue WPP (
), told Reuters in an interview.
"It might be for us very difficult to accept, but we're going to depend of them. The signs of recovery are more likely to be found in Asia than they are here."
Sorrell, who has long cited the power of the so-called BRIC nations -- Brazil, Russia, India and China -- to boost the advertising industry, said he had already seen some improvement in China, but that it had not lasted.
"There was a recovery, which was interesting in China in April but in May it was not as good," he said.
Eric Schmidt, the chief executive of Google (
), told a press conference on the impact of the recession that it was reasonable to be optimistic for 2010 and felt the United States was slowly getting through the worst of the downturn.
"If you look at the recovery globally, the U.S. recovery will probably began in the fall," he said. "And you can tell it because the rate of jobless claims is decreasing although the absolute number is increasing.
"It's an indication of the beginning of the bottom."
Mary Dillon, global chief marketing officer of fast food group McDonald's (
), said the company spends on average 7 percent of its marketing budget on digital advertisting.
"We're rethinking the mix of spending all the time, to make sure we're spending in the right place," she told the "Cannes Debate" hosted by Sorrell.
David Jones, global chief executive of Havas Worldwide (
) and Euro RSCG Worldwide, told Reuters he agreed with the industry sentiment that 2009 would be a difficult year but said he was not panicking.
"From my perspective, I say to our guys: when there's a shark in the water, you don't need to swim faster than the shark, just faster than everybody else," he said.
"So we're focusing on being a very fast swimmer.
"Green marketing has gone from being 10 years ago just good for the planet to today, being good for the planet and good for the business, because it's about being green and making money."
(Writing by Kate Holton; Editing by David Cowell)
