FTSE closes down 0.3 pct; miners, oils weigh
2009-06-26 00:32:00.0
(Reuters) - London's top share index closed 0.3 percent weaker on Friday, as declines among miners, weighed down by comments from the Chinese central bank's financial stability report, and oils offset retailers' gains.
fell 11.56 points to 4,241.01, retracing earlier gains despite U.S. consumer spending in May rising for the first time since February as government stimulus measures boosted income.
The index has gained 22.5 percent since touching a six-year low in March, but is still down 4.4 percent for the year.
"It's another case of any strength being very short-lived at the moment, which kind of indicates that there is still a good degree of underlying weakness in the market," said Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads.
"The market has got a serious summer feeling about it -- the volumes have dried up a bit, and we seem to be going sideways, but with the emphasis on the downside," he said.
UK mining stocks were big fallers, hurt by comments from the People's Bank of China (PBOC) that the financial crisis might slow China's drive to expand consumption.
) fell 1 percent, with BHP Billiton (
) off 0.7 percent, Vedanta Resources (
) down 0.7 percent, and Anglo American (
), 1.5 percent weaker.
Oil stocks were also big fallers, reversing gains made earlier in the session, as crude slipped below $70 a barrel.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), Cairn Energy (
Banks were mixed, with Barclays (
) down 0.6 percent and 0.7 percent, respectively, dented by comments from Swiss lender UBS (
Weakness was also seen among life insurers. Friends Provident FP.L fell 0.8 percent, while Standard Life (
In Friday's thin, skittish trade, a 0.8 percent decline in mobile operator Vodafone (
Retailers enjoyed a rally as John Lewis [JLP.UL], seen as a barometer of British retail spending, said its 27 UK department stores recorded their best week of the first half so far, partly helped by significant purchases for Father's Day. [ID:nLQ546376]
) was among the top blue-chip risers, up 3.7 percent, while Next (
Elsewhere, British Airways BAY.L advanced 2.1 percent after it said nearly 7,000 staff had agreed to voluntary pay cuts in a bid to save the airline costs as it battles a downturn in travel.
