Mideast, Asian firms poised for private bank deals
2009-06-26 09:16:00.0
Mideast, Asian firms poised for private bank deals | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mideast, Asian firms poised for private bank deals
Fri  EDT
The downturn, which has seen fraud by U.S. businessman Bernard Madoff, rich clients withdrawing savings and a tax haven crackdown, has trained the spotlight on acquisition interest from players in the region, which analysts feel will intensify.
Despite recent blows to the sector, private banking and wealth management remains an attractive sector for many groups, with the offshore wealth management industry estimated to be worth some $7 trillion by the Boston Consulting Group.
"There are certain sets of players that are potentially interested in acquisitions: private equity firms, banks that are already focused offshore players and players that, out of geography, do not really have a proper private banking industry, like Middle Eastern players," said Stefan Jaecklin, who covers the wealth management industry for consultancy Oliver Wyman.
Last year, Abu Dhabi investment company Aabar AABAR.AD acquired the Swiss private banking activities of troubled U.S. insurer AIG.
While Bank of China was forced to drop a planned 2.3 billion yuan investment in France's La Compagnie Financiere Edmond de Rothschild due to regulatory issues this year, it added that it would continue to seek other forms of co-operation with Rothschild in areas such as private banking.
While it is hard to place a value on any likely deals, since many private banks are family-owned and unlisted, analysts say that transactions in the sector are more likely to be worth hundreds of millions of dollars rather than in the billions.
This week's Merrill Lynch/Capgemini World Wealth Report said the wealth management market was showing signs of a recovery.
The report also highlighted the growing importance of those present in the Asian market, saying the Asia-Pacific region was expected to surpass North America by 2013 as the top regional home for the world's rich.
"This could be quite a valuable proposition for them," said Daniel Gresch, a partner at Zurich-based Ronald Berger Strategy Consultants who covers the private banking sector.
The world's biggest wealth manager, UBS (
), has been one of the major banks hit the hardest by the crisis and has had a series of losses, yet analysts said its scale would help it keep market share and that deals would center on smaller firms.
"I see the consolidation happening between the mid-tier private banks," said Wladimir Mollof, who heads up French boutique investment bank Arjil.
"In asset management and private banking, increasing your capital under management is key -- more so than cutting costs."
), Lloyds (
One major hurdle for private bank deals, however, remains the primacy of customer service quality, something Middle Eastern and Asian firms entering the fray for the first time would have to consider, said Roland Berger's Gresch.
"Customers want to be in a position to call up their private banker at 3 a.m. that night and say 'Look I can't sleep, I don't know where to send my daughter to school.' Private banking, at its heart, is about service and not just products," he said.
