China's Internet filter rules draw WTO complaints
2009-06-26 00:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Countries at the World Trade Organisation complained on Friday about China's proposed Internet filter rules which the United States deemed "draconian" and the European Union urged it to scrap.
At a meeting of the Technical Barriers to Trade committee, which assesses unfair hurdles for exporters, WTO members also took aim at Canada's anti-allergy food labelling and the European Union's treatment of imported chemicals.
The complaints, if unresolved, could eventually escalate into formal disputes. When trade rules are breached, the WTO's court permits governments to impose hefty retaliatory sanctions.
Friday's talks centered on Beijing's requirement all personal computers be pre-installed by July 1 with "Green Dam" software that filters out objectionable material like pornography, which U.S. officials have said could be used for broader censorship. [nN25302545]
The European Union "strongly urged" China to drop the rule, and Washington's representative called it "draconian" and said it could infringe on the intellectual property rights of U.S. companies, according to diplomats at the closed-door talks.
Japan also voiced concern about the measure, which China's delegate said was aimed at protecting minors from online pornography and was requested by parents and teachers.
The United States and European Union complained about a new Chinese standard for connecting mobile phones to the Internet, which strays from international standards.
South Korea said it was concerned about anti-bacterial and cleaning requirements for air conditioners, refrigerators, washing machines and dehumidifiers imported into China.
Thailand, China, Japan, Canada, the United States and Latin American members led by Argentina said their companies were facing "great difficulties and high cost" complying with the European Union's regulations on imported chemicals.
Brussels, in turn, said Canada's labelling requirements for ingredients that may cause allergies "was not in line with international practice."
"Canada said there was need for clear and understandable labels so that consumers might be aware of allergy-causing food," a trade official said.
Standards affecting imports of organic food to South Korea, medical devices to Brazil and car tyres to India were also in the spotlight.
((geneva.newsroom@reuters.com; Tel. +41 22 733 3831; Reuters Messaging: laura.macinnis.reuters.com@reuters.net)) Keywords: TRADE WTO/COMPLAINTS =2
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nLQ807642
