UPDATE 3-MOVES-RBS, State Street, UBS, Hidden River
2009-06-25 16:56:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Thursday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com
CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM
The Sacramento pension system named Stephen W. Kessler as deputy executive officer of operations, to oversee support areas for the system including administration, human resources, fiscal planning and information technology. Kessler has been chief deputy director of operations for the California Department of Public Health.
In addition, the system named Kathleen Hamilton as deputy executive officer of benefits. She will oversee the system's retirement programs and its healthcare programs. She has been legislative director for California Assembly member Dave Jones.
RBS said William O'Donnell rejoined the firm as head of U.S. Treasury Strategy within its global banking and markets division. O'Donnell joins after five years at UBS, where he was most recently head of US interest rate research and strategy for the investment banking division.
State Street, which specializes in asset management and servicing, announced that it had been selected by hedge fund firm Caxton Associates LP to offer administration services for $6 billion in assets.
California United Bank said Stephen Carpenter will step down as chairman of the board, and Chief Executive David Rainer has been elected the new chairman. Carpenter will continue as vice chairman.
The bank said it appointed Chi-Won Yoon as chairman and CEO of Asia Pacific, succeeding Rory Tapner, who is leaving the bank after 25 years. Yoon joined UBS in 1997. [ID:nHKG249697]
The company named Shek Chee Seng, former chief executive of CITIC-Prudential Fund Management, China, as chief executive of its Singapore asset management unit. [ID:nBOM145764]
One of London's top analysts, James Montier, has resigned from French bank Societe Generale to join a hedge fund, a source with knowledge of the situation said. [ID:nLP176750]
The firm said it appointed Lindsay Miller as vice president of sales, Ontario. Prior to joining the firm, Miller was national manager of broker services at Brokerworx.
The firm said it appointed Scott Beardsley and Michael Shalmi to its leadership team in Copenhagen, as senior partners. Christina Sylvester-Hvid has also joined as a principal. Beardsley joins from JP Morgan in San Francisco, while Shalmi joins from Novo Nordisk. Sylvester-Hvid was previously at Wiborg Biotech Consulting, where she was a partner. (Compiled by Antonita Madonna Devotta in Bangalore, Paritosh Bansal in New York and Svea Herbst-Bayliss and Ross Kerber in Boston; Editing by Anil D'Silva, Bernard Orr and Richard Chang)
