Gold rises as oil rallies
2009-06-25 15:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold futures rose toward $940 an ounce on Thursday, as a weaker dollar and oil's strong gains prompted investors to pour into the bullion market.
However, the gold options market indicated that bullion prices could continue to gyrate in a broad range as the market was looking for trading cues from outside of the commodities sectors.
Mihir Dange, a COMEX floor trader in New York, said that option investors have been aggressively selling volatilities, and that dampened option prices as gold futures failed to break out of a broad range between $923 and $944 in the past ten days.
"When inflation is a concern - it must be at some point when you are putting this much money into the economy, definitely gold should get interesting again," Dange said.
Spot gold was at 938.30 per ounce at 3:14 p.m. EDT, up from $931.10 quoted late in New York on Wednesday.
The U.S. currency later lost ground against most major currencies, tracking the change in U.S. stocks, which rose on economic optimism.
The yellow metal has moved some way off Monday's low of $912.90, garnering support above $930 per ounce. Rising crude prices, which rose toward $71 a barrel, also boosted its credentials as a potential hedge against oil-induced inflation.
On Wednesday, gold cut gains after the U.S. Federal Reserve's post-policy meeting statement showed that inflation will remain subdued for some time. However, the Fed also said it will keep rates low for the foreseeable future.
Low U.S. interest rates are seen as potentially bearish for the dollar from a yield perspective, raising the appeal of dollar-denominated gold for non-U.S. investors.
Buying sentiment improved after the head of the economic department of the Communist Party policy research office in China said the country should buy more gold, and that purchasing land in the United States was a better option for China than buying U.S. treasuries.
There is no suggestion that Li, even though he is a senior researcher of the Party's think-tank, was enunciating an agreed party line.
However, a debate is swirling in China about how the country can reduce its exposure to the dollar and to U.S. assets in case America's ultra-loose fiscal and monetary policy rekindles inflation and erodes the value of the dollar and U.S. Treasuries.
In other precious metals, spot silver firmed to $13.99, against $13.83 quoted late in New York on Wednesday, while platinum climbed to $1,184.50, against $1,156 and palladium was stronger $243 from $233.50.
(Additional reporting by Risa Maeda in Tokyo, Zhou Xin and Alan Wheatley in Beijing)
