CANADA FINANCE-For Manulife, the acquisitive spirit is willing
2009-06-25 07:54:00.0
(Reuters) - In Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh City there is a tower emblazoned with the green logo of Manulife Financial, Canada's top life insurer.
The same sign lights the sky in Hong Kong, Tokyo and other cities across the 19 countries where Manulife operates.
If Chief Executive Donald Guloien gets his way, the company will plant its flag in other global cities, maybe even in one of the European capitals it has ogled from a distance.
"There are tons of opportunities right now, and our M&A team has doubled in size in the last couple of months," Guloien said in an interview from headquarters in Toronto, Canada's financial capital.
The global financial crisis has put into play the distressed assets of many of Manulife's former rivals, and with one-time titans such as American International Group Inc (
) buried under massive debt loads, Manulife may be in line to pick up some of the pieces.
"Some companies are going to have to shed off some businesses in order to strengthen their balance sheets ... so there's an opportunity for a shakeout here," said Tom Mackinnon, an analyst at Scotia Capital in Toronto who sees potential for Manulife to expand in North America and Asia.
IS IT READY?
), which is is emerging from the crisis with some nasty bruises of its own. While it fared better than many international competitors, it may need time to recover from exposure to billions of dollars in liabilities incurred by its variable annuity business.
Under the direction of its former CEO, Dominic D'Alessandro, the business offered guaranteed pension-plan payouts to clients and funded the promise by investing clients' money in stocks, some of which tanked last year. The company had no hedges in place to mitigate the damage.
"This risk position is not going away fast. I think you'll find (CEO) Don (Guloien) spends a lot of this year shoring up the balance sheet, raising capital, trying to get that horse back in the corral," one analyst said on condition of anonymity.
In response, the company revamped its policies, hired a dedicated team to manage its hedge program and raised fresh capital.
Its stock has recovered to about C$20 these days from a March low of C$9, but it is still wavering amid uncertainty about whether the company is sufficiently protected.
"While we have seen encouraging improvements in the equity markets since March 31, our earnings and capital levels will continue to be impacted by equity market and interest rate volatility, and we will remain focused on fortifying capital," Guloien said last week.
As a result, Guloien said, the company expects that regulators, rating agencies and investors will want it to boost its capital levels further.
If history is an accurate guide, Manulife won't miss out on the wave of acquisitions by Canadian insurers that some analysts say is now stirring.
The company has been a trailblazer in Canadian life and health insurance since it was formed in 1887, when it offered life insurance to women on the same basis as men, and was among the first in the industry to do so.
It vaulted onto the global stage six years later by selling its first policy outside of Canada, in Bermuda. By 1897 it was in China and Hong Kong.
Manulife is still at work on its Asia footprint, and is present in the Philippines, Indonesia, Japan and China.
"There are lots of M&A possibilities out there right now, I think more than ever before," said Guloien, a 28-year company veteran known for holding his cards close to his chest.
"I'm not going to tell you specifically the things that we are looking at, but yes, there are lots and lots of opportunities."
Future Asia expansion would play to the prevailing wisdom that companies have to prepare now for the end of the crisis, especially in markets, such as India, that are seen leading growth in the future. Manulife has no presence in India.
In what may be a departure from the thinking of his fiery predecessor, the new CEO is also preparing for opportunities in Europe, just in case something comes up.
Europe is a highly competitive market where potential returns are lower than in emerging nations. It is also a market where Manulife, unlike most of its top competitors, is not active.
"If we do any degree of acquisitions on a significant scale, we're going to end up in Europe one way or another," Guloien said.
Canada's No. 3 insurer, Sun Life (
), has already jumped into the act, scooping up the British operations of Lincoln National for C$359 million ($317 million).
Manulife's biggest coup in recent years was the 2004 acquisition of John Hancock Insurance for C$15 billion, at the time the biggest ever cross-border acquisition between Canada and the United States.
"The Hancock deal hit on all cylinders. It led to where Manulife is today," Guloien said.
Some analysts say the current acquisition climate is not as full of bargains as some may think, in part because companies prefer not to sell with valuations so low.
Case in point is a plan by AIG to list its Asian subsidiary, AIA, through an IPO after failing to sell it privately last year for up to $20 billion. Manulife was among companies that was reported to have considered a bid.
Guloien says he hasn't lost hope there could be another Hancock-like marriage out there for the company.
"It will be hard to find one...but there will be others like it," he said. (Additional reporting by Andrea Hopkins; editing by Peter Galloway)
