PREVIEW-Crisis progress, exit top agenda for world c.bankers
2009-06-25 09:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Central bankers from across the world will meet in Basel at the weekend to take steps towards a new regulatory regime and to discuss strategies to exit loose monetary policy once the economy's recovery gains hold.
The world's youngest supervisor -- the Financial Stability Board -- gathers for the first time with doubts growing over whether it has the power to deliver on a welter of government pledges to correct regulatory flaws uncovered by the crisis.
Officials including the U.S. Federal Reserve's Ben Bernanke, Japan's Masaaki Shirakawa and European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet will then assess the economy at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) annual general meeting.
The focus has been on fighting the symptoms of the crisis at meetings over the past two years, but attention is now shifting towards signs of hope for the economy and the question of how to unwind ultra-loose monetary policy.
"They will probably discuss: are they winning against the crisis and if they are, what is the exit?" Citigroup economist Michael Saunders said.
Central bankers were unlikely, however, to commit to a fixed exit route and rather provide more details on the triggers that will eventually prompt the exit, he said.
Banks have taken drastic steps to fight the deepest recession since the Great Depression. They have cut rates to record lows and pumped in hundreds of billions of cheap money, bought bonds and intervened in currency markets.
Stock markets have rallied over the last couple of months as green shoots sprung up in recession-battered economies like the United States and Germany, and emerging countries like China have found the way back to more solid growth.
However, central banks have kept a cautious tone, Saunders noted: "None of them wants to declare victory too soon."
The Federal Reserve said on Wednesday the U.S. recession was easing. But it added that inflation would remain subdued for some time, giving no hint on an imminent exit.
Its forerunner, the Financial Stability Forum, was a smaller, informal G7 gathering, while the FSB is set to be more hands on, warning governments about problems and supporting new colleges of supervisors for big cross-border banks.
But no new regulatory initiatives are due from this week's two-day meeting that ends on Saturday, FSB officials say, and there are significant doubts over whether it will be equipped to implement reforms already earmarked.
"The FSB has new responsibilities but it won't be given any actual powers," said Simon Gleeson, a partner at Clifford Chance law firm. "Nobody is going to allow it to give governments binding instructions."
U.S. President Barack Obama's administration wants the FSB to complete its restructuring and institutionalise its new mandate to promote global financial stability by September.
"All it can do is try to corral everyone around an agreement," said Adair Turner, chairman of Britain's Financial Services Authority. "This is an imperfect process but it's the only process we have to drive it forward as much as possible."
Even top bankers, who in the past have feared a strengthening of regulation, say the body should be given more formal authority than is currently planned.
Deutsche Bank Chief Executive, Josef Ackermann, called this week for a radical change of thinking in international financial supervision, such as procedures to liquidate big banks in an orderly way and avoid destabilising the broader market.
"All this will not be possible without a strengthening of the powers and the institutional structure of international organisations such as the International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Board," Ackermann said.
