Q+A-What next for U.S-Venezuelan relations?_
2009-06-24 20:18:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and Venezuela will soon reinstate ambassadors expelled in a diplomatic spat last year, a sign of warmer relations between President Hugo Chavez and what he calls the U.S. "empire."
Chavez, a Cuba ally and fierce critic of U.S. policies, has clashed repeatedly with Washington, but his OPEC nation remains one of the top oil suppliers to the United States.[nN24199488]
Here are some questions and answers about what Wednesday's development means for the two countries and the region.
DOES IT MEAN CHAVEZ HAS CHANGED HIS VIEW OF WASHINGTON?
No. Chavez blames U.S. foreign policy and business interests for many of the planet's woes. While he says Obama is well-intentioned, he does not believe the U.S. president has the power to change much. As such, Chavez will continue to criticize the United States and will stick to a foreign policy based on lessening U.S. influence via alliances with emerging powers such as China and Russia and friendships with U.S. foes like Cuba and Iran.
IS THIS MOVE SIGNIFICANT FOR THE U.S. PRESIDENT?
A more neutral treatment of foes such as Cuba and Venezuela will help Obama improve U.S. relations in Latin America, most of whose governments are left-leaning.
But the Democratic president already has come under fire from Republicans who distrust his policy of engagement with countries Washington sees as difficult, and he will likely hear more criticism for normalizing relations with Chavez.
HOW WILL IT AFFECT BILATERAL RELATIONS?
The real basis of Venezuelan-U.S. ties is oil, and despite all the rhetoric the two countries continue to be mutually dependent.
Chavez would love not to rely on the United States for his income, but his plans to increase exports to China and other Asian countries are moving slowly and it will be years before refineries are built outside of the United States that can handle Venezuela's heavy crude.
The return of ambassadors, expected after Chavez and U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton discussed improving relations at a summit in Trinidad in April, effectively takes Venezuela-U.S. relations back to where they were last year before the spat.
To further improve trust between the two countries, Chavez could sign an agreement on bilateral cooperation in the fight against drug traffickers. He accused the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration of spying and cut ties with the agency in 2005.
Chavez likely will continue to aggravate Washington by nationalizing assets belonging to U.S. companies, and the United States will watch to see if Venezuela is supporting Colombia's FARC rebels, whom Washington considers terrorists.
DOES OBAMA'S APPEAL WEAKEN CHAVEZ AND HIS LEFTIST ALLIANCE?
The United States is building a stronger relationship with countries such as regional powerhouse Brazil under Obama. But Chavez's oil and money are still very appealing to smaller countries in Latin America and the Caribbean and his influence among this group is unabated.
Chavez's allies Ecuador, Bolivia and Nicaragua share Venezuela's leftist nationalism and all had diplomatic friction with Washington in the last months of the Bush administration.
Bolivia expelled its U.S. ambassador last year but will likely restore normal relations soon. However, these countries likely will keep pressuring U.S. interests including mining and oil to give them better terms. (Reporting by Frank Jack Daniel; Editing by Xavier Briand)
