Expectations prove too much for China's Zheng
2009-06-24 14:54:00.0
(Reuters) - The expectations of a nation weighed too heavily on the shoulders of last year's surprise Wimbledon semi-finalist Zheng Jie of China who went out in the second round to Daniela Hantuchova Wednesday.
Sixteenth seed Zheng, who caused a sensation at the All England Club in 2008 by becoming her country's first grand slam semi-finalist and only the second wild card ever to reach the last four, started well by breaking Hantuchova to take the lead.
But the unseeded Slovakian, who kept Zheng waiting for several minutes at the start of the match prompting slow clapping from the impatient crowd, fought back from 3-1 down to break the world number 16 twice and snatch the first set 6-3.
"In China many people know there is this Chinese girl who got to the semi-final," Zheng told reporters, adding that the pressure of expectation after her success had affected her game.
"Every match is on the television, every match is being watched," she said. "I need to not think about it too much... I get more nervous because I want to win, I want to show my best."
After losing the first set Zheng came back confidently to win the opener in the second and took the next game to break point before Hantuchova, the former world number five, fought back to hold serve before breaking Zheng.
The tense mood was lightened momentarily by a stray shot that hit the edge of Zheng's racket, flew up into the air and narrowly missed Hantuchova's brother as it bounced down a few seats away from him to laughter from the crowd.
As spectators covered their shoulders from the midday heat with towels and jumpers, the two players took it in turns to break serve with Hantuchova, who is nearly seven inches taller than Zheng, taking the lead at 6-5.
Serving for the match the Slovakian, who knocked out British teenage hopeful Laura Robson, missed several chances to finish the match as Zheng battled to the end. But with a final burst of energy Hantuchova eventually secured her third round place.
