PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - June 25
2009-06-24 17:13:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) for the sale of food manufacturer Goodman Fielder's (
) commercial fats and oil business. Goodman is seeking between A$300 million and A$400 million from the sale, however analysts believe the scarcity of bidders will make achievement of this price unlikely. The fats and oils business is being divested as part of a strategic review to reposition Goodman as capable of delivering annual earnings growth of at least seven percent. Page 18.
Essential services provider United Group has extended the contract of chief executive Richard Leupen, but at a reduced rate of pay. Mr Leupen has overseen eight consecutive years of profit growth and is regarded by analysts as a strong asset for the company. However, United has faced criticism of overpaying for his services. Mr Leupen's contract was due to expire in 2011 and has now been extended to 2014, but with a pay cut of A$500,000 a year in his base salary. Page 18.
) has pointed to its growing ratings share as as a major positive to come out of a year that has seen its full-year earnings plunge. Executive chairman Nick Falloon said that he expected the recent success of newly launched programs to start to lift advertising revenue during the August quarter. 'Each of these properties has now demonstrated their worth and they're attracting considerable interest and investment,' Mr Falloon said yesterday. Page 19.
Investment firm Co-Investor Capital Partners has purchased A$13 million of debt belonging to marketing services group CommQuest and agreed to invest a further A$3 million in the company. The payment of loans owed to the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group has halved CommQuest's debt, and in the next three to four months the investment will be converted into equity through a rights issue. In explaining Co-Investor's move yesterday, managing director Roger Sharp said CommQuest was a case of 'good business, bad balance sheet.' Page 19.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission yesterday granted temporary permission to jointly market domestic gas from the Gorgon liquefied natural gas project in Western Australia (WA), despite the objections of customers. Gorgon participants Chevron, Shell and Exxon Mobil had faced objections from big gas buyers Alcoa and Wesfarmers who claimed their commercial positions would be substantially weakened by a joint marketing agreement. Page 18.
Mining fund Lion Selection LST.AX yesterday announced major restructuring plans that include the sale of its stake in Newcrest's (
) Queensland Cracow gold mine for A$35 million. Following the sale of its Newcrest stake, Lion intends to list its residual, non-gold assets on the National Stock Exchange and then merge with gold producer Catalpa. Lion said the demerger and sale would unlock value in its stock which has been considered by analysts to be trading at half of its net asset value. Page 18.
) and native title holders for the miner's Central Pilbara iron ore projects in Western Australia. IOH, which is controlled by media entrepreneur Kerry Stokes, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement to pay the Innawonga and Bunjima people an undisclosed amount up-front and then royalties. Both IOH and the Pilbara Native Title Service declined to release full terms of the deal, claiming it was commercial in confidence. Page 18 .
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has accepted court-enforceable undertakings from printing and distribution group PMP to improve its processes following an investigation into the company's deceptive behaviour. The ACCC had intervened after PMP (
) customers had claimed the letterbox delivery of their catalogues was not taking place despite PMP stating work had been completed. Yesterday PMP chief executive Richard Allely said 'poor reporting practices' had now been rectified. Page 19.
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission yesterday asked the Federal Court to freeze assets owned by child care company ABC Learning ABS.AX founder Eddy Groves and his new wife Viryan Collins-Rubie. The move comes after Mr Groves breached undertakings not to sell assets without first informing the corporate watchdog. The application to the court has also requested that Mr Groves have his passport seized on the basis that he was now considered to be a 'flight risk.' Page 23.
In the third capital raising of this year, Macquarie Airports (MAp) MAP.AX has been forced to inject a further A$711 million into Sydney Airport after some shareholders declined to invest more equity. The move increases MAp's stake to 74 percent, an increase of 2 percent, and comes after MAp and minority shareholders agreed last November to inject A$513 million. The latest move has not removed the prospect of still further capital being required later to reduce gearing. Page 24.
) announced yesterday that it had agreed to settle patent infringement litigation based in the United States. Aristocrat said it will pay A$4.4 million to the estate of Lawrence J. Torango, which claimed intellectual property was stolen or infringed by Aristocrat in its sale and supply of Hyperlink games and machines. In its announcement the company stressed the payment was not an admission of liability. Page 24.
) has taken the unprecedented step of agreeing to mediation with a group of customers over debts relating to the collapsed financial planner Storm Financial. Around 75 customers, represented by lawyers Slater & Gordon, will have their cases handled through the mediation, with the cost of the process to be paid for by the bank. Damien Scattini, a lawyer at Slater & Gordon, said that CBA chief executive Ralph Norris should be 'applauded and credit should be given where it is due.' Page 1.
The Federal Government is planning a 'big lift' in advertising next year, according to its media buying agency, Universal McCann. The executives of media companies in discussions with Universal McCann have also indicated that the Government has expanded its advertising schedule for the next 12-months saying, 'there's a lot in the pipeline.' It is believed the expanded program will see federal advertising spending push break through the A$100 million threshold, after having been reduced to A$84 million last year. Page 2.
Greenland's new government has rejected the plans of Perth-based explorer Greenland Minerals and Energy (
) to develop its Kvanefjeld rare earths deposit, according to reports. The company had styled the project as an alternative source to China for the minerals used in electronic equipment such as flatscreens and iPods. On Tuesday the company suspended the trading of its shares while it sought clairification from the Greenland Government on its decision. Page 3.
) will encounter further delays in receiving delivery of its first Boeing 787 Dreamliner jets after the manufacturer announced it will miss its June 30 target for the aircraft's test flight. Qantas has 65 of the 787's on order, with 15 to be provided from Boeing's first production run. A new delivery timetable is currently being drawn up by Boeing, but production of the 787 is already two years behind schedule and has been a source of major embarrassment for the company. Page 3.
