UPDATE 1-U.S., Canada must do more in climate fight - France
2009-06-24 00:08:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and Canada must do more than currently proposed to tackle greenhouse gases, France says in a position paper ahead of global climate talks in Copenhagen this December.
The government document seen by Reuters, titled: "Possible outline of a fair and ambitious agreement in Copenhagen", is the strongest message yet to the United States and Canada from within the European Union.
Paris also made the first concrete suggestions on how ministers in Copenhagen might tackle soaring emissions from aviation, but stopped short of suggesting emission curbs for shipping.
Airlines should cut emissionsto 5 percent below 2005 levels by 2020, said the document, seen by Reuters on Wednesday.
It warned that Canada and the United States were not on course to cut emissions by the level needed, making it difficult for rich nations to meet the 25-40 percent collective reduction in greenhouse gases recommended by a U.N. climate panel.
The panel says such cuts are needed to avoid the most dangerous effects of climate change, such as melting ice sheets, thawing permafrost and rising sealevels.
"It is therefore necessary for Canada and the U.S. to take on commitments which are at least on a par with the EU's, compared with 1990 levels," it added.
The EU has already commited to cut its own emissions to one fifth below 1990 levels by 2020, and will increase those cuts to 30 percent if other nations take similar action.
Canada reacted with surprise, saying French officials had not mentioned their view during recent meetings with Canadian environment minister Jim Prentice, most recently in Mexico this week.
"At no time, has this issue been raised by the French with Minister Prentice," said his spokesman Bill Rodgers.
"Our targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the medium and long term have remained consistent in all of the meetings Minister Prentice has attended throughout Europe and North America," he added.
The paper said countries should base their emissions on the United Nations climate panel's most cautious scenarios.
"Parties shall work towards the goal of at least a doubling of global energy-related research and development and demonstration by 2012 and increasing it up to four times its current level by 2020," said the document.
Emerging economies such as China, India, Brazil and South Africa should outpace the action of other developing nations, which should cut to 15 to 30 percent below business-as-usual levels, it added. (Reporting by Pete Harrison; Editing by Dale Hudson and Keiron Henderson)
