Concession to farmers weakens U.S. climate bill
2009-06-24 17:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Farmers and agricultural companies could benefit from concessions in the climate bill nearing a vote in the U.S. House of Representatives, but the legislation's potential to cut emissions of planet-warming gases has likely been weakened.
A deal struck on Tuesday between Democratic Reps Henry Waxman and Edward Markey, the bill's sponsors, and House Agriculture Committee Chairman Collin Peterson, will bring votes from farm states -- perhaps enough for the bill to pass the chamber and move debate to the Senate.
The projects could form a market worth billions of dollars per year in coming years. They include steps such as burning methane given off by pits of rotting animal waste and planting crops without tilling the soil to help bury carbon-rich organic material into the soil,
Under the deal, the Department of Agriculture, which is more popular among farmers and agriculture companies than the EPA, would be the main regulator of such offsets.
"It's like putting the fox in charge of the henhouse," Frank O'Donnell, president of Washington-based nonprofit Clean Air Watch, said about the Department of Agriculture's new role.
Under the cap-and-trade market the bill sets up, big polluters like coal-fired power plants and cement and steel manufacturers would invest in the offsets, which would be cheaper than emerging technologies to cut their own emissions.
Many environmentalists and carbon market developers are nervous that the mission of the Department of Agriculture is more about building wealth for farmers and agricultural interests than in regulating. And regulating offsets, a new industry that already has shown cracks in its ability to fight climate change, would be unlike anything it has ever done.
The science about whether no-till farming, for example, actually cuts emissions in all cases is still young and hotly contested. Some scientists argue that the practice requires farmers to use more chemicals to grow food which can end up boosting emissions.
"There's going to be a lot of politics involved in the science," on agricultural offsets, said Peter Fusaro, an expert on carbon markets with Global Change Associates in New York.
"It seems to me there will be more power grabs and turf fighting, which in effect will delay a lot of this," he said.
Many carbon market builders are happy that the United States appears closer to finally forming a market to regulate emissions scientists have warned could lead to killer droughts, heat waves, and floods from melting glaciers.
But they are also concerned that the concessions could undermine the bill's ability to cut emissions in the United States, the world's top greenhouse gas emitter after China.
"We have very strong environmental support and I was very pleased that (former) Vice President Al Gore, who's the champion on this issue, is very supportive of this legislation," Pelosi said, responding to a question from Reuters.
"There's a reason why Waxman and Markey didn't have Agriculture involved in regulating offsets the first place," said O'Donnell.
(Additional reporting by Richard Cowan in Washington; Editing by David Gregorio)
