CITIC 1616 seeks acquisitions by year-end
2009-06-24 04:30:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed  EDT
) is seeking to buy international direct dialing (IDD) and mobile value-added service assets in the Asia-Pacific region by the end of 2009, a senior executive said on Wednesday.
However, the company, the telecoms service unit of Beijing backed CITIC Pacific (
), has no intention of introducing Chinese telecoms operators as strategic investors, said chief financial officer David Chan.
"We have been approached by private equity funds about the possibility of asset reorganizations, but we are very selective and will only consider those proposals that create synergy," he told Reuters in an interview.
He added that CITIC 1616 was interested in buying or consolidating IDD, mobile value-added services and integrated virtual private network businesses and was open to investment opportunities in Southeast Asia, and in particular Taiwan.
The company, which provides international roaming voice, short messaging, mobile value-added services and virtual private network services to telecoms operators around the world, posted net profit growth of 26 percent in 2008.
Revenue surged by 67 percent last year, boosted by high demand during the Beijing Olympics and the inclusion of a newly purchased IDD business from China Motion (
The company will focus on developing higher profit-margin non-voice services, hoping the non-voice business will contribute to half of its revenue by 2011 from 35 percent in 2008, Chan added.
Its three major Chinese customers, China Mobile (
), China Telecom (
), contributed about 40 percent of its revenue last year. Its clients also include Singapore Telecommunications (
) and Japan's NTT DoCoMo (
The stock, which has soared 76 percent so far this year, rose 4.6 percent to close at HK$1.84 in late trade on Wednesday.
