China urges restraint on Turkey-Syria border tensions
2012-10-04 13:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Foreign Ministry urged Turkey and Syria to exercise restraint amid mounting border tensions which saw Turkish artillery hit targets inside Syria after a mortar bomb fired from Syrian territory killed five Turkish civilians.
"We appeal to all relevant sides including Turkey and Syria to exercise restraint and refrain from taking any action that will escalate tensions in order to maintain peace and stability in the region," the ministry said in a statement on its website on Thursday (www.mfa.gov.cn).
In the most serious cross-border escalation of the 18-month uprising in Syria, Turkey hit back at what it called "the last straw" when a mortar hit a residential neighborhood of the southern border town of Akcakale.
The U.S.-led Western military alliance held an urgent late-night meeting in Brussels to discuss the matter and later on Wednesday in New York, Turkey asked the U.N. Security Council to take the "necessary action" to stop Syrian aggression.
In a letter to the president of the 15-nation Security Council, Turkish U.N. Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan called the firing of the mortar bomb "a flagrant violation of international law as well as a breach of international peace and security".
U.N. diplomats said Security Council members hoped it would issue a non-binding statement on Thursday that would condemn the mortar attack "in the strongest terms" and demand an end to violations of Turkey's territorial sovereignty.
Members had hoped to issue the statement on Wednesday, but Russia - a staunch ally of Syria's, which along with China has vetoed three U.N. resolutions condemning President Bashar al-Assad's government - asked for a delay, diplomats said.
(Reporting by Fayen Wong; Editing by Michael Roddy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Your ally Syria does not understand the word ¡®restraint¡¯ China. Neither do your own hawks. When a green light is given to the Syrian regime to kill woman and children, how could the CCP think anyone believes the rubbish calls for ¡®restraint¡¯ towards their middle east ally? Especially from a country that is inflaming SEA with aggressive expasnionism.
Oct 04, 201210:20pm EDT--
