Henderson mulls new funds
2009-06-24 09:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Anglo-Australian fund manager Henderson Global Investors (HGI) is looking to snap up more distressed rivals, create a global property fund of funds and bulk up its Asian exposure to offset property market misery in the UK and Europe.
Mike Sales, HGI's head of global property investment said the firm remained on the acquisition trail after the takeover of New Star Asset Management and that bouts of firefighting in some of its property funds had not distracted it from other opportunities thrown up by the crisis.
"We're looking at other fund management companies who perhaps started up at the wrong time and inherently have very good staff and good funds," Sales told the Reuters Global Real Estate Summit on Wednesday.
"We think we can incorporate (the funds and staff) into our business and get economies of scale to launch new product lines and gain access to new areas of the market we want to be in," he said, adding the firm would also consider "bolt-ons" of talented management teams who could bring business with them.
The property arm of HGI -- with assets under management (AUM) of about 12 billion pounds ($19.88 billion) -- was also considering buying asset management contracts from banks, who were slowly wading through problem property portfolios, Sales said.
The successful acquisition of New Star had proved there was shareholder support for Henderson to become a predator of struggling rivals in the fund management space, he said.
Besides adding a further 1 billion pounds of assets to the sum of property assets under management, the takeover has given HGI's property team a toehold in the private investor funds arena, a dimension it plans to nurture. HGI was also mulling two new bricks and mortar funds in addition to its just launched Central London Office II fund.
Sales said he was considering the launch of a UK retail fund to take advantage of distress in that market, while another of HGI's aims was to create a global fund of funds platform.
"To do that we need to find a solution in the U.S., and bulk up our business, perhaps, in Asia," he said, expressing confidence in China's growth story.
"The great thing about this recession is that it has hit everyone fair and square between the shoulders. Those markets that we particularly like that we would like to grow into, and Henderson wants to expand in, are in Asia," he said.
HGI was also mulling a French retail fund, while in Italy and Spain it wanted to grow its asset management operations.
Sales said HGI had about 750 million pounds to spend on bricks and mortar investments on behalf of mainly German and Gulf-based investors, with about 250 million pounds earmarked for the UK, the balance for Europe with a focus on France.
"We've got a lot of spending power at the moment. We haven't spent money for two and a half years," Sales said, although he said the firm was still very selective about new investment because the rental outlook for much of Europe, especially the UK, was so unstable.
"You'll see no rental growth. And that's the issue most property people have to deal with right now."
(Additional reporting by Lorraine Turner and Simon Meads; Editing by Mike Nesbit)
