MONEY MARKETS-China IRS eases, repo rates stay high on IPO fears
2009-06-24 02:42:00.0
(Reuters) - China's interest rate swaps (IRS) for shorter maturities eased on Wednesday after the previous day's rise, but repo rates remained high as investors braced for fund outflows as more IPOs enter the market.
The cost of borrowing dollars edged lower ahead of the conclusion of a U.S. Federal Reserve meeting where the central bank is expected to hold its target for the federal funds rate, the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans, in the zero to 0.25 percent range.
China's 3-month swaps CNYQB7R3M= were down 2 basis points (bps) to 1.28 percent, after spiking by as much as 10 bps the previous day.
But repo rates remained above average on expectations that a series of IPOs will follow after Guilin Sanjin Pharmaceutical Co is set to make China's first initial public offering in more than nine months.
The weighted average seven-day repo rate CN7DRP=CFXS, a key measure of short-term liquidity, rose to 1.18 percent from 1.11 percent.
The rate had fluctuated mostly in a range of 0.9 to 1.0 percent since the start of the year given that the central bank has been keeping monetary policy loose and with liquidity injected from China's 4 trillion yuan ($585.3 billion) economic stimulus package.
But with a 37 percent stock rally since March improving the prospects for IPOs and a potential supply of at least 100 billion yuan ($15 billion) in new shares, there are jitters some of the liquidity will leave the system.
Last week, the 7-day repo had spiked to about 2 percent on news of the IPO resumption.
In Singapore, 3-month dollars SIUSDD=ABSG edged lower to 0.61107 percent from 0.61286 percent. It is down about 5 basis points from the start of the month and half the levels in March.
Overnight, the London interbank offered rates on three-month dollars USD3MFSR= fell to a record low of 0.6075 percent, surpassing the prior low of 0.60875 percent set last week.
Funding costs are easing on expectations of a rate-friendly outlook from the Fed's Open Market Committee, and also after the European Central Bank launched a one-year funding operation aimed at increasing liquidity in the Euro zone banking system.
Australian one-year interest rate swaps AUDQM3AB1Y= rose 4 basis points to 3.39 percent after falling 9 bps the previous day, while Thailand's one year IRS rose 21 bps to 1.80 percent after Tuesday's 8 bps decline.
"The market knows rates are headed up eventually -- it doesn't know the timings, anywhere in the world. As a result data releases are making equities and swaps move around sharply," said Anindya Dutta, Calyon's head of interest rate derivatives in Asia ex-Japan.
"Logically, short-end swaps should be lower, but there is paying pressure as the majority of market players continue to believe there is a case for hyperinflation," he said. (Reporting by Umesh Desai; Editing by Kim Coghill)
