Avnet CEO says worst behind, sees recovery in '10
2009-06-23 16:58:00.0
Avnet CEO says worst behind, sees recovery in '10 | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Avnet CEO says worst behind, sees recovery in '10
Tue  EDT
) sees the company coming off the bottom in the second half of the year and expects a slow recovery ahead, according to its chief executive.
Avnet, which distributes products for companies including IBM Corp (
), has been posting weak results for the past several quarters and cutting costs as the $350 billion industry reels under global meltdown.
"We believe that the worst is behind us, and we are at or near the bottom," Chief Executive Roy Vallee said in an interview with Reuters.
Avnet, which competes with Ingram Micro (
), also stood by its outlook for the fourth quarter.
In April, Avnet had forecast a profit of 30 cents to 38 cents a share for the fourth quarter ending June.
Even though analysts are spotting the first signs of a recovery in technology spending, electronics distributors around the world are not yet seeing any improvement in demand except in China and a few niche areas.
At a recent industry conference in London, some of the world's biggest electronic parts distributors said the supply chain for electronic goods was moving again after practically grinding to a halt, but it was too early to speak of any broad-based recovery.
Vallee said he sees the North American business, which accounted for 46 percent of the company's overall revenue in the third quarter, stabilizing on a sequential basis but contracting on a year-over-year basis. "In Europe, we are still seeing declining demand albeit at a lower rate," he said. "I would guess that by the end of this calendar year Europe would stabilize as well."
Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) contributed about 34 percent of the electronics components and computer products distributor's revenue in the last quarter.
"Asia, specifically China, is the one place where there is clear demand growth taking place," Vallee said.
China contributes 70 percent of the Asia Pacific region's revenue and 15 percent of the global revenue, with growth being driven by communication and consumer markets.
The CEO also said he was open to acquiring firms to increase the company's market share in Asia-Pacific and, specifically, in Japan's components markets.
