UPDATE 3-MOVES-Deloitte, Venable, MetLife, AIG
2009-06-23 17:51:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Tuesday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com
Deloitte said Deborah Bailey, a senior regulator who was instrumental in guiding the Federal Reserve's response to the financial crisis, has joined its banking and securities team.
Venable said bankruptcy and restructuring attorney Jorian Rose has joined the law firm's New York office as a partner. Rose was most recently a managing director at Macquarie Capital (USA), Inc.
MetLife named Alfred Kelly, president of American Express Co, to its board of directors, effective on Tuesday.
) executives Antonio Cacorino and Fredrick Chapey formed StormHarbour, which will focus on capital markets and fixed income activities.
Jones Day said David Wales, formerly in charge of the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Competition, will join the Washington office of the law firm as a partner on July 27.
Drum Capital, which focuses on distressed and turnaround investments, appointed Duran Curis as managing director. Curis, 36, previously was a managing director at HRJ Capital.
The financial services firm appointed Phylis Esposito to its new independent advisory board. Esposito is the former chief strategy officer of TD Ameritrade Holding Corp AMTD.O and senior partner of the international finance consulting firm, Mathias & Co.
The provider of private banking and wealth management services said it appointed John Riley managing director of foreign exchange. Riley will be based at the bank's office at 160 Federal Street in Boston.
The provider of outsourced accounting infrastructure services said it appointed Judy Tyler to lead its new Southern California office, based in Los Angeles. Tyler was most recently chief financial officer of Steamboat Ventures, the venture arm of The Walt Disney Co. (
The company said it hired a team led by Managing Directors Reginald Browne, Eric Lichtenstein and Darren Taube to its exchange-traded fund (ETF) capability. The team is comprised of 13 sales and trading staff in Jersey City and two in London.
The U.S. accounting firm said Stephen Chipman will become chief executive in January. Chipman has been an executive in the company's China region for the last two years. [ID:nN22521453]
The insurance group said it appointed Matt Saker as chief actuary for Europe. Saker joins Aviva from Watson Wyatt, where he became a partner in 2003.
The asset manager said it appointed Jorge Giampaoli as partner and portfolio manager of its new equity macro fund. Giampaoli joins from Morgan Stanley where he was most recently in charge of propriety trading for European equities. (Compiled by Antonita Madonna Devotta in Bangalore and Paritosh Bansal in New York; Editing by Richard Chang)
