Brazil's Vale seen hunting amid mining merger talk
2009-06-23 13:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Potential mining mergers have sparked talk that Brazil's Vale may try to acquire a major industry player, though local analysts say Vale would probably target small companies as the economy slows.
) or Xstrata XTA.L after Anglo American rejected Xstrata's nil-premium merger bid.
The flurry of industry consolidation, including a possible joint venture between Vale rivals Rio Tinto (
), could put takeover pressure on Vale a year and a half after its failed effort to buy out Xstrata.
"We would not rule out the possibility of Vale and/or a Chinese buyer becoming involved in any (merger) discussions around Xstrata/Anglo," said investment bank Nomura in a research report, adding it sees more logic in an Xstrata deal.
Vale, the world's largest iron ore miner, has for years been seeking to diversify operations by including a greater content of non-ferrous metals, a strategy that led to its 2006 purchase of Canada's nickel miner Inco.
The 2008 bid for Xstrata would have advanced this goal, though its failure rescued Vale from buying overpriced assets. Meanwhile, Rio Tinto looked to a Chinalco equity deal to shore up its balance sheet but later backed out in favor of BHP.
Liberium Capital wrote in a research note that Vale, armed with a strong balance sheet and a solid cash position, would mostly likely be drawn to bid for Anglo to help give it the diversification it originally sought in the 2008 Xstrata deal.
"Anglo is possibly the biggest transformational deal Vale could deliver now at a time it is cashed up and keen to move," Liberium said.
"The deal would give Vale a major portfolio rebalancing along geographic and commodity lines, specifically addressing its desire to bulk up in coal and copper as well as giving access to Africa expertise."
Iron ore and pellets accounted for 63 percent of Vale's 2009 Q1 revenues, according to a presentation to investors. In addition to seeking non-ferrous metals output, Vale is branching out into areas including oil production and power generation.
But local analysts, along with one company source, were skeptical about whether Vale would launch a major takeover as it carries out critical price negotiations with Chinese steel mills and prepares for a possible extended slowdown in global demand.
"Anyone that bets on (a takeover) will get burned," said the source. "This is not the time. Right now we're just praying for some sign from the markets that things could get better."
China's principal steelmakers group has insisted on cuts of at least 40 percent, though analysts expect it will either have to settle for less or rely more on spot imports.
Pedro Galdi of the brokerage SLW in Sao Paulo said a Vale takeover bid would have to focus on something small and not a major industry competitor, a strategy the company itself has stressed in its past several conference calls with analysts.
"It would be difficult for Vale, despite its good cash flow, to buy something that big," said Galdi. "They could come up with something but it would have to be something small."
Vale in 2008 had considered paying $70 billion or more for Xstrata, which today has a market capitalization of around $30 billion. Galdi said Vale, having just barely avoided the fate of Rio Tinto, will have a more conservative outlook.
"If it had bought Xstrata back then, at that price, it would be in serious trouble," said Galdi. (Editing by David Gregorio)
