UPDATE 1-Indian telecoms BSNL eyeing Africa, awaits IPO nod
2009-06-23 07:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Indian telecoms company BSNL is looking to expand to Africa by acquiring new licences or stakes in firms, its chairman said, even as the state-owned phone operator awaits the government to revive a planned IPO.
"We are looking into various options there... getting into new licences, which are being issued, or partnering with existing licencees (and) taking a stake," Kuldeep Goyal told reporters.
Asked whether BSNL, which has cash stockpile of more than 300 billion rupees ($6 billion), was ready for a big acquisition, he said: "Yes, why not?"
Indian telecoms companies are eyeing African countries, which analysts say are the last of high-growth emerging markets.
), India's top mobile operator, is in talks with South Africa's MTN (
) for a possible merger that would become one of the world's three biggest telecoms.
) last year acquired Uganda's Anupam Global Soft.
He also said BSNL had opened bids for a large GSM equipment contract and would soon start price negotiations with Sweden's Ericsson (
) and China's Huawei [HWT.UL], the two firms that have qualified on technical parameters.
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd (BSNL) is India's fourth-largest mobile operator with 53 million subscribers as per latest data available. The company also has 29 million fixed-line users.
The government had last year proposed to list BSNL by selling a 10 percent stake for an expected $10 billion in the country's largest IPO, but the offering was put off amid opposition from communist allies and the firm's employees.
"We are hearing ... that government is thinking on that. We hope some decision should come soon," Goyal told reporters, adding the company would appoint merchant bankers and would start talks with employees after it gets a go ahead.
BSNL had last year invited bids for equipment to build 93 million GSM lines, which attracted interests from six global firms including Ericsson, Nokia Siemens Network [NSN.UL] and Huawei.
"A dialogue will happen with them. If the rates are reasonable, they should get the orders," he said.
BSNL was yet to decide on the 25 million new lines planned for the western zone, he said. ($1=48.7 rupees) (Editing by Ranjit Gangadharan)
