Zimbabwe says mines minister denied British visa
2009-06-23 06:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain has denied Zimbabwe's mines minister a visa for an investment conference, fuelling anger in President Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF party over continued Western sanctions on its officials.
Mugabe formed a unity government in February with arch-rival Morgan Tsvangirai, now prime minister, to try to end an economic and political crisis worsened last year by a disputed presidential poll. Tsvangirai is in London as part of a Western tour to drum up financial support for Zimbabwe's new government.
But on Tuesday, a Harare government official said Britain had refused Mines and Mining Development Minister Obert Mpofu a visa -- under European Union travel sanctions against Mugabe and his top associates.
"The minister did not get a visa and in our view all this does not make sense except to confirm that some people in London are pursuing their fight against ZANU-PF," the official said.
A representative of the Zimbabwean High Commission in London said he had been excluded because he was on the British government's banned list as a member of Mugabe's circle.
Denis Worrall, chairman of Omega Investment Mining Partners and one of the conference organisers, said Mpofu was absent because he had been denied a visa.
Other delegates criticised the decision, comparing it unfavourably with Britain's improved relations with Libya.
"Colonel (Muammar) Gaddafi has been rehabilitated. If he can be rehabilitated, who can't? Zimbabwe does not have a Lockerbie on its books," said Andrew Cranswick, CEO of African Consolidated Resources, a mining company with investments in Zimbabwe.
There was no immediate statement from the British embassy in Harare, which traditionally does not comment on visa issues, nor from the British government in London.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown told Tsvangirai there were "great signs of progress", but the power-sharing government still had to meet a number of tests on the road to democracy. (Reporting by Cris Chinaka in Harare and Luke Baker in London)
