CANADA FINANCE-Executives speak about recession's impact
2009-06-23 07:32:00.0
(Reuters) - With Canada's banks weathering the global economic turbulence that felled competitors from Europe to the United States, the Canadian financial system has been held up as an example of sound management.
Following are some comments from top Canadian financial services executives interviewed by Reuters about the global recession as it affects their businesses, and whether an end is in sight.
RICK WAUGH, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA (
"It's very clear that both the financial and the capital markets are stabilizing."
"Today if you look at the inter-bank market, banks are lending to each other. The cash markets have returned. They are not to where they were, and may never get back to where they were, but they have improved immeasurably."
"And now it has moved to the capital markets, to the bond markets, which are showing, over the last several weeks, a great return."
"The stock market is much tougher to call, but if your cash markets and your bond markets are functioning, both your equity markets and your economy get back into sync."
GORDON NIXON, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF ROYAL BANK OF CANADA (
"I think there's no question that in the financial sector, the turnaround is for real. I mean, you've seen a narrowing of credit spreads, and we've had record levels of bond issuance in Canada."
"We're starting to see a huge pickup in terms of M&A activity, equity financing has also started to return, interbank lending is starting to function, so if you look at the financial services, if you look at the financial industry and the capital markets, which were clearly pushed to the precipice, and they clearly shut down, credit spreads widened to levels which were not sustainable. I mean we had a market which was not functioning."
"We now have a market that is normalizing and returning. That doesn't mean that it's returned to where it was, but clearly there's been dramatic improvement, and I think those improvements are real."
"On the overall economic performance I would say the same thing in that we are starting to see a reduction in the rate of decline, but we have not yet seen dramatic improvement, and I think the real economy is well behind the financial markets in terms of a turnaround."
ED CLARK, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF TORONTO-DOMINION BANK (
"I would have been more pessimistic, but I think clearly, there are signs that Asia, and particularly China, are restimulating the economy, and that's flowing through the commodity market, which is flowing through to the rest."
"We don't know how deep this valley is, although it looks less deep than we thought six months ago. We certainly don't know how wide it is, it could well be a wide valley."
"We're pretty cautious at this point. The United States is amost in the sense of saying 'Crisis? What, that was two weeks ago we thought we'd be nationalizing our banks.' We're not quite there emotionally; we need a little longer time to get there."
WILLIAM DOWNE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF BANK OF MONTREAL (
"Where I think that the logic of building our business in the future is going to be confirmed, is that there's a natural cycle that ultimately kicks in."
"The United States was building 2.5 million new homes a year for a society that needs 1.25 million homes a year, because of immigration, because of birth."
"Neither immigration nor birth has stopped, so the United States still needs one and a quarter million homes a year and is building less than 600,000 homes right now."
"So do I believe that the market is going to clear, this year or in the first half of next year. The United States is approaching a market clearing price, and then the only question is, how much pent up demand is there."
STANLEY HARTT, CHAIRMAN OF MACQUARIE CAPITAL MARKETS CANADA, AND CANADA'S DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE IN 1985:
"I think we all agree that it's hard to say that the recession is over, but I think it's easy to say that the worst of it is over. I think some of the things we see in capital markets indicate that people are starting to come out from under their turtle shells and starting to look at markets and say, 'Hmm, maybe I'd better not wait for markets to get back to where my stock was in the last 52 weeks'."
MICHAEL NOBREGA, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF OMERS ADMINISTRATION CORP, ONE OF CANADA'S BIGGEST PENSION FUND MANAGERS:
"I see this probably not correcting itself maybe before the middle part of 2010. You need to go through a couple of more quarters to see exactly what's on those (bank) balance sheets. I don't think anyone really knows."
"The only way to get out of this is to deleverage, and how do you deleverage? Lenders lose money."
"Some people will go bankrupt, others will lose sizable portions of their wealth, not maybe directly, but certainly through equity holdings in companies, and that includes pension funds and other capital pools." (Additional reporting by Andrea Hopkins; editing by Rob Wilson)
