CANADA FINANCE-Canadian banks in capital markets push
2009-06-23 07:30:00.0
(Reuters) - No country or bank has escaped the global economic turbulence unscathed, but Canada's financial services industry has held up better than most, and it is actively investing in capacity to go after new business.
"A lot of investment banks are no longer in business or no longer covering their customers with the same amount of balance sheet, or the same people that they did previously, and that offers a client opportunity," said Doug McGregor, co-chief executive at RBC Capital Markets, the investment banking arm of the country's largest bank, Royal Bank of Canada (
As world markets slowly emerge from the doldrums that the recession brought, Canadian bankers see mining, energy, commercial real estate and agricultural commodities as possible areas for growth, in terms of existing operations or funding acquisitions and other projects.
McGregor said RBC Capital is increasing staff and infrastructure to take advantage of the opportunities, with a particular focus on business in the United States and Britain.
To be sure, RBC Capital was not completely without exposure to the U.S. credit crisis, taking billions of dollars in writedowns. But it remains profitable and is close to generating revenues of C$6 billion-plus a year, he said.
RBC and other Canadian banks aim to fill a void left by former powerhouses like Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc LEHMQ.PK, which filed for bankruptcy protection in September after trying to finance too many risky assets with too little capital. Many other U.S. and European investment banks suffered similar fates.
BMO Capital Markets, the investment banking arm of Bank of Montreal BMO.T0, is also actively building its U.S. mergers and acquisitions business with new hires from Banc of America Securities and Silver Point Capital, an investment fund focused on distressed debt.
"You're starting to see management teams of boards consider opportunities that they might have been reluctant, frankly, to spend the time on or seriously consider in the past," said Peter Myers, head of investment and corporate banking for BMO Capital Markets Canada.
"We are very busy financing old gold mines back into production," said Miranda Werstiuk, a vice-president at boutique firm IBK Capital Corp in Toronto.
"Based on the conversations we're having with people, there's no doubt that now, much more so than the last 12 months, people are beginning to become outwardly looking," said Paul Donnelly, president and chief executive of Macquarie Capital Markets Canada (MCMC), a branch of the Australian bank.
"Based on any measure of historical value, there are bargains to be had," he said.
Investment bankers don't like to tip their hand when it comes to where the best deals are to be had, but recent investment activity points directly at commodities and energy, including the food, oil and gas, metals and minerals that Canada has in such abundance.
BMO's Peter Myers points out that, recession or no, the fundamental factors driving those sectors, including the modernization of emerging markets like China, will continue.
He describes BMO's investment banking strategy as "geographically agnostic," focusing on sectors rather than countries.
"I think we're starting to see the right activity occurring out there, the sort of precursor activity necessary for M&A to occur," Myers said.
