UPDATE 2-China's GCL-Poly to pay $3.4 bln for solar company
2009-06-23 05:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese power company GCL-Poly Energy Holdings (
) said on Tuesday it would pay $3.38 billion for a Jiangsu province solar parts maker controlled by its chairman, in a move to tap the country's growing solar energy industry.
China, the world's top greenhouse gas polluter, is expected to raise its 2020 solar power generation target more than five-fold to at least 10 gigawatt, or 10 billion watts, which is enough to power 10 million homes.
Beijing has said it will unveil more cash incentives for solar projects to boost China's renewable energy industry to cut the nation's carbon emissions.
Shares of GCL-Poly, a power co-generation plant operator partly owned by Morgan Stanley (
), soared as much as 20 percent on the news to an 18-month high of HK$3.01 on the Hong Kong exchange. The shares resumed trading on Tuesday after being suspended for three weeks pending the announcement.
GCL-Poly said it agreed to buy Jiangsu Zhongneng Polysilicon Technology Development Co, which makes polysilicon and wafers used in the solar industry, in the largest targeted China deal so far this year, according to Thomson Reuters.
The controlling shareholder of both the target company and the buyer is local entrepreneur Zhu Gong Shan, who is the chairman of GCL-Poly.
GCL-Poly will issue $350 million in notes, make a $200 million cash payment and settle the remainder by issuing new shares at HK$2.2 each, a 12 percent discount to its closing price of HK$2.5 on June 3 prior to a trading suspension.
Zhu's stake in GCL-Poly will increase to 56.17 percent on completion of the deal from 34.47 percent. The deal is expected to be completed in October.
Morgan Stanley's 15.7 percent stake in GCL-Poly will drop to 1.45 percent following the completion of the purchase.
"The deal is very significant because the company agreed to pay this huge amount to acquire solar assets which will totally change its business model - one that will be dominated by the solar energy business," said Yukie Lee, an analyst with Core Pacific-Yamaichi.
"I expect more than 80 percent of its revenue will be coming from the solar business from next year," Lee said.
While the company will also feel the impact of the price decline and overcapacity in the industry, what may help it withstand the tough pricing climate is Jiangsu Zhongneng Polysilicon's leading market position.
China's government said in March it will offer to pay 20 yuan ($2.90) per watt of solar systems fixed to roofs and which have a capacity of more than 50 kilowatt peak (kwp).
Beijing is widely expected to announce a subsidised price for solar power of 1.09 yuan per kW-hour (kwh), or 16 cents, which is more than three times the rate paid for electricity from coal, the fuel use for 80 percent of China's total energy output.
GCL-Poly, which was listed in 2007, holds stakes in various energy projets in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.
(US$1=HK$7.8) (Reporting by Donny Kwok and Leonora Walet; Editing by Michael Flaherty, Ken Wills and Muralikumar Anantharaman)
