GOME gets Bain Capital investment in $418 million deal
2009-06-22 11:44:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
People walk past a GOME store at the shopping Mongkok district in Hong Kong June 22, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Mon  EDT
), a top China electronics retailer, said on Monday U.S. private equity firm Bain Capital has agreed to take up to a quarter of its shares under a plan to raise $418 million or more.
GOME, whose founder Huang Guangyu is being investigated for alleged financial irregularities, said Bain Capital could end up with up to 4.1 billion of its shares, or 23 percent, on completion of the deal. Huang's shareholding will be diluted to 25.3 percent from the current 35.5 percent.
GOME, which competes with rival Suning Appliance (
), said it would issue $233 million worth of seven-year bonds which are convertible into about 9 percent of the enlarged share capital of GOME, with an interest rate of 5 percent per annum to an affiliate of Bain Capital.
If Bain, which is underwriting the new shares, were to take all of those and convert all of its bonds into shares, it would end up with 23 percent of GOME's enlarged issue share capital.
GOME expects to raise at least HK$3.24 billion ($418 million) via the bond and share offerings, it said in a statement. The proceeds will be used for working capital.
"Bain Capital has extensive experience investing in retail businesses around the world and has built up substantial expertise in the industry," GOME said.
Established in 1984 as a separate investment group from consultancy Bain & Co., Boston-based Bain Capital is one of the world's largest private equity firms, with around $60 billion in assets under management.
The firm set up an office in Hong Kong roughly 3 years ago. Among it's hires was Jonathan Zhu, a former Morgan Stanley banker who led the GOME transaction for Bain.
Bain's China investments include shopping mall operator JinSheng International, specialty chemicals maker Feixiang, and Sinomedia.
Trading in GOME shares, which were last traded at HK$1.12, will resume on Tuesday.
GOME expects operational and financial performance to have significant improvement in the second half, an executive told reporters in a news conference.
"We are cautiously optimistic over the company and the stock is very cheap when compared with rivals such as Suning 00204.SZ," said Debby Zhu, an analyst at KGI Securities.
GOME has sought new investors to improve its capital base after its stock was suspended from trading on November 24, 2008. The suspension came shortly after a Chinese media report said Huang was detained in relation to an investigation involving stock movements of a China-listed medical company.
(Additional reporting by Michael Flaherty; Editing by Chris Lewis and Hans Peters)
