New megatrends fund sees 2009 solar bloodbath
2009-06-22 10:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The cleantech industry is poised to grow this year although 2009 could be a "bloodbath" for the solar sector due to falling module prices and limited credit, the managers of a new megatrends fund launched this month said.
Clare Brook and Nicola Donnelly, managers of the new WHEB Asset Management (WHEB AM) Sustainability Fund, believe the clean energy sector will not re-test lows hit in November and March, but remain cautious.
"Following the collapse of the market, the valuations are incredibly attractive compared to where they have been, in spite of their recent run-ups," Brook told Reuters. "We're concerned in the short term by the solar sector as 2009 looks to be a bit of a bloodbath, but longer term we like it."
The ABN AMRO Solar Energy Index has risen 41 percent since bottoming on March 6, but is still down 4 percent in 2009 and 74 percent below its all-time high in December 2007.
Despite the uncertainty, the managers felt it was a good time to launch their megatrends fund, which focuses on companies investing in climate change, water resource management and heathcare products for an aging population.
"The fund is about investing in companies that are providing solutions for the key problems that are facing the world and its inhabitants over the next few decades," Brook said.
"We're at an amazing crossroads in that you've got a huge amount of legislation to support these sectors plus stimulus packages containing vast amounts of money."
Governments have responded to the global economic crisis by committing $2.8 trillion in economic stimulus packages, of which $430 billion or 15 percent is earmarked for development of 'green' infrastructure, HSBC Global Research said in February.
The fund is backed by WHEB Ventures, an environmental venture capital firm, and includes investors such as insurers Aviva plc and the family of the late billionaire financier James Goldsmith.
The fund launched on June 8 with 6 million pounds ($9.9 mln) under management, but Brook, a former manager at Morley Fund Management (now owned by Aviva) with 19 years experience in sustainable funds, expects to raise 50 million pounds in the first year and then a further 50 million per year after that.
"We're hoping to outperform the MSCI World Index by a decent amount on an annual basis," Brook said.
