China buys 50 Airbus jets during Merkel visit
2012-08-30 08:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China signed an agreement with Germany for 50 Airbus planes worth over $4 billion during Chancellor Angela Merkel's visit to Beijing on Thursday, the first significant order since a dispute between Beijing and Europe over emissions trading.
China's ICBC Leasing and Airbus, whose parent company is Franco-German-led aerospace group EADS (
), signed the deal for 50 Airbus A320-family planes and another agreement about Airbus plane assembling in China, state news agency Xinhua said.
Xinhua put the value of the deal at $3.5 billion but at published list prices, it could be worth $4.6 billion, according to a breakdown of models supplied by Airbus.
China regularly orders aircraft in large batches timed to coincide with high-level contacts with U.S. or European leaders, but the deal fell short of European expectations of a 100-plane order circulating on the eve of Merkel's trip.
Airbus insisted it was satisfied with the deal, which includes the first Chinese order for its fastest-selling model, a revamped version of its narrow-body plane known as A320neo.
"In the current economic environment every deal is a good deal. What counts is: aviation is and remains a growth industry, with Asia and China being significant drivers," a company spokesman said.
Merkel's schedule includes a visit to the industrial port city where Airbus has just finished assembling the 100th jet out of parts shipped from Europe since 2009.
Work at Airbus's first non-European assembly plant is carried out under an agreement that runs out in 2016. Airbus plans a second offshore plant in Mobile, Alabama.
ICBC's decision to order the A320neo suggests Tianjin will have a stake in assembling the latest items in Airbus's catalogue, designed to offer 15 percent fuel savings once the revamped narrow-bodies become available from mid-decade.
Diplomats said France, where Airbus is based, would be keen to oversee the sale of more aircraft to China during a visit by President Francois Hollande penciled in for later this year.
Airbus estimates China will need 4,270 new passenger and cargo aircraft in the next 20 years, dominated by narrow-body aircraft like the A320 or its U.S. rival Boeing's (
China, Germany and Airbus made no reference to the row.
China aims to enter the jet market with its 150-seat Comac C919 jetliner from 2016, but is expected to remain a significant importer of Western aircraft for decades.
Europe's Airbus currently has a 48 percent market share against Boeing in China, with the world's second-largest economy making up 20 percent of its worldwide deliveries.
Despite the Chinese deal and a Philippines order earlier this week, Airbus lags Boeing in sales so far this year and is expected to slip from the top of the industry's rankings as Boeing enjoys a resurgence following industrial delays.
(Additional reporting by Tim Hepher and Fiona Li; Editing by Erica Billingham)
