Fears CO2 cuts will hurt economy exaggerated
2009-06-22 00:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Fears that deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions will harm the economy are exaggerated but Washington's ability to cut is limited by political pragmatism, the U.N. climate panel chief said Monday.
Many developing nations want rich nations to cut emissions by 25 to 40 percent from 1990 levels by 2020 to avert the worst effects of climate change, such as deadly heatwaves, loss of food production and rising sea levels.
Many industrialized countries fear such cuts are out of reach, especially when the global economy is in turmoil.
"I think there is too much being made of this fear. It's an exaggerated perception," Rajendra Pachauri, head of the U.N. climate panel, told Reuters.
"It's certainly not going to damage the economy. It's not cuts in emissions but the lack of them that have damaged the automobile industry in the United States," he said.
"I think (the Obama administration) is just accepting political reality. I'd like to believe that they would like to do much more but they can't," he said, describing inertia and strong opposition in U.S. political and public life as the big obstacles to global climate progress.
The United States, the world's biggest polluter, is proposing to cut emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 -- a reduction of 14 percent from 2007 levels.
U.S. President Barack Obama's special envoy for climate change said in March a 25-40 percent target, the toughest scenario outlined in a U.N. climate panel report in 2007, was "beyond the realm of the feasible."
"There is a high level of awareness on the need to bring about a strong agreement," he said, adding a standoff between developed and developing countries was an issue.
Developing countries say richer countries should make big cuts as they are historically responsible for most emissions. Industrialized nations say developing states also need to get on board -- China has recently overtaken the United States as top emitter, ahead of Russia and India.
Commenting on the United States going into the climate talks, he said: "The will and commitment are certainly there but ... we've had several years of not just inaction, but opposition to action.
"One has to be very realistic ... there's no point in insisting on more because even if they attempted more they wouldn't get anywhere and we'd really be at a standstill."
