UPDATE 3-Japan firms less gloomy; stronger BOJ tankan seen
2009-06-22 03:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Big Japanese manufacturers grew much less pessimistic about business conditions in April-June as exports picked up, suggesting the Bank of Japan's key tankan survey next week could show the corporate mood rebounded from a record low.
Given the depth of Japan's slump, however, an improvement in business sentiment is unlikely to spur the BOJ to wind down its unconventional policies as companies are still reluctant to increase capital spending, government data showed, in a sign that final demand remains weak.
"We'll likely see a big improvement in sentiment in the BOJ's tankan survey," said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at Norinchukin Research Institute.
"But it's too early for the BOJ to examine an exit strategy. Companies are still saddled with excess capacity. Capital spending will likely remain weak for some time."
The business survey index (BSI) of sentiment at large manufacturers stood at minus 13.2 in April-June compared with minus 66.0 in the previous quarter, the survey by the Ministry of Finance and the Economic and Social Research Institute, an arm of the Cabinet Office, showed on Monday. [JPBUSC=ECI]
It was the biggest jump since the survey began in 2004, as manufacturers of chemicals, electronics and cars benefited in part from stimulus spending in China, a government official said.
The BSI and the BOJ tankan headline manufacturers sentiment indexes have a 97 percent correlation, based on Reuters calculations.
Japanese companies expect capital spending to fall 19.5 percent in the year to March 2010, the survey showed. That would be smaller than the 29.4 percent slide they forecast in the previous survey but still far from a return to growth.
"The pace of improvement was limited, and this suggests the tankan will likely show a double-digit fall in the capex number," said Yasunari Ueno, chief market economist at Mizuho Securities.
"If the capex figure turns out weak as expected, it will provide further evidence that an economic recovery will be weak and the BOJ can't move to tighten monetary policy so easily."
In the past few years the capital spending figure in the government survey has been around 3 percentage points lower than in the BOJ's quarterly tankan partly because the government survey includes firms with much smaller capitalisation.
The government's survey, carried out on May 25, measures the percentage of firms that expect business conditions to improve from the previous quarter minus the percentage that expect it to worsen. It covered 14,964 firms, of which 11,763 responded. The BOJ's tankan in March was based on answers from 2,400 companies.
For a graphic comparing the government's business survey index, BOJ tankan and Reuters Tankan, please click:
Underlining the weakness in final demand, the output gap stood at a record minus 8.2 percent in the first quarter, revised government data showed. The output gap shows how much gross domestic product has deviated from potential GDP, or the volume of activity when the economy is running at full capacity.
The tankan will likely show the mood among big manufacturers recovered from a record low three months ago as they restock inventories on the view the worst of the recession may have passed, a Reuters survey showed last week. The tankan is due out on July 1. [ID:nT68128]
The BOJ will be watching the financing component of the tankan survey to help it decide whether to extend its buying of commercial paper and corporate bonds from banks beyond September, when these measures are set to expire, Governor Masaaki Shirakawa said after a policy meeting last week.
The BOJ tankan index of sentiment among big manufacturers may come to minus 43 in the three months to June, the survey showed, after dropping to a record low of minus 58 in January-March.
The Reuters Tankan, which closely tracks the BOJ tankan, showed last week that manufacturers have grown much less gloomy about business conditions over the last month. [ID:nT21699]
