SCENARIOS-How will Anglo react to Xstrata's approach?
2009-06-22 06:31:00.0
SCENARIOS-How will Anglo react to Xstrata's approach? | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
SCENARIOS-How will Anglo react to Xstrata's approach?
LONDON, June 22
Mon  EDT
LONDON, June 22
) seeking talks about a possible merger, sending Anglo shares surging by as much as 12 percent. [ID:nLM662612]
Anglo, which suspended its final 2008 dividend, could be vulnerable as its shares have underperformed Xstrata's by about 45 percent this year. A deal would likely be structured as an all-share swap, since Xstrata does not have a strong enough balance sheet to raise cash in the current market.
If the two groups link up, Xstrata would likely sell its 24.9 percent stake in No. 3 platinum producer Lonmin Plc (
) since regulators would not allow a combination with Anglo's Anglo Platinum Ltd (
), No. 1 in the sector.
An alternative to a full merger would be to establish global joint ventures in coal and copper, like BHP and Rio did in iron ore.
Anglo may resist merger talks with Xstrata, since it regards its assets as being higher quality and with longer lives. It is also likely to be wary of agreeing to a deal at the bottom of the cycle and in the midst of its own cost-cutting drive that seeks to squeeze out $2 billion in savings through procurement and making assets operate more efficiently.
The key question Xstrata may have to face would be whether it is prepared to go hostile if Anglo resists. But a hostile bid would be fraught with difficulties, due to Anglo's stance as a national champion in South Africa and possible government opposition to an unfriendly move.
South Africa's new President Jacob Zuma has close ties to trade unions, which could fear job cuts as a merged group seeks to reduce costs.
But Xstrata Chief Executive Mick Davis is South African and may offer the government to transfer a stake in the combined group to a group of black investors as part of the country's Black Economic Empowerment programme.
RIVAL SUITORS?
Brazil's Vale SA (
), the world biggest iron ore producer, may be interested in Anglo after talks about acquiring Xstrata fell through last year. A deal would give Vale more diversification both in terms of geography and types of commodities, boosting exposure to coal and copper.
A wild card could be Xstrata's biggest shareholder, Swiss commodities trader Glencore [GLEN.UL], which holds a 35 percent stake and which the Financial Times said was exploring a stock market listing. [ID:nSP449365]
Following Sunday's announcement by Xstrata about Anglo, some industry sources speculate the two moves may be linked and all three groups could eventually get together, or there was a twin process underway.
