CORRECTED - UPDATE 2-Siemens sees new orders push from govt stimuli
2009-06-22 06:11:00.0
(Reuters) - German industrial conglomerate Siemens (
) said it expects to win new orders of around 15 billion euros ($20.9 billion), mostly green projects, from economic stimulus programmes worldwide in the next three business years.
Of that figure, 6 billion euros would come from green technology contracts, "significantly" increasing revenues from the company's environmental portfolio in the future.
Nonetheless, Siemens still expected business to weaken in the third and fourth quarters of the current fiscal year, Chief Executive Peter Loescher told journalists on Monday.
"That's because we expect these stimulus programmes to have a stabilising effect on our business -- and then on our new orders -- next year at the earliest," he added.
Shares of Siemens were down 0.7 percent at 50.30 euros at 0937 GMT, while the German blue-chip index
Siemens, which makes trains and turbines as well as hearing aids and light bulbs, is a bellwether of Germany's economy, the largest in the euro zone.
Loescher said the decline in global economic growth appeared to be slowing down, although experts now expect the economy to contract more than was forecast in April.
"Therefore we can realistically hope that we're now approaching the low point. However, it is still very difficult to predict how long the economy will remain at this depressed level, and when and at what rate of incline it will once again rebound," he added.
"Regarding the green technology portfolio, it is somewhat vague as the company never precisely defined what belongs to that portfolio," said DZ Bank analyst Karsten Oblinger.
Siemens said of the 2 trillion euros worth of economic stimulus plans around the globe, around 700 billion euros are for infrastructure investments.
The total volume of planned infrastructure expenditures relevant for Siemens comes to around 150 billion euros in the next three fiscal years, Siemens said.
"Against the backdrop of the worst global economic crisis in decades, these government measures are at least partially cushioning, in some cases, sharp declines in private sector demand. They should also have a stabilizing effect on our business," Loescher said.
Loescher said the United States has reserved more than $4 billion of its stimulus programme for improvements to the U.S. power transmission infrastructure and $8 billion for high-speed trains, two areas where he said Siemens is very strong.
Siemens said China has reserved more than 700 billion yuan ($102.4 billion), of its stimulus programme for the development of rail infrastructure. ($1=.7183 euros) ($1=6.835 Yuan) (Reporting by Jens Hack and Marilyn Gerlach; Editing by Mike Nesbit)
