UPDATE 4-Sechin denies Rosneft/Surgut merger, stock rally
2009-06-19 13:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia's top energy official Igor Sechin denied on Friday plans by the Kremlin to merge top oil firm Rosneft (
) after Rosneft's stock rallied on renewed merger speculation.
The rally came as Vladimir Bogdanov, a charismatic career oilman who has been running Russia's No.4 oil firm Surgut for over two decades, was elected to join the board of state-run Rosneft at the annual meeting later on Friday.
A simple reminder by Sechin, also Rosneft's chairman, that Surgut has $23 billion in spare cash sparked a new rally and a flurry of speculation that the Kremlin may ask Surgut to help Rosneft, which has around $19 billion in debts.
"Judging by the reaction of Vladimir Leonidovich (Bogdanov) -- he is sleeping over there -- nothing is planned. And I can also confirm, nothing is being planned," a smiling Sechin told a shareholder who asked him about the merger.
Shares of Rosneft, which rose as high as 4.5 percent and outperforming the broader market during the day, pared the gains after Sechin's comments to close 3.3 percent up.
Rumours about a possible tie-up between Kremlin-friendly Surgut and Rosneft have been emerging and dying down regularly in the past few years alongside speculation about a departure of Rosneft's current chief executive Sergei Bogdanchikov.
"The rumour mill is now running in overdrive that Surgut may acquire a blocking minority stake in Rosneft for cash and that there may be a change in the position of CEO of Rosneft," said Chris Weafer, chief strategist at UralSib brokerage.
"This is something of a seasonal story but this year appears to have much greater credibility," he added.
Bogdanchikov said, however, that no new share issue was planned for purchase by Surgut.
COST CUTS, DEBT
Bogdanchikov looked confident on Friday as he and Sechin gave upbeat speeches on Rosneft's performance saying heavy debt was being refinanced and cost were being cut.
"In 2008 some $16 billion in debts have been refinanced and partly repaid, in the first half of this year it was $7 billion. The company feels confident," Sechin, told a gathering of some 740 shareholders.
Sechin, one of the closest allies of powerful Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, also said Bogdanov becoming a director would not imply a conflict of interest.
He also promised Surgut state support in its fight with Hungarian energy firm MOL MOLB.MM, in which Surgut bought a 21 percent stake for 1.4 billion euros ($2.0 billion) earlier this year, earning the ire of MOL and Hungary's government. [ID:nL41038469]
Bogdanchikov said Rosneft had approved a plan to cut costs by 18 billion roubles ($579 million) as part of an anti-crisis programme, but did not say if he referred to 2009 or beyond.
"2009 will become a year of growth for our firm despite the crisis," Bogdanchikov said, promising modest oil output growth this year, robust growth in 2010 and ruling out staff cuts.
He also said Rosneft may partner with Italy's ENI (
Rosneft has over 138,000 shareholders, with the state owning 75-percent and oil major BP (
), Russian state bank VEB and Chinese CNPC being among the biggest private investors.
Rosneft became Russia's most indebted oil firm after borrowing heavily since 2005 to acquire the assets of bankrupt oil firm YUKOS at state-forced auctions.
The global credit crunch made it difficult for Rosneft to refinance debts but the firm found a way out by persuading China to lend it $15 billion in exchange for 20 years of supplies via a new pipeline, which will be commissioned next year.
Rosneft's vice-president Sergei Makarov told reporters Rosneft has already obtained $5 billion of that loan and hoped to get a further $5 billion before October. ($1=31.09 Rouble) ($1=.7183 Euro) (Writing by Dmitry Zhdannikov; Editing by David Jones and Victoria Bryan)
