Nortel selling wireless unit to Nokia Siemens
2009-06-20 01:50:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
A Nortel sign is seen in downtown Toronto February 27, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Mark Blinch
Sat  EDT
Nortel, once the largest North American maker of telecommunications gear, collapsed into bankruptcy in January, blaming the economic crisis for derailing a turnaround effort that began in 2005.
Nokia Siemens, a joint venture of Nokia (
), had made an unsolicited offer for parts of Nortel's carrier network group, but the price and scope of a deal had been unclear.
), Huawei HWT.UL, Nokia Siemens and Alcatel-Lucent (
The deal will allow Nokia Siemens to expand its presence in North America and make it a leading supplier of wireless infrastructure products in the region, it said in a separate statement announcing the deal.
The transaction includes Nortel's CDMA business and LTE assets. CDMA is the technology that lost the battle for global dominance but still has a strong position in some markets, including North America. Nortel has a roughly 30 percent share of the global CDMA market.
"This agreement provides an important strategic opportunity for Nokia Siemens Networks to strengthen its position in two key areas, North America and LTE, at a price that makes good economic sense," NSN Chief Executive Simon Beresford-Wylie said in the statement.
Nokia Siemens is now the "stalking horse" bidder, which means its offer sets a floor under other possible offers in the bankruptcy process.
Under the terms of the deal, at least 2,500 Nortel employees in Canada, the United States, Mexico and China have the opportunity to keep their jobs under NSN ownership.
A Nortel spokesman said this represented "a majority" of the employees associated with the assets, but would not give a specific percentage. Nortel once employed more than 90,000 people, but now has about 30,000 staff.
"This is not what we were planning to accomplish," said Chief Executive Mike Zafirovski in an interview with the Wall Street Journal.
But he said the deal was good for employees, customers and Nortel's technologies.
"We always thought it was very important for us to be driving consolidation in the industry" through acquisitions, Zafirovski told the Journal. "This time, we will be on the other side of the transaction."
The deal is subject to approval by both a U.S. bankruptcy court and the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, Nokia Siemens said in a statement. Final sale hearings are expected on July 28 in the United States and July 30 in Canada.
Export Development Canada, Canada's government-owned export credit agency, is supporting the deal with a $300 million loan commitment, NSN said.
(Reporting by Nichola Groom in Los Angeles and Ritsuko Ando in New York; Editing by Gary Hill and Alex Richardson)
