CIC to invest $500 million in Blackstone fund: source
2009-06-19 10:47:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri  EDT
) hedge fund unit, a source familiar with the situation said on Friday.
The Wall Street Journal earlier reported the news and said it was part of a broad effort to put cash to work, and that the hefty injection would be welcome news for hedge funds.
The paper, citing unnamed sources, said that CIC Chairman Lou Jiwei worries about missing investment opportunities as the market nears a bottom.
CIC has been approached by hedge fund managers, including Eton Park Capital Management's Eric Mindich and Paulson & Co's John Paulson, the paper reported.
The paper said it was not clear how much CIC might allocate to hedge funds, although it said officials in the past have said it plans to give asset managers up to $80 billion overall.
CIC, Blackstone and the hedge funds declined to comment to the Journal.
Blackstone's funds-of-hedge-funds unit is based in New York and London and is run by J. Tomilson Hill.
CIC was created in 2007 to manage part of China's foreign exchange reserves for higher returns. The fund has not published any official financial statements.
) and Blackstone, but it has recently shown renewed interest in overseas markets as the global financial crisis eases.
On Thursday, sources told Reuters that Blackstone is in talks with the Shanghai city government to set up a wholly-owned China subsidiary as it prepares to launch a local currency private equity fund.
(Reporting by Paritosh Bansal and Megan Davies; Editing by John Wallace and Brian Moss)
