EU backs new banking rules; IMF sees stronger 2010
2009-06-19 11:32:00.0
(Reuters) - European Union leaders agreed on Friday to more steps to avert a repeat of the banking crisis and the IMF said 2010 might deliver stronger growth than earlier forecast, adding to a run of better economic news.
The EU leaders backed the creation of a European system of financial supervisors, but gave them only limited powers.
The agreement, outlined in a draft summit declaration obtained by Reuters, followed U.S. President Barack Obama's announcement on Wednesday of what he said was the biggest reform of U.S. financial supervision since the 1930s.
In the draft declaration, the leaders said: "The European Union, like the rest of the world, still faces the effects of the deepest and most widespread recession of the post-war era. It is imperative for the EU to continue to develop and implement the measures required to respond to the crisis.
In one of the first major financial crimes prosecutions of Obama's administration, Texas billionaire Allen Stanford was to appear in U.S. federal court on Friday to answer charges he orchestrated massive fraud through his bank in Antigua.
The International Monetary Fund suggested it may lift its 2010 growth forecast for the world economy, adding to the recent run of upbeat economic news that has cheered investors. But it steered clear of suggesting signs of slowing economic decline amounted to a recovery.
After "an unprecedented global economic contraction ... signs are emerging that the rate of output decline has moderated," IMF First Deputy Managing Director John Lipsky told a conference in Turkey.
"I expect that in the coming weeks we will revise our growth projections modestly upward, mainly with regard to 2010," Lipsky said.
U.S. stocks rose. The MSCI world stocks index .MIWD00000PUS edged 1 percent higher, following Asian equities .MIAPJ0000PUS, although the indexes were down on the week. Commodity prices and higher-risk investments such as emerging market stocks .MSCIEF also firmed.
"We still have not seen economic data that indicated an economic expansion has taken hold," said Michael Sheldon, chief market strategist at RDM Financial in Connecticut, who warned of a pullback in prices over the coming weeks.
In Britain, where the bursting of a house price bubble has deepened economic pain, homebuilder Taylor Wimpey (
In tech, shares of Toronto-based Blackberry maker Research in Motion RIM.TO fell more than 2 percent, a day after the company issued an outlook that was below expectations [ID:nN18406026], and smaller crowds greeted Apple's (
Mexico's central bank cut its key interest rate by 50 basis points to 4.75 percent and said its easing cycle is nearly over as signs of improvement in the economy emerge.
The EU's financial supervisory proposals involve creating three pan-European regulatory bodies next year, and a board to monitor risks.
The head of Britain's financial regulator said he was broadly in favor of the EU proposals and also said banks viewed as too big to fail may need to meet tougher standards on their capital defenses than their smaller rivals.
(Writing by Patricia Zengerle; Editing by Brian Moss)
