Regulators' power debated; signs of recovery sought
2009-06-18 15:16:00.0
Regulators' power debated; signs of recovery sought | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Regulators' power debated; signs of recovery sought
Thu  EDT
The Swiss National Bank said in its stability report Switzerland might have to create rules to split off parts of its dominant banks, UBS (
), if the economy worsened. The two hold over $3 trillion of liabilities -- about six times Swiss gross domestic product.
"The state of the Swiss and international financial system is -- and remains -- vulnerable overall," SNB Vice Chairman Philipp Hildebrand told a news conference in Berne.
"The situation for the big banks appears more difficult. In addition to the still sizable market risks, they face significant credit risks overall.
The debate over new global bank regulation is still in its infancy. U.S. President Barack Obama said on Wednesday he had directed officials to work with governments around the world to try to build a stronger, uniform global regulatory regime, but no consensus has emerged on how that should be done.
Over the nearly two years since a collapse of the U.S. subprime mortgage market triggered a banking crisis that spread across the globe, governments have poured trillions of dollars into the financial system to prop up banks and safeguard savings and investments.
The world economy has yet to recover, with millions losing their jobs. The U.S. Labor Department said 608,000 U.S. workers filed new claims for jobless benefits last week, 3,000 more than the previous week, but recorded the first drop in continuing claims since January.
There were glimmers of hope on Thursday in the U.S. economy, the world's largest and the source of the financial contagion. The Conference Board's forward-looking gauge of economic activity, the index of leading indicators, rose 1.2 percent in May.
It was the second consecutive rise in the index, after a 1.1 rise in April, and the largest since March of 2004.
In the U.S. mid-Atlantic region, manufacturing contracted much less severely than expected in June, with the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank's business activity index rising to minus 2.2 from minus 22.6 in May.
Buoyed by recovery hopes, U.S. stocks were higher. The S&P 500
Targeting the root of the crisis, the International Monetary Fund has called on Europe to make "more convincing efforts" to fix banks and adopt tough capital requirements to ensure banks have enough capital to weather financial storms.
In Britain, Bank of England Governor Mervyn King said on Wednesday that banks considered too big to fail may be larger than regulators should allow -- a point swiftly played down by British Finance Minister Alistair Darling.
"If some banks are thought to be too big to fail, then, in the words of a distinguished American economist, they are too big," King told the City of London Financiers.
Darling instead said the fix should be systemwide, with more transparency, stronger national and international regulation, better means of dealing with failures and a greater focus on system-wide risks.
Washington has forced banks to boost their capital cushions to ensure they could weather any future economic downturn. On Wednesday, Obama laid out his vision for expanded regulation.
FREE MARKET, NOT 'FREE LICENSE'
"We are called upon to recognize that the free market is the most powerful generative force for our prosperity -- but it is not a free license to ignore the consequences of our actions," Obama said.
European Union leaders will approve new rules to tighten bank supervision at a two-day summit that began on Thursday, to safeguard an economy they said was deep in recession.
Consumer sentiment in Europe has risen in recent months, but industrial data and company results have shown the depth of the recession ushered in by the financial crisis.
In Britain, retail sales fell in May while lenders have slashed credit lines to firms and export demand slumped at its sharpest rate in more than a decade. A business group predicted the British economy would contract by 3.8 percent this year and make only a muted recovery in 2010.
Investors have hoped that China, the world's third largest economy, could lead the way out of recession. The World Bank on Thursday raised its China forecast for this year to 7.2 percent growth, below Beijing's target of 8 percent.
In Japan, a Reuters poll showed manufacturers have grown much less pessimistic about business over the last month, but consumer reluctance to spend has reinforced concerns that a recovery will be long and slow.
(Writing by Todd Eastham; Editing by Brian Moss and Steve Orlofsky)
