Oil rises on economic hopes, Nigeria disruptions
2009-06-18 15:07:00.0
Oil rises on economic hopes, Nigeria disruptions | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Oil rises on economic hopes, Nigeria disruptions
Mon, Jun 15 2009
Mon, Jun 15 2009
Traders work in the Crude & Natural Gas Options pit at the New York Mercantile Exchange June 10, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Shannon Stapleton
Thu  EDT
The reading on the Philadelphia Federal Reserve business activity index was the highest since September 2008 while the Conference Board's forward-looking measure of the U.S. economy posted its biggest increase in five years in May.
The number of U.S. workers filing new claims for jobless benefits rose last week, but the number of people staying on the benefits rolls fell for the first time since January, data showed on Thursday.
"I think that the Philly Fed report which showed manufacturing contracting at the lowest rate in nine months and ... the first drop in 21 weeks (in continuing job benefit claims) helped turn the market around," said Gene McGillian, analyst for Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut.
Oil prices have nearly doubled since February on signs of a potential economic recovery, which have sparked expectations for a rebound in fuel demand.
The World Bank on Thursday raised its forecast for 2009 gross domestic product growth in No. 2 oil consumer China to 7.2 percent, up from the 6.5 percent it projected in March. The economic data also helped lift U.S. stocks. .N
"The market seemed to get a boost from fresh attacks in Nigeria," said Tradition's McGillian. "It looks like hostilities are increasing and the market is concerned about supplies from there."
Security experts say guerrilla-style attacks on exposed oil infrastructure in the oil exporting country's Niger Delta may spread in the coming weeks although militants are divided.
"The (OPEC) goals are being met and I think that if by the end of the year prices remain at the $70 to $75 level that will be positive for the economy," he told Reuters.
(Reporting by Matthew Robinson, Robert Gibbons, and Gene Ramos in New York, David Sheppard in London and Chua Baizhen in Singapore; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)
