Deutsche, Morgan tapped for AIA IPO role: sources
2009-06-18 10:32:00.0
Deutsche, Morgan tapped for AIA IPO role: sources | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Deutsche, Morgan tapped for AIA IPO role: sources
A man walks past the American International Group (AIG) building in New York's financial district, March 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Brendan McDermid
Thu  EDT
) as joint global coordinators for the more than $4 billion IPO of its Asian life insurance unit, banking sources said on Thursday.
The choice of Deutsche Bank came as a surprise to rivals who thought the top coordinators would be U.S. banks with strong ties to what was once the world's largest insurer.
Ninety-year-old, Hong Kong-based AIA, with more than $60 billion in assets under management, provides coverage to about 20 million customers -- close to a third of AIG's total customer base.
Morgan Stanley, which is advising the U.S. Federal Reserve on the AIG bailout, had been expected to be named as a global coordinator.
The bigger surprise is Deutsche Bank, as much of the speculation for the lead role had focused on U.S. banks that had previously worked with AIG and AIA. Citigroup (
) advised on the sale of AIA this year, that was ultimately pulled.
Deutsche Bank, though, does have a track record on major Asian IPOs.
It was appointed joint global coordinator of China Life's (
) $3.48 billion IPO in December 2003, and was among the banks that handled the $19.1 billion IPO of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
The sources involved in the AIA process cautioned that the formal structure of the joint coordinators and bookrunners had yet to be made official. Co-managing an IPO is another role, but usually comes without a fee.
The IPO is part of a larger divestiture program by AIG as it looks to repay U.S. taxpayers after a series of bailouts in which the federal government committed about $180 billion to AIG's rescue, including about $85 billion in loans.
(Reporting by Michael Flaherty; Editing by Jacqueline Wong, Chris Lewis and Ian Geoghegan)
