Zimbabwe rights situation precarious: Amnesty
2009-06-18 08:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Zimbabwe's government has failed to curb human rights abuses, Amnesty International said on Thursday, criticism that may discourage Western donors who want to see a democracy created before providing aid.
"Although the level of political violence is significantly less compared to last year, the human rights situation is precarious and the socio-economic conditions are desperate," the group's Secretary General Irene Khan told a news conference.
"Persistent and serious human rights violations, combined with the failure to introduce reform of the police, army and security forces or address impunity, and the lack of clear commitment on some parts of the government are real obstacles that need to be confronted," said Khan.
Khan's visit was the first by an Amnesty International secretary general and the group's only high-level mission in the last 10 years of economic crisis. It was seen as a sign of political openness after what critics say was President Robert Mugabe's repressive one-party rule.
International donors say they remain to be convinced that the new unity government with Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai is not simply a cover for Mugabe, 85, to extend his nearly three decades in power.
"There seems to be no real sense of urgency to bring about human rights chances on the part of some government leaders. Words have not been followed by effective action," Khan said.
But she said the "grim" rights assessment by Amnesty International, a frequent critic of Mugabe, was not a reason for donors to withhold aid needed to rescue Zimbabwe.
Western skepticism over the new government's commitment to broad democratic reforms was clear on Tsvangirai's tour of Europe and the United States designed to drum up financial support for the unity government.
Governments said they would give millions of dollars for areas such as health, education and food.
But Tsvangirai wanted far more substantial pledges that could help rebuild the country of 12 million people devastated by acute poverty and chronic unemployment of more than 90 percent, an effort his government says will cost $10 billion.
Tsvangirai, who long accused Mugabe of widespread human rights abuses, has said there was no longer evidence of a general campaign of intimidation or violence.
Khan is due to meet Tsvangirai in London on Monday, where his tour is expected to continue.
Khan said no government restrictions were placed on her mission. But she said she did not have a chance to meet Mugabe, who has always described human rights groups as agents of Western foes working to topple him. "The officials said he was engaged with other matters," she said.
