UPDATE 1-China's CISA says exchanged views with Vale, Fortescue
2009-06-18 06:54:00.0
(Reuters) - The China Iron and Steel Association (CISA), the country's lead iron ore price negotiator, said on Thursday that it recently "exchanged opinions on iron ore cooperation" with Brazil's Vale (
) and Australia's Fortescue Metals Group (
), a deal which would require an embarrassing Chinese climb-down or an admission of defeat by Rio.
Rio, which has said it wants a deal by June 30, first threw down the gauntlet to China by convincing Japanese and South Korean steelmakers to sign up for smaller price cuts than the Chinese were demanding.
), more than the 33 percent accepted by a swathe of other Asian steel mills.
The iron ore pricing system has traditionally seen Vale, Rio and BHP, which between them control about 70 percent of the global seaborne iron ore market, agree prices in Asia that then become the world benchmark for the year.
But several factors have suddenly thrown open the door to a change in the system, including the emergence of Fortescue as a smaller rival to BHP and Rio, the collapse in global demand and shipping rates, splits between the pricing systems favoured by the big three suppliers, and the possibility that abundant iron ore stocks could prompt China to rely on the spot market.
CISA's General Secretary Shan Shanghua met Jose Carlos Martins, Vale's executive director for ferrous minerals on Tuesday, and Fortescue Chief Executive Andrew Forrest on Thursday, CISA said in two brief statements on its website.
Vale, the world's largest producer of iron ore, said last week it was in talks with the Chinese to set prices after concluding deals with other Asian steel mills.
"Vale also hopes to reach an agreement with China, one of the main markets of Vale," it said in a statement. A press official said this meant the company had begun talks with China.
Meanwhile, Fortescue has said its charter is to become China's most important iron ore supplier and is aiming to be one of the first foreign companies to list on the Shanghai Stock Exchange. (Reporting by Alfred Cang and Tom Miles, Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
