GLOBAL MARKETS-World stocks near 3-week low; oil slips
2009-06-18 07:41:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks fell towards the previous day's three-week low and oil also slipped on Thursday after investors turned nervous in pushing risky assets further before seeing concrete signs of an economic recovery.
UK data showed retail sales fell unexpectedly in May, tempering recent optimism that the global economy is on track for a recovery and weighing on sterling. Britain's factory orders fell slightly more than expected in June with export orders recording their biggest drop in more than a decade.
Concerns over the banking sector grew after Standard & Poor's cut its credit ratings on 18 U.S. banks on Wednesday, saying increased regulation and market volatility will hurt the already weakened sector.
Struggling German Bank IKB Deutsche Industriebank AG IKBG.DE is in talks with Germany's bank rescue fund SoFFin about 7 billion euros in fresh guarantees, two financial sources familiar with the situation told Reuters.
"We've gone back below a few of the major moving averages. That alone will focus the mind on the fact that there is some scope for profit-taking," said Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin Securities.
"The rebound that we did see from the March lows was really fast and furious and there wasn't really much pause for breath while it was underway."
The MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS lost a third of a percent, having hit the three-week low on Wednesday. Banking stocks .SX7P lost 0.8 percent.
fell 0.7 percent while emerging stocks .MSCIEF dropped 1.1 percent. U.S. stock futures were down around a quarter percent SPc1, pointing to a weaker open on Wall Street later.
The World Bank in its quarterly update on China raised its forecast for economic growth this year to 7.2 percent from 6.5 percent projected in March, although that remains below the official target of 8 percent.
The currency fell as low as 1.5118 per euro EURCHF=R, before recovering to 1.5043 after the central bank said it had been successful in stemming the currency's rise against the euro.
Sterling fell to a one-week low of 86.04 pence per euro EURGBP= while September gilt futures FLGU9 rallied as much as 14 ticks after UK data showed retail sales fell unexpectedly in May, driven by falls in clothing and footwear.
(Additional reporting by Harpreet Bhal; Editing by Victoria Main)
