Dollar weakness to support Latam recovery: Bernal
2009-06-17 17:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Latin America's economic recovery will be supported in the next few years by a weak U.S. dollar, which has allowed central banks in the region to aggressively cut interest rates, Alberto Bernal of Bulltick Capital Markets said on Wednesday.
Bernal, the head of emerging markets macroeconomic strategy at Bulltick, told the Reuters Investment Outlook Summit in New York that his optimism for the region's recovery is dependent on the U.S. Federal Reserve maintaining its benchmark lending rate near zero percent and the reappointment of Ben Bernanke as Fed chairman. Bernanke's term as Fed chairman ends on January 31, 2010.
"The key to everything that I see is dollar weakness," said Bernal, who has maintained a much rosier outlook for Latin America than many economists.
"If you don't have dollar weakness it is hard for even the good countries to do counter-cyclical monetary policies," he said, adding that central banks in the region would have a hard time cutting rates if their currencies were weakening.
Bulltick forecasts the Latin American economy will shrink a mere 0.2 percent in 2009, a much more bullish call than the 1.5 percent decline expected by the International Monetary Fund.
Bernal's views have been unchanged since the beginning of the year. Now, with signs of economic recovery popping in the region, market consensus for Latin America's growth has been moving up again.
The Latin American economy has been hit hard as the global financial crisis and downturn has cut demand for exports of commodities ranging from copper to oil, as well as denting consumer demand at home.
The main risks to a recovery, he said, would be the emergence of another event like the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September or the beginning of a monetary tightening cycle by the U.S. Federal Reserve in the fourth quarter of 2009, as some economists have speculated.
"But I have no expectation that by the fourth quarter of this year we are going to have any central bank in the world hinting that they are going to raise rates, even if these green shoots become a serious crop," Bernal said.
A failure to reappoint Bernanke would be "mind-blowing" for markets, Bernal said, adding he "cannot think of anybody who could have done a better job" to stabilize financial markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
As a result of very aggressive monetary policy easing in Latin America, inflation risks in the region are higher than in the developed world "without a doubt," he said.
For now, however, countries that have been able to implement counter-cyclical monetary policies will see their currencies appreciating further or staying at strong levels, Bernal said, naming Chile, Peru, Colombia and Brazil, as well as Mexico to a certain extent.
Exchange-traded funds, or ETFs, that invest in those countries' equity markets are an interesting option for investors providing they have ample liquidity, Bernal said, mentioning the MSCI Brazil and the MSCI Mexico funds.
Personally, however, Bernal said he would also invest his money in an ETF focused on China.
(Additional reporting by Vivianne Rodrigues, Herbert Lash, Daniel Bases and Manuela Badawy; Editing by Leslie Adler)
