UPDATE 1-Minmetals sees China commodity demand flat for 1-2 yrs
2009-06-18 02:25:00.0
(Reuters) - It will be one to two years before China sees growth in demand for industrial metals despite a recent surge in prices, Wang Lixin, president of China Minmetals Non-ferrous Metals Co. Ltd said on Thursday.
"We think the market will be flat in the next one to two years," Wang told reporters, dampening speculation that China was already leading a global recovery in the sector.
) including Century mine, the world's second-largest zinc mine, and a copper and gold business in Laos.
After operating at a loss, Century had turned cash positive thanks to a bump up in zinc prices, MMG's chief executive Andrew Michelmore said.
"In the last quarter, cash costs have been running around US$0.50 a pound," Michelmore said.
This compares with current equivalent selling prices of around A$0.71 a pound ($1,555 tonne) on the London Metal Exchange MZN3. The LME price in January was around $0.58 a pound ($1,280 a tonne).
Costs at the mine had ballooned as high as $0.69 a pound last year due to temporarily inflated mining expenditure tied to pre-stripping work, meaning it needed to move more earth to access ore.
Michelmore also said he saw a need to develop the company's nearby Dugald River zinc deposit, possibly in the next two-to three years to meet anticipated fresh demand from customers, mainly steel makers using the metal in galvanising.
Dugald has long been tipped as a replacement for the Century mine, which is scheduled to run dry in 2015.
Increasing metals prices -- copper is up 54 percent since January and nickel MNI3 is up 26 percent -- has led to some predicting demand, particularly from China, was rebounding.
But senior executives, including ones from industry majors BHP Billiton Ltd/Plc (
), warn the price surges were probably linked to stockpiling of metals in China rather than higher consumption. ($1=1.258 Australian Dollar) (Reporting by Sonali Paul, writing by James Regan; Editing by James Thornhill)
