COLUMN-Rio shows the Chinese how capitalism works: Neil Collins
2009-06-17 11:45:00.0
(Reuters) - The Chinese may be an emerging economic superpower, but when it comes to grasping the way early 21st century capitalism works, they have a great deal to learn.
) is turning into a slow-motion freight train crash, one loaded with thousands of tons of iron ore from Pilbara, and they are getting cross.
Chen Yanhai, an official from the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, reckons the latest episode has "a strong monopolistic flavour" [ID:nSYD417400].
) have finally agreed terms to turn their fabulously valuable iron ore interests in Western Australia into a joint venture. The terms value the whole shooting match at $116 billion, and would mean that 80 percent of the world's seaborne iron ore is controlled by just three companies.
The Chinese, big importers of the stuff, can see a potential oligopoly when it stares them in the face. Chen would like to subject the Rio/BHP deal to the Chinese competition authorities, although in practice it's hard to see what good that would do him.
It could all have been so different had his compatriots at Chinalco been a little smarter. They own 9.3 percent of Rio, bought at the very top of the market last year, and when the Rio board had its collective panic attack earlier this year, agreed a sweetheart deal. This involved an injection of $19.5 billion in return for doubling Chinalco's stake, minority shares in Rio's best mines and two seats on the board.
All that it needed was shareholder approval, but since the deal looked rotten at the time, and has looked worse with every passing month, approval never looked likely. Had Chinalco been a little smarter, it would have renegotiated the deal before it was too late.
Now it's in an open-cast hole. Rio has launched an independence-saving rights issue, and hasn't even bothered to win a commitment from Chinalco to take up its share. The possible overhang should the Chinese dump 1.6 billion pounds-worth of new shares has pushed the London price of Rio to a discount of 21 percent to the Australian price, according to the brokers at Liberium.
It's surely unlikely that Chinalco would cut off its nose to spite its face, and the best bet is that it will take up the rights and bide its time. China Inc. is obviously feeling pretty sore about the whole affair. It's been quite a lesson.
Reuters' Michael Flaherty points out [ID:nHKG327708] another lesson. JP Morgan was one of Chinalco's advisers on the original Rio deal, but it smoothly moved away and has emerged as one of the underwriters of the rights issue. No wonder the Chinese are hopping at perfidious Albion.
