Dementieva loses to Razzano in Eastbourne
2009-06-17 16:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Top seed Elena Dementieva lost in the second round of the Eastbourne International on Wednesday, going out 6-0 3-6 7-6 to Frenchwoman Virginie Razzano.
The Russian world number four took her time to get into her stride on a chilly, windy evening at the English seaside and was a set down within 21 minutes.
Though she recovered her aggression in the second set, she missed chances in the third-set tiebreak, giving the 25th-ranked Razzano a 3-1 lead when she hit a double fault.
"I had some disappointing mistakes in the tiebreak," Dementieva, a Wimbledon semi-finalist last year, told reporters. "I wish I had more matches to play."
Razzano will now play holder Agnieszka Radwanska of Poland, the eighth seed, who progressed to the quarter-finals when her opponent Li Na of China pulled out with an abdominal strain after four games.
Apart from Radwanska, the only seed to reach the last eight of the grasscourt event was Dane Caroline Wozniacki, the number six. She took revenge on Samantha Stosur, who defeated her in the quarter-finals here last year, beating the Australian 6-1 5-7 6-1.
Former world number one Amelie Mauresmo, the Wimbledon champion three years ago, threw away a host of chances to make the quarter-finals and lost 7-6 7-6 to Russian Ekaterina Makarova, with the second tiebreak going to 15-13.
Frustrated at being broken as she served for the second set, the Frenchwoman took a stray ball and whacked it high over a row of trees into the street, earning a warning from the umpire.
"It was a very cruel match," Mauresmo, who failed to convert five set points in each tiebreak, told reporters. "I had the opportunities and was not able to take them."
World number 10 Nadia Petrova, a finalist here last year, vented her frustration on her racket, smashing it on a chair after having to withdraw because of problems with her back.
The seventh seed had taken the first set against fellow Russian Vera Dushevina and was one game down in the second when she decided she could not continue, handing her opponent a quarter-final place against Canadian Aleksandra Wozniak.
Dmitry Tursunov, the top seed left in the inaugural men's tournament at this south coast resort, had to work hard to beat British qualifier Alex Bogdanovic, who was buoyed by the support of the Center Court crowd, 6-7 6-4 7-6 in the second round.
