FOREX-Dollar drops as tame inflation dents rate hike view
2009-06-17 16:49:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar fell for a second day against major currencies on Wednesday after tame U.S. inflation data dampened speculation the Federal Reserve would raise interest rates anytime soon.
But investors pared back such expectations after a Labor Department report on Wednesday showed U.S. consumer prices rose just 0.1 percent month on month in May, and fell over the past 12 months by the most since 1950. See [ID:nN17329915].
"The latest inflation data has obviously reminded market participants that inflation is still not as much of a worry right now," said Samarjit Shankar, director of global foreign exchange strategy at the Bank of New York Mellon in Boston.
"The market has had to scale back its expectations for a Fed rate hike. That has obviously taken away some element of support for the dollar," he added.
In late New York trading, the euro rose 0.8 percent to $1.3949
on electronic trading platform EBS, hitting a session peak of $1.3986 earlier in the session.
and was last at 95.64 yen, down 0.8 percent on the day.
"We're seeing dollar weakness because the idea is that inflation is not pretty evident right now and that is seen as a positive in terms of the growth outlook and risk appetite," said Brian Dolan, chief currency strategist at Forex.com in Bedminster, New Jersey.
The ICE Futures' dollar index .DXY, which measures the value of the greenback against a basket of major currencies, dropped 0.6 percent 80.247.
"The U.S. current account deficit, although higher than expected, continues to narrow rapidly," Vassili Serebriakov, currency strategist at Wells Fargo, wrote in a note.
Concerns over the dollar's role as a global reserve currency also continued to weigh on the market, a day after the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China, known as the BRIC group, called for a "more diversified international monetary system."
The presidents of Russia and China on Wednesday agreed to boost the use of their national currencies, the rouble and yuan, in bilateral trade. Russia has recently repeatedly called for less global reliance on the U.S. dollar. [ID:nLH721678].
Bank of New York's Shankar said there's already evidence that some central banks have started to reduce the proportion of dollar-denominated holdings in their new currency reserves. "It's going to be a long-term negative for the dollar," he said.
In other currency trading, sterling traded at $1.6406, up 0.1 percent on the day, after Bank of England Governor Mervyn King said there are signs the British economy is starting to stabilize. But he added that it is too early to remove the huge degree of stimulus in the economy. See [ID:nLAG003515]. (Additional reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss)
