U.S. to announce bank reforms; China, Japan more upbeat
2009-06-17 11:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China and Japan gave more upbeat views on how their economies were emerging from the global economic crisis and U.S. inflation numbers on Wednesday were surprisingly benign, though policymakers urged caution on the pace of recovery.
The United States, where the crisis began, has shown weak signs of recovery but unemployment remains at 9.4 percent, the highest level since July 1983. President Obama said late on Tuesday that while the pace of job losses was slowing and the economy was "going to turn around," the jobless rate would probably rise further before falling back.
Still, there was comforting news for those who fear Obama's massive stimulus spending and bank and auto bailout plans would heat up inflation, with prices rising a smaller than expected 0.1 in May as core CPI also rose just 0.1 percent, the smallest advance since December 2008.
Japan's government raised its assessment of the world's second biggest economy for a second month, while in China -- increasingly seen as an important engine of world economic growth -- the cabinet said it saw more positive signs.
But both Chinese and Japanese policymakers said recovery prospects were uncertain, a view echoed in Lisbon by European Central Bank policymaker Vitor Constancio.
"There are risks of a prolonged period of weak growth in developed economies," Constancio told a banking conference.
The contraction in global trade was highlighted by U.S. data showing imports and exports falling further in the first three months of this year, reducing the world's biggest current account deficit to its lowest level since the end of 2001, when the September 11 attacks shook the world economy.
Britain, were unemployment was running at 7.2 percent in the three months to April, the highest since July 1997, has also been hard hit. However, the number of Britons claiming jobless benefits rose less sharply than expected in May, data showed.
"Employees are suffering lower wage growth to protect jobs," said Amit Kara, economist at UBS. "You are seeing lower wage growth being compensated by less unemployment. That's the new deal.
Wednesday's U.S. data showed average wages falling 0.3 percent in May after adjusting for inflation.
Japan said exports to other parts of Asia show signs of improving, and factory output was recovering. "I strongly assume the economy has bottomed out," Finance and Economics Minister Kaoru Yosano told a news conference.
China's cabinet concluded: "Favorable and positive factors are increasing, and the overall situation has stabilized and is moving toward the good side.
But a summary posted on the central government web portal (www.gov.cn) added: "We should also note that the foundation of the economic recovery is not solid, and that there are many uncertainties."
In France, tire maker Michelin (
) announced a plan for 1,093 voluntary job cuts, while the head of carmaker Renault (
The U.S. government has been discussing for six months how best to tighten bank and market regulation in response to the global crisis, which erupted when a long-running credit boom fueled increasingly risky lending, notably in U.S. mortgages.
A senior U.S. official said the plan, to be unveiled at 12:50 p.m. EDT, would close one regulator, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and put the Federal Reserve in charge of monitoring big-picture economic risks.
The Fed would also be given strong oversight powers on the largest financial firms, where excessive risk-taking helped trigger the recession.
The United States is struggling to emerge from its deepest downturn since the Great Depression and while belief that the worst is past has propelled global stocks up around 40 percent from their March nadir, investors have begun to seek firmer evidence that a real upturn is in sight.
) offset CPI data suggesting a milder inflation outlook. .N The benchmark 10-year Treasury note's price was up 2/32, compared with a 7/32 fall shortly before the CPI report.
European shares slid for the fourth day running, hitting their lowest level in three weeks and echoing falls across most of Asia as investors unwound trades betting on a speedy economic recovery. Weaker stocks pushed oil below $70 a barrel. <MKTS/GLOB> .MIWD00000PUS .MSCIEF
The dollar was lower against the euro and yen as the U.S. inflation data renewed hopes that a global recovery was under way, cutting demand for dollars as a safe haven.
(Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by Todd Eastham; Editing by Brian Moss)
