Obama, Lee warn North Korea; missile on the move
2009-06-17 11:37:00.0
Obama, Lee warn North Korea; missile on the move | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Obama, Lee warn North Korea; missile on the move
Wed, Jun 17 2009
Wed, Jun 17 2009
Tue, Jun 16 2009
President Barack Obama and South Korean President Lee Myung-bak depart after a news conference in the Rose Garden at the White House, June 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Larry Downing
Wed  EDT
After a summit with South Korean President Lee Myung-bak in Washington on Tuesday, U.S. President Barack Obama said a nuclear-armed North Korea would pose a "grave threat" to the world. He vowed new U.N. sanctions imposed for North Korea's May 25 nuclear test would be strictly enforced.
Separately, the leaders of Russia and China called for speedy return to six-party talks on North Korea's nuclear program. Chinese President Hu Jintao and his Russian counterpart Dmitry Medvedev expressed serious concern over the situation on the Korean peninsula, according to a joint statement issued at the end of talks in Moscow.
"Given the belligerent manner in which they are constantly threatening their neighbors, I don't think there's any question that that would be a destabilizing situation that would be a profound threat to not only the United States' security, but to world security," Obama said at a news conference, referring to North Korea's recent moves.
Obama vowed to end a cycle of allowing North Korea to create a nuclear crisis, then get concessions in the form of food, fuel and other incentives in return for backing down, only to later see Pyongyang renege on its promises.
"This is a pattern they've come to expect," Obama said. "We are going to break that pattern."
Obama also reaffirmed Washington's commitment to the defense of South Korea, including keeping it under the U.S. "nuclear umbrella," a move likely to anger Pyongyang, which accuses Washington of scheming to mount a nuclear attack against it.
Analysts say the North's provocative moves are partly aimed at building internal support for leader Kim Jong-il, who appears to be laying the foundation for his youngest son to eventually take over the impoverished nation. The 67-year-old leader is believed to have suffered a stroke last year.
North Korea has also threatened to launch an intercontinental ballistic missile after being earlier punished for a long-range rocket launch in April, which was widely seen as a disguised missile test that violated U.N. resolutions.
A South Korean newspaper said the North's special train for moving intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) had made a trip to an east-coast missile base, weeks after it was seen moving a missile to a new site on the west coast.
U.S. and South Korean authorities believe the train may have moved a long-range rocket to the Musudan-ri base on the east coast, used to launch two long-range rockets in the past, the Chosun Ilbo newspaper said.
"A U.S. spy satellite spotted a special ICBM transport train moving from the manufacturing plant (near Pyongyang) to the Musudan-ri test site and staying there for a few days before returning," it quoted a government source as saying.
The rocket launched in April flew about 3,000 km (1,860 miles), well short of the 4,800 km needed to reach the Alaskan coast. The rocket, called the Taepodong-2, is designed to fly as far as U.S. territory.
Japan's Sankei newspaper, which did not cite any sources, said there was activity at missile bases on both coasts that appeared to be preparations for launches.
The moves at one site could be a ruse aimed at confusing U.S. and Japanese intelligence, it said.
North Korea had begun withdrawing funds from bank accounts in Macau and other cities in anticipation of the sanctions freezing its overseas deposits, South Korea's Dong-a Ilbo newspaper said, quoting a source in Beijing familiar with the North.
Pyongyang had also lifted a ban on tourists from the United Kingdom, according to a Beijing-based travel agency specializing in tours to the country, reversing a move taken last week in reaction to a similar move against North Koreans by London.
(Additional reporting by Yoko Kubota in Tokyo, Doug Palmer and Matt Spetalnick in Washington and Lucy Hornby in Beijing; Editing by Jon Herskovitz and Sanjeev Miglani)
