China Money: Panda bond market set to boost yuan's profile
2009-06-17 20:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Foreign banks' plans to issue yuan bonds in Shanghai have revived prospects for a "panda bond" market that would bolster China's ambitions to globalise its currency and build Shanghai into a world financial centre.
remains severely constrained by capital controls, but authorities are finally diversifying China's illiquid onshore bond market to include foreigners, and this will expand the currency's global role.
"First you want to increase global demand for the yuan. By providing funding channels in yuan to foreigners, authorities are promoting the yuan bond market to foreigners as well as the international use of the currency," said Frances Cheung, fixed income analyst at Standard Chartered Bank.
) said early this month they were preparing to become the first foreign firms to issue yuan-denominated bonds in China, after the government said last month it would support issuance by locally incorporated overseas lenders.
The move comes as Chinese officials, spurred by the global financial crisis, have begun voicing unease over the dollar's dominance as well as long-term ambitions for their own currency.
Perhaps the most prominent hint came in a March essay by central bank chief Zhou Xiaochuan, who raised eyebrows by suggesting the dollar be replaced as a global reserve currency.
An easing of capital controls and full convertibility of the currency, essential if the yuan is to have a truly global role, is not expected for many years to come.
In the meantime, China has launched schemes to use yuan to settle cross-border trade with neighbouring countries, as well as 650-billion yuan in currency swap deals with countries from Belarus to Argentina, to put the yuan more widely into play.
"When the yuan becomes liberalised, at least five or 10 years from now, the global status of the currency and the yuan bond market will become very important," said Xing Ziqiang, analyst at China International Capital Corp.
China's panda bonds [0#PANDA=CDC] debuted in 2005 and by the next year two issuers, the International Financial Corp and the Asian Development Bank, had raised a combined 3 billion yuan from three issues. The proceeds were required to be used in China.
Investor demand is also likely to be strong, as well-funded domestic banks, with relatively little exposure to bonds compared with loans, will be eager for new arenas to deploy their capital.
But China has yet to issue a clear set of rules for yuan bond issuance by foreign firms in the mainland, including whether proceeds could be converted to foreign currency and repatriated as is typical elsewhere, including with Samurai bonds in Japan.
About 10 more foreign companies were lined up to issue panda bonds in 2007 but Beijing shelved the plans at the first sign of the emerging global credit crisis, fearing they might provoke capital outflows and yuan depreciation if bond proceeds were converted to foreign currency and sent abroad.
But the crisis actually appears to have strengthened China's hand in the global financial markets.
Capital controls and strict regulation insulated financial institutions from the subprime debt debacle while government stimulus has helped to position its economy, the world's third-largest, as one of the first to recover from the global slump.
This has bolstered the outlook for long-term yuan appreciation as well as China's overall economic and financial stability, giving the authorities confidence to proceed with allowing foreigners to issue yuan bonds on the mainland.
Bank of China analyst Shi Lei said that was in line with China's aim of developing Shanghai into an onshore yuan market where foreign issuers could tap China's vast domestic liquidity, while positioning Hong Kong as an offshore yuan-denominated market for foreign investors.
) said last month they were granted permission to issue yuan bonds in Hong Kong, while five Chinese banks have also issued yuan bonds in Hong Kong since the government first began allowing such issuance in 2007.
But many analysts believe the mainland market will be more attractive to both issuers and investors despite lower rates in Hong Kong, where the six-month yuan deposit rate is 0.70 percent versus 1.98 percent for corresponding mainland deposits.
Standard Chartered's Cheung noted that the mainland has an established yuan yield curve, while demand in Hong Kong is much weaker due to a less-developed secondary market. The Hong Kong banking system's yuan deposits total just 53 billion yuan.
