UPDATE 3-Sinopec, KNOC face off in $8 bln-plus Addax battle
2009-06-17 07:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Sinopec Group and Korea National Oil Co (KNOC) are competing to take over Swiss oil and gas explorer Addax Petroleum, sources said, with bids valuing the company at more than $8 billion, including debt.
The winner would get access to Toronto-listed Addax's AXC.TOAXC.L projects in Nigeria, Gabon, Cameroon, as well as the Taq Taq field in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, from which exports began this month after being blocked for years. [ID:nL1235061]
A thaw in relations between Baghdad and the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) has led to renewed interest in the area, culminating in news last week of a proposed $6 billion merger between UK-based Heritage Oil (
) and Turkey-based Genel Enerji, a partner in Taq Taq. [ID:nL9405539]
An acquisition by Sinopec Group, the parent company of China's Sinopec Corp (
), or KNOC would fit with both companies' strategy of securing energy assets to fuel their economies.
Both KNOC, which is active in Kurdistan, and Sinopec, which has interests in West Africa, were negotiating with Addax, which has a market capitalisation of $6.1 billion, the sources said.
"KNOC has put in a bid for Addax -- for the whole company," a source with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters.
) said the company declined to comment, when contacted by Reuters.
Addax's offices in Geneva did not immediately respond to requests for comment by telephone and email.
) is advising KNOC, sources said.
However, a Seoul-based source with close knowledge of the deal said the Korean oil firm has doubts that its bid can compete with China's.
"KNOC said they don't have much chance with this one because the Chinese made a very attractive bid," the source told Reuters.
Last week, Reuters reported that KNOC had hired six banks to arrange its debut dollar bond sale. The firm is an aggressive buyer of foreign assets as part of efforts by South Korea, the world's fifth-biggest importer of crude oil, to increase its reserves.
In February, Reuters reported that Addax had attracted buyout interest from multiple Asian suitors.
While Taq Taq is attractive -- it aims to produce 180,000 barrels of high grade light crude a day within 18 months -- involvement in the field still carries political risk. [ID:nL2489990]
Addax and Genel Enerji signed a production sharing contract with the KRG in which they get a percentage of revenues from oil produced at the field, but Baghdad says this was illegal, instead preferring fixed-fee service contracts.
While oil exports began in early June, Addax has yet to receive any money and neither Baghdad nor the KRG have agreed to foot the bill.
The KRG has guaranteed Addax will be paid but the KRG's natural resources minister says the region would not pay the developers from its 17 percent share of Iraq's total state oil revenues.
Baghdad is believed to have allowed exports from Taq Taq, in spite of rejecting the deals the KRG made with the fields' developers, because of budget shortfalls. (Additional reporting by Angela Moon in Seoul and Pascal Schmuck in Zurich; Editing by Jean Yoon and Simon Jessop)
