TOPWRAP 4-Tentative hope in Europe, Asia; US to reform banking
2009-06-17 09:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China and Japan gave more upbeat views on Wednesday on how their economies were emerging from the global economic crisis, although they and European policymakers urged caution on the pace of recovery.
The scale of the contraction in trade was highlighted by U.S. data showing imports and exports falling further in the first three months of this year, reducing the world's biggest current account deficit to its smallest since the end of 2001, when the Sept. 11 attacks shook the world economy. [ID:nN17329437]
Japan's government raised its assessment of the world's second biggest economy for the second straight month, while in China -- increasingly seen as an important engine of world economic growth -- the cabinet said it saw more positive signs.
But both Chinese and Japanese policymakers said recovery prospects were uncertain, a view echoed in Lisbon by European Central Bank policymaker Vitor Constancio. [ID:nLSB000212]
"There are risks of a prolonged period of weak growth in developed economies," Constancio told a banking conference.
Britain has been particularly hard hit by the crisis which has slashed jobs in its financial sector. British unemployment was running at 7.2 percent in the three months to April, the highest since July 1997, according to the internationally comparable ILO measure.
However, the number of Britons claiming jobless benefit rose less sharply than expected in May, data showed on Wednesday.
"Employees are suffering lower wage growth to protect jobs," said Amit Kara, economist at UBS. "You are seeing lower wage growth being compensated by less unemployment. That's the new deal." [ID:nLH826126]
Wednesday's U.S. data showed average wages there falling 0.3 percent in May after adjusting for inflation. [ID:nOAT002174]
In France, tyre maker Michelin (
) announced a plan on Wednesday for 1,093 voluntary job cuts, while the head of carmaker Renault (
Japan's government said exports to other parts of Asia show signs of improving and factory output is recovering. "I strongly assume the economy has bottomed out," Finance and Economics Minister Kaoru Yosano told a news conference. [ID:nT36828]
China's cabinet concluded: "Favourable and positive factors are increasing, and the overall situation has stabilised and is moving towards the good side." [ID:nPEK61962]
But a summary posted on the central government web portal (www.gov.cn) added: "We should also note that the foundation of the economic recovery is not solid, and that there are many uncertainties."
'RETURN TO REALISM'
The U.S. government has been discussing for six months how best to tighten bank and market regulation in response to the global crisis, which blew up when a long-running credit boom fuelled increasingly risky lending, notably in U.S. mortgages.
A senior U.S. official told reporters the plan, to be presented at 1650 GMT, would close one bank regulator, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and put the Federal Reserve in charge of monitoring big-picture economic risks. [ID:nN16300022]
The United States is struggling to emerge from its deepest downturn since the Great Depression and while belief that the worst is past has propelled global stocks around 40 percent up from their March nadir, investors have begun to seek firmer evidence that a real upturn is in sight.
European shares slid for the fourth day running, hitting their lowest level in three weeks and echoing falls across most of Asia as investors unwound trades betting on a speedy economic recovery. Dollar weakness boosted oil towards $71 a barrel. [MKTS/GLOB] .MIWD00000PUS .MSCIEF
"Some of the hype on the recovery seems to have faded and we seem to be returning to realism," said Peter Dixon, economist at Commerzbank.
The dollar continues on the back foot after leaders of the emerging BRIC nations -- Brazil, Russia, India and China -- pressed their view at a summit on Tuesday that the crisis has underlined the need for a more diversified monetary system. [ID:nLG674351] (Writing by Ruth Pitchford; editing by Elizabeth Piper)
