UPDATE 1-Gazprom says pipeline to China delayed due pricing
2009-06-17 05:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia has indefinitely delayed plans to build gas pipelines to China because it still cannot reach a pricing deal with Beijing, Russia's gas export monopoly Gazprom (
"No one is talking about gas supplies to China in 2011 anymore," Gazprom deputy chief executive Alexander Ananenkov told a news conference.
The statement came as Russia's President Dmitry Medvedev and Prime Minister Vladimir Putin met Chinese President Hu Jintao during his state visit to Russia.
China, the world's second largest oil consumer but still a relatively modest gas user, has since then agreed to buy gas from the former Soviet Union's republics of Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan, with supplies due to begin in the next few years.
Analysts say the deals give Beijing an upper hand at talks with Gazprom and hinder the Russian gas behemoth's desire to diversify away from the European markets, of which it already controls one quarter.
Gazprom wants to buy Kovykta from BP's (
Gazprom's export boss Alexander Medvedev told the same news conference the two sides were currently not holding active talks about Kovykta.
Ananenkov said Gazprom's talks with U.S. oil major ExxonMobil (
) about gas purchases from Exxon's Sakhalin-1 field were progressing well but did not give details.
Exxon's plans to export gas from Sakhalin-1 to China have been on hold for years after Gazprom said it wanted to buy gas from the field for Russia's domestic use.
Gazprom controls the neighbouring project on Russia's eastern island of the same name, Sakhalin-2.
Medvedev said Sakhalin-2 would export over five million tonnes of liquefied natural gas (LNG) from Sakhalin-2 this year, up from the initial plan of three million.
) and Japan's Mitsui (
), and Medvedev said the project would reach target capacity of 9.6 million tonnes next year. (Writing by Dmitry Zhdannikov; editing by James Jukwey) (Moscow Newsroom, + 7 495 775 12 42, moscow.newsroom@reuters.com)
