FOREX-Euro rises but market struggles with direction
2009-06-17 02:10:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro rose on Wednesday as investors bought it back after steep falls against the dollar and yen this week, but the market struggled for clear direction as it tried to decide if a dollar recovery had run its course.
The dollar has fallen against major currencies such as the euro and Australian dollar this year, with investors unwinding safe-haven dollar positions as the worst of the economic crisis faded and as questions arose over its suitability as the world's reserve currency.
But with a question over its reserve currency status resurfacing on Tuesday, analysts said the market was not sure which direction to head.
"The market seems to be bewildered, facing lots of different factors," said Kazuyuki Kato, treasury department manager at Mizuho Trust and Banking.
"And investors are shying away from taking risks after stocks entered a correction phase as optimism for the economy had gone too far," he said.
The greenback fell on Tuesday after Russia suggested ahead of a meeting with leaders of Brazil, India and China there was a need for a reserve currency other than the dollar.
In the event, the four leaders avoided the reserve status issue in their statement after the summit, causing the dollar selling to peter out. [ID:nLG674351]
"At the end there was no strong comment to play down the role of the dollar," said Masafumi Yamamoto, head of FX strategy Japan at Royal Bank of Scotland in Tokyo.
Asian stock markets were largely negative on Wednesday, with investors doubting how fast the U.S. recession is easing after a mixed set of economic indicators.
"The global financial markets are in correction mode," Yamamoto said.
Traders and analysts said currency flows seemed to be driven by short-term players, making the market choppy, but some saw the dollar and the yen as having room to strengthen a bit more.
"The dollar can continue a bit higher but overall the medium-term trend lower is still intact," a senior trader at a European bank in Hong Kong said.
Traders said talk that Japanese investors may repatriate funds from euro zone bond redemptions had helped push the euro down versus the yen this week, with 15.6 billion euros ($21.6 billion) of redemptions and 2.1 billion euros of coupon payments falling due.
Traders also cautioned about possible yen-selling related to Japanese investment trusts, which tend to attract funds in June and July when people receive bonuses.
A batch of trusts investing overseas are expected to be launched towards the end of this month, although traders questioned how much will flow into them as many people face bonus cuts this year. (Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Joseph Radford)
