UPDATE 2-Indonesia court jails president's in-law for graft
2009-06-17 03:12:00.0
(Reuters) - An Indonesian court on Wednesday jailed a former central banker who is related to President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono for corruption, a move that may help the president's re-election prospects next month.
The case against Aulia Pohan was seen as an important test of Indonesia's efforts to clamp down on corruption, especially where it involved the powerful or well-connected.
Pohan, whose daughter is married to Yudhoyono's eldest son, was one of four central bank officials involved in a scandal that cost the state 100 billion rupiah ($9.83 million) in losses.
The country's corruption court sentenced him to four-and-a-half years in prison for his role in approving illegal payments to members of parliament -- more than the four years requested by prosecutors.
Kevin O'Rourke, a political analyst and author, said the decision could slightly lift Yudhoyono's election chances.
"The big step was the initiation of the investigation of Pohan in the first place, that's what the electorate interpreted as a sign that Yudhoyono is impartial in allowing anti-corruption investigations to proceed," said O'Rourke.
Yudhoyono, who is currently favourite to win a second term in a July 8 election, faces a challenge from Vice President Jusuf Kalla and former president Megawati Sukarnoputri in the election.
Pohan, dressed in grey trousers and a cream shirt, appeared impassive as his sentence was announced in a packed court room.
"The four defendants have been proven legitimately and convincingly guilty of corruption," said judge Kresna Menon.
Another judge, Hendra Yospin, said Pohan and the three other defendants could not justify handing out cash simply because the practice may have previously been common at the central bank.
"The fact is the money was given to individuals in parliament," said Yospin.
"It has been decided. What can you do?" Pohan told reporters after hearing the sentencing.
Widespread graft deters investors who otherwise might pour billions of dollars into developing Indonesia's abundant oil, gas and mineral deposits or improving its shoddy infrastructure.
As a result, Indonesia's growth lags far behind that of China and India.
Emerson Yuntho, an official at Indonesia Corruption Watch, a pressure group, welcomed the stiff sentences.
"This is positive, the tendency now is a sentence that is not always the same or is less than prosecutors had demanded."
Arbi Sanit, an academic at the University of Indonesia, said the Yudhoyono administration had made real strides against graft.
"Since Indonesia's independence, I think his era is a landmark in the history of corruption eradication. We had the laws long ago, but they didn't function," said Sanit.
Despite its recent successes in fighting graft, there have been setbacks. Earlier this year, the head of the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK) was detained as a murder suspect.
The corruption court, which has a 100 percent conviction rate, also faces a threat to its existence since the current parliament is yet to pass a law to extend its life. ($1=10,175 Rupiah) (Additional reporting by Sunanda Creagh; Writing by Ed Davies, Editing Dean Yates)
