RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Oil slides, most Asia shares down 4th day
2009-06-16 22:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Most stocks in Asia edged lower on Wednesday, weighed down by resource-related shares and doubts about a global economic recovery, while oil slipped below $70 a barrel ahead of U.S. inventory data that could reflect slowing energy demand.
U.S. Treasuries eased on profit taking after a surge overnight, but may not stay down for long, especially after the Federal Reserve bought $6.45 billion in Treasury debt on Tuesday and a report showed industrial capacity use at a record low.
Several U.S. economic indicators this week have come in below expectations, raising fears that investors may have pushed up equity and commodity prices too far, too quickly.
"The market does need to come off because lot of cyclicals have become very expensive very quickly," said Damien Boey, equity strategist at Credit Suisse in Australia.
The materials sector had continued to climb after the broad market began to drift lower after June 3, but along with the energy sector this week has been leading the region lower.
Japan's Nikkei share average
eked out small gains, rising 0.4 percent in listless trade. Defensive sectors, such as pharmaceutical and food-related stocks, were among the main supports to the index.
The U.S. dollar was largely unchanged on the day against the euro and yen, after Brazil, Russia, India and China after a first summit together issued a joint statement that did not mention any doubts about the dollar's role as the primary reserve currency.
The dollar had been under some pressure heading into the summit on fears that Russia, which has publicly made clear it wants to have new world reserve currencies, would coax China into bashing the dollar together. [ID:nLG674351]
, down 5 cents since hitting a 2009 high around $1.4337 on June 3.
Besides headlines about the U.S. dollar's global reserve role, perceptions on risk expressed through equity markets have also been a driver. Fears that price increases have run ahead of fundamentals, particularly with earnings estimates for 2010 in the double digits, have weighed on global stocks.
"That is a similar picture of markets around the globe and quite appropriately so, given we are in the midst of a reassessment of expectations for the global economy - about which there is little more agreement than that challenges lie ahead," said Patrick Bennett, Asia foreign exchange and rates strategist with Societe Generale in Hong Kong in a note.
U.S. crude oil futures fell a fourth day, with the July contract CLc1 down 0.3 percent to $70.25 a barrel after touching a session low of $69.91 earlier.
The Reuters-Jefferies CRB index .CRB, a basket of 19 commodity futures, has slipped about 4 percent from a seven-month high reached last Thursday. It was still up 15 percent since the end of April.
The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury yield US10YT=RR ticked up to 3.68 percent after tumbling to 3.66 percent late on Tuesday in New York. After climbing to an eight-month high of 4 percent on Thursday, the 10-year yield has come off sharply as investors bought back bonds with a higher coupon as doubts about the recovery pile up. (Additional reporting by Denny Thomas in SYDNEY) (Editing by Kim Coghill)
