German investors more hopeful; U.S. home building up
2009-06-16 16:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Investors in Germany signaled recession may be nearing its low point, while in the United States, optimism from a surge in housing construction was dampened by a downward spike in industrial production.
In Germany, analyst and investor sentiment rose in June to its highest level since May 2006, a survey from the Mannheim-based ZEW economic think tank showed. [ID:nLG831670]
"We are nearing (the lowest point in the recession)," said ZEW economist Peter Westerheide. "It all points to an improvement in economic growth. We might still see negative growth digits (in the fourth quarter) but it will be an improvement compared to what we have seen in the past."
Data from the U.S. housing market, where the global financial crisis was born, showed construction of new homes rebounded in May.
But analysts said the figures, paired with news of a larger-than-expected drop in U.S. industrial output, had yet to signal conclusively that any recovery was on the way.
Investors are seeking any sign that the worst of the global recession may be over, despite appeals for caution from officials who fear that markets will surge, only to dive again if the real economy fails to revive.
The ZEW survey in Germany, Europe's dominant economy, found stronger optimism than expected, although that optimism has yet to filter into the real world, where companies are struggling and workers are losing their jobs.
"The survey gives the impression that we could be looking at normal economic activity again by the end of the year. We do not see things this way," said Rainer Sartoris, an economist at HSBC Trinkaus. "Survey participants are somewhat removed from the real situation, which is still very bad."
In other reports on the real situation in Europe, new car registrations fell in Europe for a 13th straight month in May and French newspapers said tire giant Michelin (
) would cut 1,500 jobs.
In Canada, labor productivity unexpectedly grew 0.3 percent in the first quarter as workers put in fewer hours. Analysts had expected a second straight decline.
U.S. STOCKS UP ON HOUSING, THEN DOWN ON INDUSTRIAL DATA
The U.S. Commerce Department said housing starts jumped 17.2 percent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 532,000 units, as ground-breaking for multifamily units surged 61.7 percent after falling 49.4 percent in April.
"The month-over-month gains have increased every month since February," said Zach Pandl, economist with Nomura Securities in New York. "It is an encouraging sign that we have found the bottom in housing starts."
"It's going to rake down the inflation hawks," said T.J. Marta, chief markets strategist at Marta on the Markets. "This is the most benign (inflation) reading yet."
U.S. stocks initially rose on the housing data, but fell after the Fed report, which showed capacity utilization, a measure of slack in the economy, fell to 68.3 percent, the lowest level on records dating back to 1967. The broad S&P 500 index closed down 1.3 percent. .N
The dollar fell broadly, pressured by comments from Russia suggesting a need for a global reserve currency other than the greenback. <FRX/> The weak dollar, paired with the rebound in housing starts, spurred a 2 percent rise in oil prices.
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev told a news conference that "we have to consolidate the international monetary system, not only through the consolidation of the dollar but the creation of new reserve currencies."
His comments were made against the backdrop of the first BRIC summit of the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China taking place in Yekaterinburg, Russia.
China -- which holds $2 trillion in foreign currency reserves -- was silent on the issue, indicating little unity on any challenge to the dollar, and sources said the BRIC communique would not discuss the dollar.
But markets react nervously to any questioning of the dollar's global dominance.
In Tokyo, the Bank of Japan held its main rate at 0.1 percent and upgraded its economic assessment, as rising output and exports raise hopes the worst is over.
But its tone was cautious. The BOJ said the economy was likely to show clearer evidence of leveling out in the next few months. Domestic demand remained weak as companies pass on their financial pain to households through job cuts, it added.
Asian stock markets fell on Tuesday, with Japan's Nikkei
down 2.9 percent for its worst one-day percentage loss in more than two months, while MSCI's measure of other Asian stock markets shed 1.1 percent .MIAPJ0000PUS.
European shares inched higher, as energy and defensive stock gains offset bank losses after a planned rights issue by National Bank of Greece revived fears over banks' balance sheets.
(Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by Todd Eastham; editing by Brian Moss, Gary Hill)
