RPT-FACTBOX-Steps by beverage companies to conserve water
2009-06-16 08:03:00.0
(Reuters) - In the face of increasing global water scarcity, beverage companies are taking steps to conserve this resource.
), PepsiCo (
), Anheuser-Busch InBev (
), Brown-Forman (
), Beam Global Spirits and Wine FO.N, Carlsberg (
), this group works to define a common framework for assessing water use, improve industry practices and performance and inform public policy in areas such as water conservation.
PepsiCo is also teaching farmers in India to use direct seeding for rice instead of moving seedlings from nurseries to paddies which are then flooded. The program is being extended to more than 4,700 acres of land and is expected to save nearly 4 billion liters of water.
The company is setting water efficiency targets for plants and is working to protect water basins worldwide. Programs range from controlling thirsty invasive plant species along the Rio Grande in North America to developing pollution control measures in China's Yangtze area.
) - All new plants will achieve "green building" certification from the U.S. Green Building Council. So far, the company's five certified plants have reduced water use by 9 million gallons. It also sponsors a children's water education program called Project WET.
) - Set water efficiency targets while undertaking extensive watershed mapping and work to improve suppliers' efficiency. A plant in Slovakia, for example, now has a more efficient bottle washer and uses the same water to clean the inside and outside of kegs, while a brewery in Honduras supplies a local nursery with treated water and dried sludge for use as a fertilizer.
) - Is using a technique at vineyards in Australia, Spain and Argentina which measures the exact amount of water needed for grapes to grow and then irrigates drop by drop. Its Chivas Brothers business in Scotland uses an automated machine to wash vehicles while a plant in Brazil is running a project aiming at using rainwater to clean plants. (Reporting by Martinne Geller in New York; Editing by Cynthia Osterman)
