TIMELINE-GM's Saab car unit in deal with Koenigsegg
2009-06-16 07:52:00.0
TIMELINE-GM's Saab car unit in deal with Koenigsegg | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
TIMELINE-GM's Saab car unit in deal with Koenigsegg
Tue  EDT
Following are some key events in the history of GM's Saab Automobile unit:
1937 - SAAB or Svenska Aeroplan Aktiebolaget founded in 1937 in Trollhattan, southwestern Sweden, to produce high-performance aircraft. It ventured into cars in 1946.
1990 - The Saab car division is restructured into an independent company, Saab Automobile AB, with headquarters in Sweden. Investor AB and General Motors own 50 percent each.
March 2005 - GM's German unit Adam Opel edges out Saab to win a crucial contract to build the next generation of GM's mid-sized cars in Europe. The German and Swedish governments had lobbied hard to get the mid-size car work.
Jan. 11, 2009 - GM has been in talks to sell its struggling Saab unit, GM Europe chief Carl-Peter Forster says.
Feb. 17 - In a restructuring plan submitted to the U.S. Treasury, GM says it will cap its financial support for Saab and aims for the brand to become an independent business as of Jan. 1, 2010.
Feb. 20 - Saab's fight for survival gets a boost as a Swedish court grants it protection from creditors while it tries to find a new partner and raise fresh funds.
- Saab estimates it lost $340 million in 2008 and that it expects a similar loss for 2009, blaming slack demand, ageing products, overcapacity and high costs.
Feb. 23 - Sweden can guarantee a European Investment Bank loan to Saab if a new owner that can cover half the necessary financing emerges, Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt says.
May 19 - Saab says it has selected three suitors for continued talks, but does not reveal who they are.
May 29 - Saab gets a further extension, until August 20, to its protection from creditors.
June 9 - Media reports say that three groups have entered bids for Saab - Swedish luxury sportscar maker Koenigsegg and Ira Rennert's Renco Group are among the suitors, as well as Merbanco, a group of investors from the U.S. state of Wyoming.
Sources: Reuters/ www.saabusa.com;
(Writing by Jijo Jacob, Bangalore Editorial Reference Unit; Additional writing and editing by David Cutler, London Editorial reference Unit; additional editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
