RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Dollar falls on Russia; stocks drop
2009-06-16 03:19:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar slid on Tuesday after Russia, before a meeting of the biggest emerging market powers, said the world needs new reserve currencies, while Asian stocks fell, as investors cut their holdings of riskier assets and bought yen.
A day after Russian finance minister Alexei Kudrin said the dollar's status as the world's main reserve currency would unlikely change in the near term, the country's president called for new ones, confusing investors about Russia's position. [ID:nLG281330]
With volatility creeping higher and uncertainty rife, investors as they did during the worst days of the financial crisis, turned to the yen.
Major European stocks opened slightly firmer, with the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300
according to financial bookmakers, with dealers watching resource-related shares closely after oil briefly fell below $70 a barrel, down for a third day after hitting the highest since October last week.
Japan's Nikkei share average closed 2.9 percent lower, the biggest single-day drop since March 30, led by a 4 percent decline in shares of Honda Motor Co. (
The MSCI index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS fell 1.8 percent, with losses in the energy and materials sectors the biggest drag.
Materials stocks have been driven by a rapid rise in metals and other raw materials prices on hopes outperforming, large economies such as China's would keep devouring commodities.
Since the latest global equity rebound began on March 9, the MSCI all-country world index .MIWD00000PUS has risen 35 percent, but the materials sector .MIWD0MT00PUS has gained about 49 percent.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
slid 2.8 percent. Resource-sensitive stocks were among the biggest drags on the market, with Asia's largest oil-and-gas producer PetroChina (
"I don't see a lot of evidence of a really solid economic recovery. All I see is a moderation in the rate of decay," Frank Villante, chief investment officer at Souls Funds Management in Sydney.
fell 2.4 percent on Monday, the biggest daily decline since May 13. The Dow Jones industrial average
IS VOLATILITY BACK?
The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility index, better known as the VIX .VIX, jumped 9.5 percent on Monday, the largest single-day rise since April 20.
The index, which is based on prices of options on the S&P 500, is used by global investors as a benchmark for risk taking.
The stronger indications of volatility ahead drove investors to buy the yen, which was one of the biggest movers in Asian trade. During the most violent days of the financial crisis, the yen consistently strengthened, thanks to Japan's relatively unscathed banking industry.
, while the euro fell 1.1 percent to 133.45 yen EURJPY=.
The outlook for the euro darkened after an European Central Bank report said euro zone banks may need to write down another $283 billion, but equally potent were fears about how expensive it would be for the U.S. government to finance its growing budget deficit.
"The themes of dollar-debasement and a sick European banking sector are powerful ones and depending on which theme grows in intensity, the dollar could move decisively in either direction. Right now, the mood is for downside in euro/dollar," Ashley Davies, currency strategist with UBS in Singapore, said in a note.
The 10-year yield is on its way to a fourth consecutive decline after reaching 4.01 percent last Thursday, its highest since mid October.
Many debt securities, including mortgage loans, are benchmarked against Treasury yields, so the quick rise in yields over the last month have investors spooked about the viability of the fragile recovery. (Additional reporting by Denny Thomas in SYDNEY; Editing by Kazunori Takada)
