Indian shares fall 0.1 pct; Reliance, ICICI drop
2009-06-16 01:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Indian shares fell 0.1 percent on Tuesday as tepid U.S. regional manufacturing data dented optimism across Asia and sparked profit-taking on an 85 percent rally since early March.
"There is no doubt this is a healthy correction. The market has held up very well recently, and so we could see some consolidation over the next few sessions," Hitesh Agrawal, head of research at Angel Stock Broking, said.
) extended losses into a second session, a day after a court asked the billionaire Mukesh Ambani-controlled energy group to sell gas at half the government-approved price to his estranged brother's firm. [ID:nBOM433343]
Reliance fell 1 percent to 2,158 rupees, after dropping 7.5 percent in the previous session.
), which is in exclusive merger talks with South Africa's MTN (
), was another major heavyweight drag on the index, down 1.4 percent at 807 rupees.
By 11:15 a.m. (0545 GMT), the 30-share BSE index
was down 0.1 percent at 14,855 points, with 18 stocks declining, after falling as much as 1.7 percent earlier.
) gained 1.1 percent to 1,523.50 rupees to limit losses.
The Indian market has raced up 85 percent from a 2009 low in early March, largely driven by foreign funds which pumped more than $7.5 billion into the market since mid-March on growing optimism the world economy was healing.
The stock market also received a boost after the ruling Congress-led coalition was re-elected last month, raising hopes that the strong election mandate may encourage the government to accelerate investor-friendly economic and financial reforms.
But concerns have emerged about expensive valuations, with niggling worries about the global economy, uncertainty about proposed reforms and an uncertain outlook for corporate earnings growth weighing on investor confidence.
Investors will be wary ahead of the annual budget in early July, when the government is expected to announce reform plans to boost sagging economic growth and tackle a yawing fiscal deficit, analysts said.
"There could be a recovery ahead of the budget in anticipation of the reforms the government could come out with," Agrawal said.
In the broader section, losers led gainers almost 2 to 1 on relatively moderate volume of 102.6 million shares.
was flat at 4,487.50.
Asian shares were lower on Tuesday, with Japan's Nikkei
down 2.5 percent, while MSCI's measure of other Asian markets .MSCIAPJ fell 0.4 percent.
U.S. equities marked their worst slide in a month on Monday after the New York Fed's Empire State general business conditions index showed the factory sector shrank at a much more severe rate in June than the previous month.
* Jubilant Organosys Ltd JUBO.BO jumped 10.4 percent to 185 rupees after the Economic Times said the chemicals and drugs maker plans to sell a part of its industrial and performance products division, and use the proceeds to retire debt.
* Drugmaker Dr Reddy's Laboratories (
FACTORS TO WATCH * For technical analysis double click on www.reutersindia.net * Indian rupee bounces off lows on inflows; weak dlr [INR/] * Indian bond yields ease on liquidity; supply eyed [IN/] * Yen gains broadly as investors grow wary on economy [FRX/] * Oil falls for 3rd day towards $70 as dollar firms [O/R] * Stocks fall, bonds rise as risk is assessed [MKTS/GLOB] * Wall St sees worst day in a month on resources, data [.N] * For closing rates of Indian ADRs
INADR (Reporting by Pratish Narayanan; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
