Airbus nears $7 billion Philippines order despite U.S. lobbying
2012-08-27 15:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Aug 9 2012
Wed, Aug 8 2012
Tue, Aug 7 2012
Fri, Aug 3 2012
Sat, Jul 28 2012
Mon  EDT
) the multibillion-dollar deal, people familiar with the matter said.
The order, for approximately 40 narrowbody A320-family jets and 10 long-haul A330s, could net the European firm $7 billion at list prices but is expected to involve hefty discounts as lobbying adds fuel to an ongoing price war.
The head of the national flag carrier, known as PAL, told Reuters this month that it would soon decide between Airbus and Boeing in a contest to renew its mainly Airbus fleet, which includes models from both suppliers.
Boeing and Airbus are already locked in a global contest for market share, in some cases more than halving prices to bolster orders of the newly revamped models of best-selling narrowbody jets, industry sources and analysts say.
In Washington, the State Department did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The South China Sea is seen as Asia's biggest potential military flashpoint.
Beijing's sovereignty claim over the huge area has set it against Vietnam and the Philippines as the three race to tap possibly huge oil reserves.
Philippines President Benigno Aquino visited the United States in June, highlighting the archipelago's growing importance in U.S. thinking and temporarily raising U.S. hopes of a commercial aviation deal benefiting export jobs [ID:nL1E8H7F4O].
Some industry sources said Tuesday's anticipated deal may not be the last word on PAL's fleet renewal, with potential demand for longer-range, wider-bodied jets up for grabs.
The airline has not yet decided its needs but Boeing could start with the advantage of an existing presence, whereas Airbus dominates smaller and medium parts of PAL's fleet, they added.
With prestige, jobs and often influence at stake, experts say diplomacy is an occasional weapon in jetliner deals.
A 2005 diplomatic cable released by Wikileaks said U.S. diplomats in Manila were "working closely" with Boeing, which had formally requested diplomatic support for previous efforts to sell the Boeing 777 to PAL, resulting in an order in 2007.
Analysts say Airbus - originally a consortium between France, Germany, Britain and Spain - also benefits from diplomatic support from European nations for major contracts.
Recent French presidents Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy both regularly promoted Airbus overseas, especially in Asia.
(Additional reporting by Andrea Shalal-Esa; writing by Tim Hepher; editing by Helen Massy-Beresford and Matthew Lewis)
