FOREX-Yen gains broadly as investors grow wary on economy
2009-06-15 22:41:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen rose broadly on Tuesday after weak data in the United States and Europe plus a slide in global stocks encouraged caution about the global economy, prompting investors to cut bets on riskier assets.
The euro hit its lowest level in almost a month against the dollar in early Asian trade after the European Central Bank said euro zone banks will probably need to write down another $283 billion. [ID:nLF65323] Separately, data showed that the euro zone lost a record 1.22 million jobs in the first quarter of 2009. [ID:nLF436431]
"Investors are shifting to a cautious tone on the economy from their optimistic view previously," said Kazuyuki Kato, treasury department manager at Mizuho Trust and Banking.
"Investor profit-taking in the euro and commodity-related currencies will likely continue, led by short-term players due to a retreat in optimism and for technical reasons," Kato said. Monday's data showed the New York state factory sector shrank at a more severe rate in June than during the previous month. [ID:nN15186978]
Tokyo's Nikkei share average
fell 2 percent to below the key 10,000 level after the weak U.S. regional manufacturing data dented optimism about the economy. [.T] [.N]
on electronic trading platform EBS, the lowest since May 21. But later the European single currency recovered to $1.3812, up 0.1 percent from late U.S. trading on Monday.
The euro fell 0.8 percent to 133.91 yen EURJPY=R, dragging the dollar lower against the yen, traders said.
, down 0.9 percent on the day.
, having fallen over 2 percent in New York trade on Monday.
The Reserve Bank of Australia saw no "pressing need" to cut interest rates at its June monthly policy meeting given signs of stabilisation at home and abroad, though it judged there was scope to ease further if necessary, minutes showed on Tuesday. [ID:nSYC000194]
The market is looking to the outcome of the first summit among leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China -- the BRIC group of emerging powers -- to discuss the global financial crisis and reforms of the world's financial and trade institutions. [ID:nBRIC]
Japanese Finance Minister Kaoru Yosano reiterated on Tuesday his view that the dollar will remain the world's key reserve currency, despite rising calls among some countries to reduce dependence on it. [ID:nT2262]
His comments came after Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin expressed confidence over the weekend in the greenback as the world's reserve currency. Kudrin's comments eased worries about major emerging market countries diversifying away from the dollar. [ID:nFCA000184]
The market is watching what leaders of the BRIC nations say about the dollar and a reserve currency, dealers said.
"If the BRIC nations confirm what Russia's finance minster said, it would support the dollar in the current market environment. But there is also a risk of comments that would weigh on the dollar coming out of the meeting," said Yuji Saito, head of FX sales at Societe Generale.
The Bank of Japan will announce its monetary policy decision later in the day and is seen keeping interest rates on hold at 0.1 percent. It is expected to sound a slightly more upbeat tone on Japan's economy following improved exports and output. [JPINTR=ECI] (Reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Michael Watson)
