FOREX-Dollar rises as Russia backs reserve currency status
2009-06-15 14:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar rose broadly on Monday after Russia expressed confidence in the greenback as the world's reserve currency, while concerns about the euro zone economy undermined the euro.
Speaking on the sidelines of a Group of Eight finance ministers in Italy, Russia's Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said the dollar's role as the world's main reserve currency is unlikely to change in the near future.
The comments followed news from Russia last week that it would cut the share of U.S. Treasuries in its reserves and alleviated concerns that major emerging market countries may be diversifying away from the dollar ahead of a summit of leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC) in Russia on Tuesday.
"Reserve diversification has really come into question given the complete U-turn in the comments from the Russian Finance Minister," said Kathy Lien, director of currency research at GFT Forex in New York. "We have started the new trading week on a dollar-friendly tone."
The International Monetary Fund on Monday also threw its support behind the U.S. unit, saying the dollar's status as the world's dominant reserve currency is likely to remain. See [ID:nWBT011368].
"Some people have sold the dollar as a result of chatter about diversification away from the U.S. dollar. Now that the finance ministers are standing by the dollar, people are starting to buy the dollar again," UBS currency strategist Brian Kim said.
In early afternoon trading in New York, the ICE Futures' dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's value against a basket of major currencies, rose 1.4 percent to 81.272 .DXY.
, the lowest in more than 3 weeks, as investors worried about persistent weakness in the euro zone. It last traded at $1.3771, down 1.7 percent.
The euro also fell sharply against the yen to 134.62 EURJPY=EBS, a roughly two-week low. It was last at 134.60 yen, down more than 2.3 percent from late on Friday.
Investors fretted about news suggesting euro zone banks could face another $283 billion in writedowns. The figures were published in the ECB's latest Financial Stability Review. See [ID:nLAG003504]
Separately, a German industry group warned on Monday that tight credit conditions are putting a squeeze on German firms, which could hamper a recovery [ID:nLF082319].
Russia's remarks and concerns about the euro zone's financial sector outweighed data showing a slump in the New York state's factory sector in June and a net capital outflow from the United States in April. See [ID:nN15768]
A U.S. Treasury report showed a capital outflow in April, with China, Russia, and Japan all reducing their holdings of U.S. Treasuries. See [ID:nN15197019]
In other currency trading, the Australian
both fell more than 2 percent versus the greenback. (Additional reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss; Editing by Padraic Cassidy)
