Bonds rise as stock selloff revives safety bid
2009-06-15 00:38:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
Benchmark yields retreated from their eight-month high set last week with easing anxiety about the government's heavy debt issuance to pay for bailouts and economic stimulus.
"People are looking at Treasuries with a more attractive stand. Yields are high enough, which is more appropriate given the supply," said William Bellamy, director of fixed income with Thompson, Siegel & Walmsley at Richmond, Virginia.
Bond yields have spiked since March on evidence of economic stabilization, but their rise has lost momentum on a lack of consensus on how quickly a recovery will emerge.
As Federal Reserve policymakers prepare to meet next week, the economy has shown some signs of flagging. "There are fears things will deteriorate further," Bellamy said.
Weakness in the manufacturing sector and continued job losses, while moderating, suggest the economy is still shrinking. The proper monetary response will be a major task that Fed policymakers will have to tackle at their meeting next Tuesday and Wednesday.
The New York Fed's "Empire" index on factory activity in New York state stood at minus 9.41 in June, below an expected minus 4.50 and May's minus 4.55 reading.
The price on benchmark 10-year notes was up 14/32 at 94-31/32. Their yield, which moves inversely to their price, was 3.74 percent, down from 3.79 percent late Friday and well below a eight-month peak of 4 percent seen last week.
The tone of the Treasuries market has improved after last week's combined $65 billion sale in coupon notes. This signaled investors here and abroad have not abandoned this bond sector despite inflation worries stemming from $2 trillion projected in new government issuance this fiscal year.
The Treasury Department reported on Monday foreign investors bought $41.9 billion in Treasuries, a good amount, albeit less than the $55.3 billion in March.
"There has been a reemergence of Asian buying since the Geithner trip," said Glenn Capelo, co-head of rates at BroadPoint Capital in New York, referring to Geithner's recent visit to China, the biggest Treasuries holder.
Bonds' rise may lose steam if a private report later Monday supports the view of housing stabilization.
At 1 p.m. EDT, the National Association of Home Builders will release its reading on its members' sentiments, a predictor of housing starts. Analysts recently polled by Reuters forecast it likely rose to 17 in June from May's 16.
Among other bond maturities, two-year notes were up 2/32 to yield 1.24 percent, down 4 basis points from Friday, while the 30-year bond was up 27/32 to yield 4.59 percent, down 6 basis points from Friday.
On Thursday, the 30-year yield reached an intraday peak of 4.84 percent, the highest since October 2007.
(Reporting by Richard Leong; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
