Brazil stocks plunge on commodity dive; real down
2009-06-15 11:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks slumped on Monday as a pullback in oil and commodities prices weighed on widely traded stocks Vale and Petrobras, while the country's currency weakened on rising caution on emerging market assets.
of the Sao Paulo stock exchange dropped 3.2 percent to 51,855, heading for its first decline in three sessions. State-run energy giant Petrobras and mining company Vale led the market lower as crude oil sank nearly 3 percent in New York CLc1 and copper prices plunged nearly 4 percent in London MCU3=LX.
) shares dropped 2.7 percent to 33.02 reais, while Vale (
Prices of zinc, nickel and other industrial metals also slumped, dragging lower shares of Gerdau and other Brazilian steelmakers. Gerdau (
) slumped 5 percent to 20.33 reais, CSN (
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 1 percent to 1.947 per U.S. dollar.
Yield spreads on the Brazilian government's overseas bonds over comparable U.S. Treasuries, as measured by JPMorgan's EMBI+ index, jumped on on Monday, reflecting lower risk appetite for Brazilian assets. The index 11EMJ showed the country's bond spread rose 9 basis points to 274.
The dollar strengthened sharply on Monday against several currencies .DXY after Russia's Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said it would remain the world's main reserve currency. Last week, the U.S. currency weakened sharply after Russian officials announced plans to cut the amount of U.S. treasuries in the country's $400 billion of international reserves.
Leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China begin the first ever BRIC summit on Tuesday in Russia, seeking to increase their clout as a global economic force. They will also discuss reforms at the International Monetary Fund.
Market-watchers in Brazil expect investors to take a breather to evaluate their positions after yields on interest rate futures zigzagged on a flood of data last week, said Silvio Campos Neto, economist with Banco Schahin in Sao Paulo.
Yields that had risen sharply on Tuesday and Wednesday after data on the economy and inflation, plunged on Friday after the central bank's surprise 100-basis-point interest rate cut to a record low of 9.25 percent.
On Monday, yields <0#DIJ:> fell further as investors adjusted their expectations. The Jan. 2011 DIJF1 contract dropped to 10.08 percent from 10.16 percent on Friday, while the October 2009 contract DIJV9 slid to 8.94 percent from 8.96 percent.
Two major indicators are due to be released this week: April retail sales data on Tuesday and, on Thursday, minutes from last week's central bank meeting, which investors will scour for signals on future interest rate adjustments.
"We think that additional rate cuts will not be at the same rate that they have been, but there's still the question of how much more will they do in a cumulative way," said Douglas Smith, chief economist for the Americas at Standard Chartered Bank in New York. (Editing by James Dalgleish)
