RPT-UPDATE 1-Addax shares soar on bid talk, Sinopec, KNOC mum
2009-06-15 07:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Shares in Swiss-based oil explorer Addax Petroleum AXC.TO soared on Monday after a fresh report saying China'sSinopec (
Addax said last week that it had held preliminary discussions with third parties expressing an interest in a potential transaction, after the South China Morning Post said Sinopec was planning a bid.
An acquisition by Sinopec or KNOC would fit with the two companies' strategy of securing energy assets to fuel their economies.
Addax has fields in West Africa, where Sinopec has interests, and in the semi-autonomous Kurdish region of Iraq, where KNOC is drilling for oil.
In February, three sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters that a number of Asian energy companies were mulling bids for Addax.
Addax's London-listed shares were up 13.7 percent at 2,700 pence at 1142 GMT.
) said last week it planned to merge privately-held Turkish rival Genel Energy and earlier this month Dubai's Emirates National Oil Company said it wanted to buy the 48 percent of Dragon Oil (
) it didn't already own. [ID:nL9405539] [ID:nL5151846]
One reason for the sudden flurry of activity is improved cooperation between the Baghdad government and Iraq's largely autonomous Kurdish region.
Exports of crude from Kurdistan started at the beginning of June, after being blocked for years as the central government and the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) fought over revenue sharing. [ID:nL1428908]
Despite the progress, uncertainty remains over how much Kurdish licences will be worth. Companies including Addax, which are producing oil in Kurdistan and exporting it via the Iraqi pipeline system, are currently not being paid for their oil.
Growing hostility in Iraq toward deals with foreign oil companies may make it harder for Baghdad and the Kurdish authorities to agree a mechanism whereby the companies are paid. [ID:LE419256] ($1=.6119 pounds) (Reporting by Aizhu Chen in Beijing and So-eui Rhee in Seoul; additional reporting by Tom Bergin and Quentin Webb in London and Joseph Chaney in Hong Kong; writing by Tom Bergin; editing by Simon Jessop and Mike Nesbit)
