TREASURIES-Bonds climb as stock decline fuels safety bid
2009-06-15 11:25:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Treasury debt prices rose on Monday as a Wall Street selloff and data showing weakness in manufacturing spurred a safety bid for bonds.
Benchmark yields retreated from their eight-month high set last week as anxiety about the government's need to issue debt to pay for bailouts and economic stimulus eased.
"It helps that stocks are weaker," said Glenn Capelo, co-head of rates at BroadPoint Capital in New York.
Bond yields have spiked since March on evidence of economic stabilization, but their rise has lost momentum on a lack of consensus on how quickly a recovery will emerge.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said in New York on Monday an economic rebound from the worst recession in decades "will be slower than we would normally see." For details, see [ID:nLF25252]
As Federal Reserve policymakers prepare to meet next week, the economy has shown some signs of flagging. [FED/DIARY]
Weakness in the manufacturing sector and continued job losses, while moderating, suggest the economy is still shrinking. The proper monetary response will be a major task that Federal Reserve policymakers will have to tackle at their meeting on next Tuesday and Wednesday.
The New York Federal Reserve's "Empire" index on manufacturing activity in New York state stood at minus 9.41 in June, falling short of an expected minus 4.50. The May reading was minus 4.55. [ID:nN15768]
The price on benchmark 10-year notes US10YT=RR was up 16/32 at 95-1/32. Their yield which moves inversely to their price was 3.73 percent, down from 3.79 percent late Friday and well below a eight-month peak of 4 percent seen last week.
The tone of the Treasuries market has improved after last week's combined $65 billion sale in coupon notes. This signaled investors here and abroad have not abandoned this bond sector despite inflation worries stemming from $2 trillion in new government issuance this fiscal year.
The Treasury Department reported on Monday foreign investors bought $41.9 billion in Treasuries, a good amount albeit less than the $55.3 billion in March. [ID:nTRU000389]
"There has been a reemergence of Asian buying since the Geithner trip," BroadPoint's Capelo said, referring to Geithner's recent visit to China, the biggest Treasuries holder, in a bid to reassure its U.S. investments were safe.
Bonds' rise may lose steam if a private report later Monday supports the view of housing stabilization.
At 1 p.m. (1700 GMT), the National Association of Home Builders will release its reading on its members' sentiments, a predictor of housing starts. Analysts recently polled by Reuters forecast it likely rose to 17 in June from May's 16.
Among other bond maturities, two-year notes US2YT=RR were up 2/32 to yield 1.24 percent, down 4 basis points from Friday, while the 30-year bond US30YT=RR was up one point to yield 4.58 percent, down 6 basis points from Friday. (Reporting by Richard Leong; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
