Global stocks slide, bonds up, US dollar jumps
2009-06-15 13:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Global stocks fell sharply on Monday after weak U.S. manufacturing data and record job losses in Europe raised concerns about the world's economic health while boosting the safe-haven appeal of U.S. and euro zone debt.
The U.S. dollar gained broadly after Russia expressed confidence in the greenback as the world's reserve currency, and the euro extended losses after the European Central Bank said euro zone banks face another $283 billion in write-downs.
Crude oil fell more than 3.0 percent to below $70 a barrel in a further retreat from a near eight-month high. Nickel, zinc and lead prices tumbled more than 6.0 percent, while copper also slid after the manufacturing data signaled demand remains weak.
Gold slipped toward $930 an ounce, pressured by the firmer dollar while easing crude prices dampened bullion's appeal as a hedge against the potential of oil-induced inflation.
Gains in the dollar, which makes oil and other dollar-based commodities more expensive for holders of other currencies, helped pressure prices. <USD/>
U.S. stocks sold off broadly on a reading from the New York Federal Reserve's "Empire State" general business conditions index, which fell to minus 9.41 in June from minus 4.55 in May.
"We've got a little bit of cold water thrown on the manufacturing sector's recovery after seeing some persistent improvements. We're now back down a little bit," said Eric Lascelles, chief economics and rates strategist at TD Securities in Toronto.
At 1 p.m. (1700 GMT), the Dow Jones industrial average
was down 194.46 points, or 2.21 percent, at 8,604.80. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was down 22.67 points, or 2.40 percent, at 923.54. The Nasdaq Composite Index
was down 46.98 points, or 2.53 percent, at 1,811.82.
European shares fell, with financials the main drag after the ECB write-down estimate was published in its latest Financial Stability Review.
"Companies are still not seeing a recovery in a demand," said Heino Ruland, strategist at Ruland Research.
"It is a transition from a strong rally which we have seen since March to a consolidation or fall back to more appropriate levels as markets went too fast too far," Ruland said.
The 16-country euro zone lost a record 1.22 million jobs in the first quarter of 2009, data showed, highlighting the depth of recession and boding ill for any quick turnaround.
Benchmark U.S. yields retreated from their eight-month high set last week with anxiety easing about the government's heavy debt issuance to pay for bailouts and economic stimulus after auctions last week attracted good demand.
"People are looking at Treasuries with a more attractive stand. Yields are high enough, which is more appropriate given the supply," said William Bellamy, director of fixed income with Thompson, Siegel & Walmsley in Richmond, Virginia.
Bond yields have spiked since March on evidence of economic stabilization, but their rise has lost momentum on a lack of consensus on how quickly a recovery will emerge.
Speaking on the sidelines of a Group of Eight finance ministers in Italy, Russia's Alexei Kudrin said the dollar's role as the world's main reserve currency is unlikely to change in the near future.
Kudrin's remarks alleviated concerns that major emerging market countries may be diversifying their reserves away from the dollar ahead of a summit of leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China in Russia on Tuesday.
"We saw a lot of dollar-supportive comments from the G8 finance ministers' meeting, starting with Kudrin," said Sebastien Galy, currency strategist at BNP Paribas in New York.
The dollar was up against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY up 1.49 percent at 81.324.
The euro was down 1.88 percent at $1.3757. Against the yen, the dollar was down 0.56 percent at 97.85.
MSCI's index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS fell 1.8 percent to 327.01 while Japan's Nikkei share average
shed 1 percent at 10,039.67 after closing above 10,000 on Friday for the first time in eight months.
(Reporting by Edward Krudy, Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss and Richard Leong in New York; Emelia Sithole-Matarise, Edward McAllister, Kylie MacLellan and Joanne Frearson in London; writing by Herbert Lash)
