Commodity dive takes down Brazil stocks; real dips
2009-06-15 16:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks sank on Monday as commodities prices dragged down the stock market, with the real also weakening amid concerns on emerging market assets.
dropped 2.85 percent to 52,033.82 points, a slight bump from the early afternoon loss of 3 percent but still its first decline in three sessions. State-run energy giant Petrobras and mining company Vale led the market lower as crude oil sank 2.12 percent in New York CLc1 and copper prices plunged 4.14 percent in London MCU3=LX.
Brazilian steelmakers fell as prices of zinc, nickel and other industrial metals slumped. Gerdau (
) slumped 5.23 percent to 20.29 reais, CSN (
Trading volume was higher than usual on Monday, in part due to the expiration of stock options. That turnover brought in 2.66 billion reais as investors sought to cash in on the Bovespa's 40 percent increase from March through last Friday.
Brazil's currency, the real BRBY, weakened 1.4 percent to 1.954 per U.S. dollar.
The dollar strengthened sharply on Monday against a basket of major currencies .DXY after Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said it would remain the world's main reserve currency. Last week, the U.S. currency weakened sharply after Russian officials announced plans to cut the amount of U.S. Treasuries in the country's $400 billion of international reserves.
Leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China begin the first-ever BRIC summit on Tuesday in Russia, seeking to increase their clout as a global economic force. They will also discuss reforms at the International Monetary Fund.
Analysts expect investors in Brazil to weigh the flood of conflicting economic data released last week that led to zigzagging yields on interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:>, said Silvio Campos Neto, economist with Banco Schahin in Sao Paulo.
The Jan. 2010 DIJF0 contract, the most heavily traded contract, edged higher to 8.96 from 8.94. In contrast, the yield on the April 2011 contract DIJJ1 declined to 10.42 from 10.71.
Two major indicators are due this week: April retail sales data on Tuesday and, on Thursday, minutes from last week's central bank meeting, which investors will scour for signals on future interest rate adjustments.
"Additional rate cuts will not be at the same rate that they have been, but there's still the question of 'How much more will they do in a cumulative way?'" said Douglas Smith, chief economist for the Americas at Standard Chartered Bank in New York. (Editing by Dan Grebler)
