Retailers should look beyond borders: study
2009-06-15 00:08:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
A man walks past a billboard in Beijing, January 9, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
Mon  EDT
A.T. Kearney, the international consulting firm, says in a new study that lower sales and tight consumer spending at home are a sign that retailers should look to emerging markets for growth.
Titled "Windows of Hope for Global Retailers," the eighth annual study ranks 30 emerging countries on the "urgency" for retailers to enter them, using a variety of economic, social and political criteria.
Topping the list is India, whose domestic retailers have been hurt by the recession in ways similar to their U.S. counterparts, says the study. This creates an opportunity for new brands to establish themselves.
Russia is second, where the group says the best retail opportunities are in the grocery market, which is doing well.
China, third on the list, is ready for retailers thanks to increased state and bank lending mixed with a migration of people to smaller cities, says the study.
Next is the United Arab Emirates, which rose from No. 20 last year to No. 4 this year because of increased investment in tourism.
Scattered throughout the index are countries where political, social or financial uncertainties could be problematic for U.S. brands already struggling at home. That is why Deepa Bangaru, one of the study's authors, stressed there are many ways to enter a foreign market.
What's most important is for a company to understand the stage of a country's economic growth, as well as its politics and culture.
"A country might fall lower on our index, but might be the right choice for a retailer," she said.
And above all, Bangaru stressed the importance of having good talent in place that understands the market, the government and the business environment.
While not all companies may be considering international expansion now, and others might be reeling from past missteps, Bangaru said she hopes that all retailers have it on their radar.
"We're obviously in a global economic recession," she said. "That makes the call for international expansion greater than ever."
(Reporting by Ian Sherr; Editing by Brian Moss)
