Comments from Italy G8 finance ministers' meeting
2009-06-15 04:57:00.0
Comments from Italy G8 finance ministers' meeting | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Comments from Italy G8 finance ministers' meeting
LECCE, Italy
Mon  EDT
LECCE, Italy
"I don't see the dollar as being weak, I think the dollar has been today correctly valued by the market.
"We see a dollar which today is stronger than one year ago....so I don't see today a weak dollar and I don't forecast that we would have to expect many changes in the coming time."
"Even if the green shoots are real, growth as an average will only come back at the beginning of 2010 which means an unemployment peak at the beginning of 2011."
"I think it is a good news that we had to revise our (2010 growth) forecast upward. But please please don't overestimate the change, the risks are still very big."
"In Europe we haven't started to talk together about stress tests either national or European, secret or public."
"In Europe there is a national but standardized system (of stress tests) applied so far in Italy, for example, with positive results."
"Speculation is coming back, a certain type of finance is raising its head again and doing the same not very nice things it was doing until last summer. Concern about this came not just from Italy but from everybody, there is a return of speculation on derivative and commodity markets."
"What the statement says is very comprehensive, there was unanimity to guarantee the soundness of systematically important institutions. I can't be sure that in the meetings there was no mention at all of the term stress tests, but there was no disagreement on this."
Asked if he was satisfied with the results of the G8 on this issue, he said: "There could not be more expected."
"I am very cautious, but there are indeed indicators which show that there will be possibly a certain stabilization."
ON "STRESS TESTS" OF BANKS' HEALTH:
"The European position is yes, but no publishing of individual results for banks."
"It is very difficult to determine the right price. That's why the president (Nicolas Sarkozy) said that we need to have discussions between producing and consuming countries. We have periods of very high volatility...it's a subject that I would like to talk about tomorrow, that was briefly discussed by the deputies today."
"It's a subject that we must be at the same time very precise on, technically coherent and transparent. When I say technically coherent, it's not as simple as that. It's not a question of just jumping on your chair and crying stress tests, stress tests, it doesn't work like that. We do them very regularly, frequently, at a national level, macro, micro, at a European level...the Europeans are doing stress tests. We do a lot of them."
"But it's certainly not just to do PR."
"We are debating it currently among Europeans to see if it would be by country, if we do it all at the same moment, if we publish only the criteria, if we do the criteria and the results, it's this whole debate that we're having at the moment and we're not going to reach a decision tomorrow on it and that's what we're going to explain nicely to the Americans."
"I don't expect an agreement," he said in answer to a question on the chances of a deal on exit strategies. "These are early discussions."
"It's time to have a discussion on how to disengage from the fiscal stimulus. It's realistic to start talking about the exit strategy.
"Everyone should do stress testing of their national banking system, it's fundamental for trust. "There is more to be done in Europe (on stress testing), they should publish at least their systemic results.
"There is some resistance in Europe on stress tests; there is a tendency to look to other countries to resolve the problems.
"There are some indications that the real economy is improving in North America; these are early, relatively modest signs. First we will have stabilization." (Compiled by Patrick Graham; Editing by Andrew Torchia)
(Lecce newsroom; patrick.graham@thomsonreuters.com)
