Uranium One eyes big league with Russia deal
2009-06-15 16:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon  EDT
) plans to leverage its new links with Russia and Japan into a top-tier position among uranium producers, and sees Africa as the next hot spot for mining of the increasingly in-demand mineral, CEO Jean Nortier said on Monday.
"Our strategy is to be one of the largest uranium producers globally," Nortier said in an interview after announcing a $390 million deal that will see the company acquire half of the Russian-owned Karatau mine in Kazakhstan in exchange for cash and a 17 percent stake in the company for Russian state-owned nuclear giant Rosatom.
Nortier also said he does not expect an investigation into uranium contract sales in Kazakhstan that has appeared to involve one of Uranium One's assets to harm the company.
The deal with Rosatom comes as countries like Russia, South Korean, and Japan move to lock in supply of uranium to fuel a global expansion of nuclear power generation that is seen producing a massive uranium deficit over the next decade.
"We've seen a supply race coming predominantly out of Asia and the East... They're certainly concerned enough about the supply side of the equation," Nortier said.
"What is fascinating to me is that the U.S. utilities don't share the concern that we see out of Asia and the east, and I wonder if they're going to be caught short in the supply race."
The deal with Rosatom also includes a long-term offtake agreement that will see Uranium One sell half of the Karatau mine production, or 20 percent of its total output, to Russia.
It will bring the company's annual uranium production to 7.5 million pounds in 2010, up about 35 percent from past forecasts. Cameco, the world's top publicly-listed uranium producer, should produce about 20 million pounds this year.
EXPANDS IN KAZAKHSTAN, LOOKING TO AFRICA
The acquisition expands Uranium One's already substantial presence in Kazakhstan, home to one-fifth of the world's uranium reserves and the target of investment from several countries of late.
State officials initially fingered a past Uranium One deal as one that was under investigation. Kazatomprom has said past deals will be honored, although analysts point out Kazatomprom may not have the final say on the issue.
Nortier said he has been in contact with the state security agency that arrested Dzhakishev and said he would be very surprised if the company's contracts are changed.
"We certainly feel very confident that we should be left unharmed," he said.
Uranium One's shares rose 11 Canadian cents to C$2.94 on Monday, but are still down 11 percent since the first reports that the company had been swept up in the Kazakh probe.
Nortier said the company had also had talks with Chinese utilities, although they did not lead to a deal. He noted China has aggressive plans to expand its uranium industry.
He said the Karatau deal -- which also gives Uranium One the right to negotiate the takeover of Rosatom's 50-percent stake in the Akbastau project in Kazakhstan -- would likely be the company's last venture in Kazakhstan, as the company is now looking toward Africa as the next area of opportunity to find producing assets.
"If we look down the line here (in the next decade) we see that more than half the world's uranium will be supplied from Kazakhstan and Africa," he said.
(Reporting by Cameron French; editing by Janet Guttsman)
