FTSE tumbles 2.6 percent on oils, miners and banks
2009-06-15 00:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's blue-chip share index fell 2.6 percent on Monday to its lowest closing level in six weeks, dragged lower by commodity stocks as the firmer dollar hurt metal and crude prices.
closed 115.94 points lower at 4,326.01, breaking an uptrend channel extending back to March 9. Volumes on the British benchmark were about 76 percent of its 90-day average daily volume.
Commodity stocks were the biggest losers on the index, as a stronger dollar weighed on raw material prices CLc1 MCU3=.
The dollar gained against a basket of major currencies after Russia's finance minister, Alexei Kudrin, expressed confidence in the U.S. currency on the sidelines of a meeting of Group of Eight finance minsters in Italy.
) shed 2.1 and 4.2 percent, respectively.
Among miners, BHP Billiton (
), Rio Tinto (
), Xstrata XTA.L, Vedanta Resources (
), Kazakhmys (
) sank 9.8 percent to be the biggest loser after the platinum producer said it shut down its No. 1 furnace on Sunday due to a production incident, and started up three other furnaces with about half the capacity.
"The fundamentals of the economy are still pretty poor, still pretty shaky," said Philip Gillett, sales trader at IG Index. "This correction has been on the card for a while."
The FTSE 100, which is down 2.4 percent for the year, has risen 25 percent since hitting a six-year low on March 9.
Banks .FTNMX8350, which have rallied 105 percent since those March lows, were other standout losers on the index, as the global economic outlook remained murky. HSBC (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Barclays (
) was one of the three gainers on the index, up 2.3 percent. The Times reported at the weekend that Commonwealth Bank of Australia (
) may join a list of potential bidders for the third-party fund business of its investment management unit, Insight.
'WORST NOT YET OVER'
Insurers in the euro region may face significant balance sheet stress ahead due to financial market turbulence and a weak economy, the ECB also said. [ID:nLF49562]
In Britain, insurers Prudential (
), Standard Life (
The 16-country euro zone lost a record 1.22 million jobs in the first quarter of 2009, highlighting the depth of recession and boding ill for any quick turnaround. [ID:nLF436431]
Meanwhile, Li Yang, a former adviser to the People's Bank of China, said he expected China's recovery to be "W-shaped" -- meaning growth will falter once fiscal and monetary stimulus wears off, before regaining momentum. [ID:nPEK255337]
Finance ministers of the G8 nations agreed over the weekend the global recovery was showing encouraging signs of stabilisation but recovery remained shaky, and they said they would consider how to unwind rescue steps.
Among other individual movers, AstraZeneca (
) put on 0.8 percent after Citigroup upgraded the drugmaker to 'buy' from 'hold' and lifted its price target on the stock. (Editing by Dan Lalor)
