Holcim clinches Cemex unit deal, calls rights issue
2009-06-15 08:33:00.0
Holcim clinches Cemex unit deal, calls rights issue | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Holcim clinches Cemex unit deal, calls rights issue
Mon  EDT
Holcim said on Monday it will buy the unit for A$2.02 billion ($1.6 billion), gaining a foothold in the aggregates, ready-mix and concrete products sectors in a fast-growing market at what analysts described as an attractive price.
The world's second biggest cement maker aims to fund the deal -- its largest for several years -- via a 2 billion-Swiss-franc rights issue it will ask shareholders to approve next month.
Holcim shares shrugged off the prospect of a 12 percent rights dilution, trading unchanged at 62.00 Swiss francs by 8:00 a.m. EDT (1200 GMT), outperforming a 1.35 percent drop in the DJ Stoxx European construction index .SXOP and valuing the company at around 17.1 billion francs. Frankfurt-traded Cemex shares rose 4.5 percent in very thin trade.
"This was an opportunistic buy," Chief Executive Markus Akermann said on a conference call. "Cemex has done the job right. This is a profitable, performing company."
The transaction will generate much-needed cash for the Mexican group, which has been struggling to refinance $14.5 billion of debt that falls due by the end of 2011, including $4.1 billion maturing this year, amid plummeting sales volumes.
"Australia is a good market to strengthen your position in; it was one of the few Western markets that had GDP growth in the first quarter and it has good growth potential," said Martin Huesler, analyst at ZKB.
Cemex bought Australia's Rinker in 2007 in one of the largest ever emerging market takeovers. Rinker's U.S. assets made Cemex the top cement maker in the United States, but the deal closed just as the U.S. housing collapse struck, triggering the start of the Mexican group's financial difficulties.
Monday's deal involves only Rinker's Australian operations, which cover the fast-growing eastern and southeastern markets and the mining belt in the west of the country.
Germany's Heidelberg Cement (
"Two of the big four players, Cemex and Heidelberg, are in quite a difficult position and Holcim has shown it is in a position to make the most of opportunities arising from their problems," said ZKB's Huesler.
Holcim also said on Monday it will invest around 1.6 billion yuan ($234 million) in the planned private placement of China's Huaxin Cement (
), in which it has a stake of around 40 percent, adding this deal would also be financed with equity.
GOING CHEAP?
The purchase price of Cemex Australia corresponds to an expected 2009 earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) multiple of 6.6 times, Holcim said.
In 2008, Cemex Australia, which employs 2,800 people, had sales of A$1.86 billion and an EBITDA of around A$313 million.
ZKB's Huesler said the price compared favorably to the $3.4 billion Holcim paid for Aggregate Industries in 2005, though the outlook for the next quarters was more uncertain than it was four years ago.
Kepler Capital Markets analyst Josep Pujal saw it as a positive deal, combining cheap assets with a capital increase at a timely moment which should help Holcim to cut debt, even though the rights issue would entail raising funds at a significant discount.
Huesler said Holcim's capital hike would likely give it a stronger balance sheet than world leader Lafarge (
), which launched a deeply discounted 1.5-billion euro capital increase earlier this year for refinancing.
Holcim will also buy Cemex Australia's 25 percent stake in Cement Australia, of which it already owns 50 percent.
), which is acting as global coordinator and sole bookrunner on behalf of a syndicate of banks.
(Additional reporting by Cyntia Barrera Diaz; editing by John Stonestreet)
