SNAP ANALYSIS-Ahmadinejad heads for re-election in Iran
2009-06-13 12:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Hard-liner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad took an unbeatable lead in Iran's presidential vote on Saturday, official results showed, although his moderate challenger alleged irregularities and claimed victory for himself.
Here is a brief outline of what might happen next and the possible implications of the incumbent's victory against former Prime Minister Mirhossein Mousavi in Friday's election.
COULD MOUSAVI CHALLENGE OUTCOME?
By declaring victory at a hastily organized news conference before the election commission announced its early counts, Mousavi signaled he would not accept defeat quietly.
If Mousavi pursues his accusations of irregularities, such as a shortage of ballot papers and many people being denied a chance to vote -- he may enjoy support from influential allies.
They include reformist former President Mohammad Khatami and powerful cleric Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a former president who traded accusations with Ahmadinejad during the campaign.
But Ahmadinejad has basked in the support of Iran's Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, throughout his presidency.
A key issue will be how Mousavi's supporters -- who thronged Tehran's streets in the run-up to the vote -- react.
In an early sign of post-election tension, police broke up a crowd of several hundred Mousavi supporters in a Tehran square early on Saturday, a Reuters witness said.
On the eve of the election, a senior official of Iran's elite Revolutionary Guards accused Mousavi's camp of seeking a "velvet revolution" in Iran, referring to the tag given to the non-violent revolution in communist Czechoslovakia in 1989.
The official, Yadollah Janavi, made clear the Guards would not tolerate any such attempt. Ahmadinejad is a former Guardsman who took part in the 1980-88 war with Iraq. The force is seen as fiercely loyal to the values of the 1979 Islamic revolution.
Ahmadinejad spent much time during his first four-year term railing against the West and there is little sign he will change that approach now. He made his defiance of Western pressure over Iran's nuclear programme a campaign issue. Like Khamenei, he has responded to U.S. President Barack Obama's overtures toward Iran by demanding real policy changes from the "Great Satan."
The Obama administration has made clear it plans to pursue attempts to engage Tehran whichever candidate wins the election, but there is little doubt it would have preferred to see Mousavi as president as he was likely to be less confrontational.
Ultimately, however, the election was never expected to lead directly to major changes in nuclear or foreign policy since such issues are in the hands of Khamenei, Iran's top authority.
In the campaign, Ahmadinejad rejected any nuclear talks with six world powers -- the United States, China, Russia, France, Britain and Germany. Iran has steadily expanded its nuclear programme under Ahmadinejad and this is likely to continue.
Mousavi has also ruled out suspending uranium enrichment, which can have both civilian and military uses, but he said during the campaign he would talk with the six powers and seek to assure them of Tehran's peaceful intentions.
An Ahmadinejad victory would mean "a deal is less likely, additional sanctions more likely and the status quo trajectory continued," Cliff Kupchan of risk consultancy Eurasia said in a commentary before the vote.
The nuclear dispute -- and U.S. pressure -- has deterred many companies, especially European ones, from investing in Iran's oil and gas sector. This is now unlikely to change.
Analysts say any president would face hard choices in cutting budget spending in view of declining oil export revenue caused by prices falling more than 50 percent over the last year, despite a sharp recovery since December. Ahmadinejad may now revisit plans to reform Iran's subsidy system that parliament blocked earlier this year. He wants to reduce energy and other subsidies and compensate the needy with direct cash payments.
