Market survives U.S. debt supply barrage, more ahead
2009-06-12 16:56:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. bond market survived another round of federal debt issuance this week, but the government still faces a prolonged campaign to sell another $1 trillion of new paper to finance its economic bailout.
These higher yields could sour on the government, adding significantly to debt repayment costs, hurting the value of the dollar and even imperiling its long-term creditworthiness with investors at home and abroad.
Most of all, they could exacerbate a further rise in mortgage rates, which would be a blow to the housing market and could damage the chances of a rapid economic rebound.
"It looks like a really lopsided boxing match where one guy is just getting pummeled, and it is supply pummeling the portfolio manager," said Fifth Third Asset Management chief fixed income officer Mitch Stapley in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
The auctions this week of three- and 10-year notes and 30-year bonds mostly met good demand, although the government did have to pad the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasuries to get them sold.
In fact, the Treasury will continue to launch a relentless barrage of new debt, with expectations of about $2 trillion of supply in fiscal 2009, half of which has already been issued.
Any dip in demand for all the new debt could force Treasuries prices sharply lower, and yields, which move inversely to price, sharply higher.
Treasuries have performed miserably this year, losing 6 percent through Thursday, according to Barclays Capital.
Uncertainty over the direction of Treasury yields has put investors in a quandary and revealed differing views on the economy: guarded optimism in a recovery that will lift yields further, versus a nagging fears of a protracted recession that could push yields lower.
Current yields make Treasuries compelling as a short-term source of steady income, but a further rise in yields makes them bad longer-term investments.
The bond market's wild swings after the 10-year and 30-year Treasury sales illustrates this lack of investor conviction.
"It's been harrowing going into these longer-dated auctions," said Steve Van Order, fixed income strategist at Calvert Asset Management in Bethesda, Maryland.
Analysts expect current yields to hold until the next wave of supply hits in two weeks, coinciding with a two-day meeting of Fed policy-makers to chart the course of key U.S. rates.
Investors hope the central bankers will expand their $300 billion Treasury purchase program to counteract the jump in yields. So far, however, Fed officials including Chairman Ben Bernanke have offered no hints on such a move.
For now, investors are breathing a sigh of relief until the next auction. "It's an adventure every time these days," Van Order said.
Many analysts argue that yields are merely returning to more "normal" levels with those on the benchmark 10-year jumping to about 4 percent, double historic lows of last year.
"People were convinced last year that we were headed for a depression. Then we found that it wasn't going to happen, and the market took the yield back out," said Jim Paulsen, chief investment officer at Wells Capital Management in Minneapolis.
This week, Russia threatened to cut holdings of U.S. Treasuries in its $400 billion reserves and buy bonds issued by the International Monetary Fund instead.
However, the Japanese Finance Minister said on Friday that Japan, the second-largest U.S. debt holder after China, has full trust in Treasuries and U.S. support for a strong dollar.
"This should help allay fears that Russia's decision to diversify out of Treasuries into IMF bonds is not a case of follow-the-leader," said David Rosenberg, chief economist at Gluskin Sheff in Toronto.
(Additional reporting by Mary Angela Rowe; Editing by James Dalgleish)
