UPDATE 1-Russia finmin: won't change reserves significantly
2009-06-12 18:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia will not "significantly" change the structure of its reserves, its finance minister said on Friday, two days after plans to reduce its holdings of U.S. bonds prompted a fall by the dollar.
On Wednesday, first deputy central bank chairman Alexei Ulyukayev said the share of U.S. Treasuries in Russia's $400 billion reserves would fall as it bought International Monetary Fund bonds and put more money into foreign bank deposits.
But finance minister Alexei Kudrin said on Friday, "We are not going to significantly change the structure of our investments.
"Ten billion is not a significant change. A serious change is when we used to invest $100 billion in Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, but no longer do," Kudrin added.
He was speaking to reporters after talks with U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner at a meeting of finance ministers from the Group of Eight rich nations in Lecce, Italy.
Russia has gradually exited its holdings of U.S. agency bonds, cutting the amount from $100 billion at the start of 2008 to zero, largely by not replacing maturing paper.
"In the nearest future, I do not see major changes in our policy in relation to the dollar," Kudrin said, adding that he was talking about a time frame "in excess of a year".
He said that on the whole, Russia would buy the IMF bonds with new money coming into its reserves, rather than by selling existing assets to raise money.
However, Kudrin added that he had not discussed Russia's views on U.S. Treasuries, or U.S. dollar exchange rates, with Geithner.
Russia has been calling for less global dependence on the dollar as a reserve currency, suggesting the IMF's special drawing rights, China's yuan and the rouble as possible long-term alternatives.
It has reduced the share of dollars in its reserves, around 40 percent of which are now made up of euros. (Writing by Toni Vorobyova and Patrick Graham; Editing by Andrew Torchia)
