Travel Picks: World's top hotel mini-bars add luxury to nuts
2009-06-12 08:58:00.0
Travel Picks: World's top hotel mini-bars add luxury to nuts | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Travel Picks: World's top hotel mini-bars add luxury to nuts
The Trump International Hotel, Chicago in an undated image. Credit: Reuters/Handout
Fri  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - Hotel minibars catering for a discerning type of guest are becoming more inventive with luxurious items such as Champagne cocktails and designer clothing found alongside the drinks and snacks.
Men's website AskMen.com (
) has come up with a list of some of the world's top hotel minibars. This list is not endorsed by Reuters:
1. W Retreat & Spa, Maldives
The W Retreat & Spa has stocked its mini-bars with an unusual item -- a bikini by luxury beachwear label Heidi Klein. Crafted in W's signature purple, the bikini is a limited edition sold only on-site and comes with silver hammered-chrome detailing. If the bikini provided doesn't fit, a "Bikini Butler" is on-hand to measure guests for the right size.
2. Trump International Hotel, Chicago
Entrepreneur-cum-hotelier Donald Trump, who is a well-known teetotaler, has stocked the mini-fridges of his Chicago hotel with four hard-to-find waters -- Welsh Tau, Australian Tasmanian Rain, 420, and Bling H20.
3. The Levin Hotel, London
After a hard day of retail therapy in upscale Knightsbridge, unwind with a cocktail in your room with each suite installed with a Champagne cocktail minibar. Each fridge comes with half-bottles of Champagne, ingredients for mixing nine different Champagne cocktails and glasses in varying shapes and sizes.
4. The James Hotel, Chicago
Here the mini-bar boasts 13 top-shelf liquors and a mixing kit that includes glass, strainer, tongs, spoon, and corkscrew. There's also an extensive list of mixers, four varieties of eco-friendly water, and 16 snacks.
5. Gansevoort South, Miami
The Gansevoort South has beefed up its minibar and modified its prices to enable guests to drink and eat in the comfort of their own suites. There's recession-friendly Dean & Deluca treats for just $3, 375 ml bottles of Grey Goose, Bacardi and Bombay Sapphire, a variety of mixers, and appropriate glasses.
6. XV Beacon, Boston
Catering for jet-lagged guests, Boston's boutique hotel, XV Beacon, provides Sprayology in its mini-bar -- an all-natural sleep enhancer for $24 that also purports to flush away urban toxins.
7. Mondrian Hotel, Los Angeles
The minibars here contain an Alice in Wonderland Hand Mirror, designed by iconic visionary Benjamin Noriega-Oritz that is made from shatterproof acrylic. The retro-styled mirror costs $25 and is a perfect souvenir for guests to take home.
8. The Loews Hotel, Denver
Can't bear to leave your pet at home while on vacation? The Loews Hotel in Denver has minibars crammed with gourmet dog biscuits. If the minibar doesn't cater to your pet's cravings, then you can always order from the room-service menu with Bow Wow Tenderloin of Beef and Kitty's Salmon Supreme major favorites.
9. Banyan Tree Ringha, China
Set at an oxygen-lacking height of 10,500 feet above sea level, the hotel offers its clientele the perfect solution in its minibars -- oxygen canisters.
