UPDATE 2-China May refinery output at new record
2009-06-12 02:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China's refinery output jumped to a record high in May as refiners, encouraged by higher fuel prices and decent margins, stepped up supplies to meet increasing demand.
The robust refinery production, mirroring the second-highest ever daily crude imports last month, came amid rampant expectations of a retail fuel price rise in May and steadily increasing domestic sales.
But as supplies may be piling up faster than demand -- already shown in the rise in refined fuel stocks last month -- firms could be under pressure to again raise fuel exports, which have eased in recent months.
"Refining firms have very strong incentives to ramp up production as the new oil pricing regime gives them more guaranteed and attractive margins," said an official with top refiner Sinopec Corp (
"The June 1 fuel price increases are less than what they should have been to reflect global crude costs and the risks for another price rise are very high, barring any sharp crude falls this month," he added.
China's refinery output rose 10.7 percent in May versus a year earlier, the National Bureau of Statistics said. This is the third monthly rise in seven months, following a hefty 6.0 percent rise in April and a mild 0.7 percent increase in March.
For a graphic of China's crude runs, click on:
Refiners processed 31.19 million tonnes of crude last month, or 7.34 million barrels per day, exceeding the previous record of 7.21 million bpd hit last June in the run-up to the Olympics.
Output of crude oil dipped 1.1 percent to 16.03 million tonnes, and was down 0.9 percent at 77.78 million tonnes for the first five months versus the year-ago period.
Production of gasoline rose by a strong 30 percent in May, in line with a nearly 50 percent jump in car sales in the month, while diesel output rose by a mild 9.7 percent last month.
China revealed details of a new oil pricing regime in early May, saying it would adjust fuel prices when global crude prices move more than 4 percent from their moving average over 22 working days.
It also said refiners would enjoy "normal" profits when crude was under $80 per barrel, but tighter margins when crude rose above $80.
"Refiners' profits have been rising sharply this year thanks to the new oil pricing mechanism, though it's still under government controls," the Sinopec official said.
), Asia's biggest refiner, saw its first quarter net profit jump 85 percent from a year earlier.
Sinopec said last month that its refinery operation rates have risen to 90 percent of capacity in April and May and likely through June, after five months of rising domestic fuel sales.
A Reuters poll showed that twelve major plants accounting for more than a third of China's capacity will increase their average daily crude run by nearly 10 percent in June from May.
Analysts said the hefty refinery production was apparently running ahead of domestic demand, shown by rising fuel inventories.
Fuel inventories held by the country's top two oil majors rose 2.1 percent in May, reversing a double-digit fall in April, an industry official with access to the data told Reuters on Wednesday.
Monthly fuel sales growth slowed to 2.3 percent in May from 5.2 percent in April, according to the source. [ID:nPEK205260]
Top refiners used to export their extra supplies to balance the domestic market. But Chinese fuel exports fell 20.1 percent in May from April, official figures have shown, and traders said Beijing would cut diesel exports for June by a third from May.
"This is because fuel supplies are quite abundant in the regional market now and prices are not very attractive," a Shanghai-based trader said.
For a table of China's preliminary March commodity trade data, click [ID:nPEK44627]
"China's total 2009 oil demand is likely to remain flat from the 2008 level, or even fall from last year. And due to oil majors' expanding production, oil supply will be in surplus," said Ke Xiaoming, a senior Sinopec researcher. (Additional reporting by Jim Bai; Editing by Michael Urquhart) (eadie.chen@reuters.com; +8610 6627 1268; Reuters Messaging: eadie.chen.reuters.com@reuters.net))
