WRAPUP 2-China industry output beats forecasts, sales up
2009-06-12 02:33:00.0
(Reuters) - China's factory output growth rebounded more than expected in May alongside stronger expansion in credit and consumer spending, bolstering evidence that the world's third-largest economy is on the path to recovery.
The figures, which round out a batch of monthly data that has mostly surprised on the upside, suggest that the government's huge stimulus spending and tax breaks to encourage purchases of everything from cars to home appliances are helping to offset continued weakness in exports.
The acceleration in annual industrial production growth, to an eight-month high of 8.9 percent from 7.3 percent in April, beat economists' forecasts of 7.5 percent but was in line with a figure reported earlier by two Chinese newspapers.
Retail sales grew by 15.2 percent in the year to May, also topping forecasts and up from growth of 14.8 percent in April.
Together with the uptick in new domestic-currency lending in May, to 664.5 billion yuan ($97.3 billion) compared with 592 billion yuan in April, the data paints a picture of an economy pulling up from a bottom.
"The worst is over for the Chinese economy," said Hao Daming, senior analyst with Galaxy Securities in Beijing.
Asian shares moved towards new highs for the year on Friday, buoyed in part by the stronger-than-expected data, which helped add to hopes that the worst is over for the global economy. [MKTS/GLOB]
However, the National Bureau of Statistics said that a low base of comparison due to the massive earthquake that hit southwest China in May 2008 was responsible for 0.6 percentage points of the annual gain in industrial output.
For a graphic on output growth, double-click on:
The stronger-than-expected production growth is due mainly to policy-driven investment, but other positive signs include a rebound in property investment and resilience in consumption, said Qing Wang with Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong.
The government has been frontloading a 4 trillion yuan ($585 billion) stimulus package focused on infrastructure investment, driving annual growth in fixed-asset investment in the first five months up to 32.9 percent.
"We expect the economy to accelerate in the remainder of the year because currently we see policy-driven investment growth, but at the same time we expect that exports should have bottomed and will gradually improve," he said.
Exports and imports both fell in May from year-earlier levels for the seventh month in a row, marking the main weak spot for the economy.
Despite the generally strong data, Liu Mingkang, head of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, cautioned that China needs to ask whether the positive signs in the economy are for real, with questions about the recovery in the real estate sector.
Still, Liu told a financial forum in Beijing on Friday that banks remained sound, even as lending soars.
Banks extended a total of 5.84 trillion yuan of local-currency loans in the first five months of the year, a record amount that easily topped the government's minimum target of 5 trillion yuan for the whole year.
"We mainly care about quality now. As long as the quality is good, there should be no problem if the speed is a little bit high," Liu said. [ID:nBJB000630]
) initially soared 5.7 percent, later paring some of those gains to trade up 4.2 percent. Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
"Without window guidance from the regulator, new loans will continue to grow quickly, driven mainly by smaller lenders, while in earlier months, loans were mainly from big banks," said Lu Zhengwei, chief economist with Industrial Bank in Shanghai.
While retail sales growth, the closest proxy for consumer spending, maintained considerable momentum, a survey released by the central bank showed a record number of urban residents now prefer to save their money than spend it.
The survey, conducted in late May, showed that just 3.4 percent of urbanites were optimistic their incomes will rise in the future, down 14.3 percentage points from the first quarter.
Some 47 percent of respondents would now like to save more, up 9.5 percentage points on the first quarter, and the highest since the survey began in 1999. [ID:nPEK331502] (Additional reporting by Simon Rabinovitch and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills and Neil Fullick)
