Dispute on CO2 cuts forms roadblock to Copenhagen
2009-06-12 13:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A chimney is seen at an industrial site on Teesside, northern England February 8,2009. Credit: Reuters/Nigel Roddis
BONN, Germany
Fri  EDT
BONN, Germany
For developing nations at two-week U.N. talks in Bonn ending on Friday, the outlined emissions cuts by developed nations of 25 to 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 have become vital for a deal due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December.
Many developed nations, however, say such curbs meant to avert the worst of climate change would cripple their economies.
"The minus 25 to 40 range has become a sort of beacon," Yvo de Boer, head of the U.N. Climate Change Secretariat, told Reuters. "It is very much in the back of people's minds as something to measure the success of Copenhagen against."
The 25-40 range was based on only a handful of studies and did not even make it to the "summary for policymakers" of the three-part report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), drawing on work of 2,500 experts.
"Very little progress has been made on setting targets," Shyam Saran, special climate envoy to Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, said of the Bonn talks.
Developing nations led by China and India say the rich should aim for cuts in emissions, mainly from burning fossil fuels, of at least 40 percent. They say that evidence of global warming, such as melting Arctic ice, has worsened since 2007.
And small island states, who fear being washed off the map by rising sea levels, say the rich should cut by at least 45 percent below 1990 levels.
"Forty percent by 2020 is a rather reasonable target" if the problem is as big as now widely believed, Saran said. De Boer noted the level was not an agreed target, merely a scenario for avoiding the worst of global warming.
Many developed nations led by the United States say the number is out of reach -- President Barack Obama wants to cut U.S. emissions back to 1990 levels by 2020, a 14 percent cut from 2007 levels, and by 80 percent below by 2050.
"A level of minus 25 percent is still possible but it will be quite difficult," said Bill Hare of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research who was an author of the IPCC's final summary.
So far, offers on the table by rich nations total cuts of between 8 and 14 percent below 1990 levels by 2020, Hare said. The European Union is offering 20 percent cuts, or 30 if other developed nations join in.
That judgment splits rich and poor into two starkly different camps rather than, for instance, setting a sliding scale of cuts with the richest making the deepest.
"Both sides feel they are being asked to do too much," said Alden Meyer of the Union of Concerned Scientists.
It was unclear how deadlock will be broken. The rich might offer deeper cuts or the poor could back down, perhaps in return for clean technologies and far more aid.
Hare said that Russia, the main country which has yet to set a greenhouse gas goal and whose emissions are already about 30 percent below 1990 levels after the collapse of the Soviet Union, could make a big difference.
But some countries suggest that cuts do not have to fall within the range, especially if later reductions are deeper.
"There are other trends that are possible," Jonathan Pershing, head of the U.S. delegation in Bonn and an IPCC author of the chapter that included the 25-40 percent range, said in a briefing late last month.
