South African Markets - Factors to watch on June 12
2009-06-12 02:09:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Friday.
The safe-haven dollar was largely unchanged after Thursday's falls, but oil prices slipped below $73 following a three-day rally that brought levels to their highest since mid-October.
For a story, please double click on [ID:nLC315410]
Trevor Manuel, head of South Africa's government planning commission, described businesses as cowards on Thursday for giving in to unions and criticised labour for overusing strikes to push for social change.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLB147173]
Hundreds of investors have been fleeced of up to 10 billion rand ($1.2 billion) in what could be South Africa's biggest corporate fraud, a private investigator and lawyer representing investors said.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLBO25438]
South Africa's blue chips reversed two days of gains on Thursday as commodity shares dipped, but the rand was boosted by a broadly softer dollar and less expectation of central bank intervention.
recoiled 1.12 percent to 20,810.60 points and the broader All-share index
fell 0.99 percent to 23,057.32 points.
For Thursday's South African financial markets closing report, double click on [ID:nLB741509]
South Africa's fourth-biggest bank Nedbank is keeping an eye on Nigeria for expansion opportunities, its chief executive said on Thursday.
For a story, double click on [ID:nWEA6503]
South Africa's Standard Bank and China's ICBC (
) are working on 60 deals on the African continent, the chief executive of Africa's biggest bank by assets said on Thursday.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLB810320]
S.AFRICAN UNIONS, GOLD FIRMS
South African mineworkers' unions said on Thursday they were deadlocked with gold producers over wage demands and would strike should an arbitration authority fail to reconcile the parties.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLB813821]
MCDONALD'S CORP (
McDonald's Corp is considering handing control of its South African operations to a local partner by appointing a "developmental licensee", its senior official said in a statement obtained on Thursday.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLB55870]
South African sugarcane production in 2008/09 fell by 400,000 tonnes to 19.3 million compared with the previous season owing to a sharp rise in input costs, the nation's sugar association said on Thursday.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLB810583]
Gold prices steadied on Friday, supported by a weaker dollar, although gains in equities amid increasing investor risk appetite sapped further buying.
Gold tested a psychological target of $1,000 an ounce last week as a steadily weakening dollar combined with better economic sentiment boosted investment demand.
For the latest precious metals report, double click on [GOL/]
U.S. stocks racked up gains across a wide array of sectors on Thursday, aided by rising commodity prices and improving labour market conditions, along with a sharp drop in interest rates.
For the New York stock market report, double click on [.N]
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- McDonald's to hand over to local partner
- Swindle suspect's S.African estate seized
- African politicians must scale back, WEF hears
- It's a WaBenzi frenzy: MECs in multimillion-rand car, leather seats, sunroof splurge
