Europe shares gain; Novartis rises, oils fall
2009-06-12 05:04:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares rose on Friday morning as positive data from China helped lift investor spirits, while Novartis (
By 0847 GMT, the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300
"Last night we got better than expected Chinese data, following better than expected U.S. data yesterday ... We are getting a view that we can come out of the recession and have a reasonable degree of economic recovery globally," said Bernard McAlinden, market strategist at NCB Stockbrokers.
China's May factory output rose more than forecast and retail sales growth accelerated, giving new impetus to investor hopes the world's third-largest economy can lead a global revival. [ID:nSP375389]
On Thursday data showed sales at U.S. retailers rose in May for the first time in three months, and the number of workers filing new applications for jobless benefits fell for a fourth straight week last week. [ID:nN11493029]
Drugmakers were the biggest gainers with Novartis up 1.9 percent after saying it had produced a first batch of a vaccine to fight the H1N1 flu outbreak, which will start clinical trials in July. The company said it expects to be able to ramp up manufacture rapidly. [ID:nLB532879]
), AstraZeneca (
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was up 0.04 percent, Germany's DAX
was down 0.2 percent and France's CAC 40
Banks recovered from earlier losses as Deutsche Bank said most European banks would pass a "stress test", although stocks within the sector were mixed.
), UBS (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
Energy stocks were lower as crude CLc1 slid towards $72 a barrel, as investors locked in gains from a near eight-month high settlement a day ago. Cairn Energy (
), Tullow Oil (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
) dropped 5 percent after the group launched a $1.0 billion convertible bond issue, partly to help finance takeovers and to boost ownership of subsidiaries. [ID:nLC176664]
), BHP Billiton (
), Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation (
), Rio Tinto (
Later in the session, investors may focus on the G8 finance minsters meeting in Italy.
"The finance meeting will be interesting to see what leads it may provide. There is still obviously the concern of potential contagion coming out of eastern Europe and whether we are getting any stability, though I do get the impression there is some," said Justin Urquhart Stewart, director at Seven Investment.
