FOREX-Dollar steady after U.S. data helps risk appetite
2009-06-12 12:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar was steady against other major currencies on Friday after falling the previous day when improved U.S. labour market and retail sales figures boosted optimism about the economy, eroding the dollar's allure as a safe haven.
A solid auction of U.S. 30-year Treasury bonds on Thursday eased supply concerns and supported U.S. bond prices and stocks, which also lessened demand for the dollar, dealers said. [US/]
"Now that a series of Treasury auctions is over, the currency market is taking a breather," said a dealer at a Japanese bank.
"But Treasury yields will likely stay higher until the Federal Reserve's next policy meeting. And a focus will be the central bank's next move, although nobody can control longer-term yields," he said.
A 10-year auction on Wednesday had raised supply concerns but the 30-year sale left a positive spin on the week's total $65 billion in issuance.
"From a short-term perspective, commodity prices are a focus," said Kosuke Hanao, head of treasury product sales at HSBC.
"If oil prices rise further even as an economic recovery lags behind, inflation worries could rise," he said.
Inflation worries stemming from a spike in oil prices while the economy remains weak could lift U.S. Treasury yields higher, putting pressure on the dollar, dealers said.
holds gains above the key 10,000 level as higher share prices would increase investor risk appetite, dealers said.
U.S. data on Thursday showed retail sales rose in May for the first time in three months and the number of workers filing new claims for jobless benefits last week was the lowest since January, fostering hopes the recession was abating. [ID:nN11493029]
The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six other major currencies, was little changed at 79.599 from late U.S. trade on Thursday.
after hitting a one-week high on Thursday of $1.4178 on electronic trading platform EBS. Against the yen, the euro was up 0.1 percent at 137.84 yen EURJPY=R.
due to profit-taking after having gained more than 3 percent this week, but it was not far from an eight-month high of $0.8265 hit earlier this month.
