UPDATE 1-Volcker sees no strong U.S. recovery, inflation subdued
2009-06-11 09:07:00.0
(Reuters) - A healing process in financial markets seems to be underway and it is reasonable to expect some growth late this year and next in the United States, Paul Volcker, an economic adviser to the Obama administration, said on Thursday.
The prospects for a really strong recovery, typical of most recessions, seem unlikely, Volcker told a meeting of the Institute of International Finance in Beijing.
"A long slog, with continuing high levels of unemployment, seems to be in store," Volcker, a former chairman of the Federal Reserve, said.
"This is not an environment in which inflationary pressures are at all likely for some time to come," he added.
Turning to the dollar's role as a reserve currency, Volcker said it was reasonable to ask whether it is in the long-run interest of the United States to provide what is essentially a public good -- an international currency -- in such large amounts as to raise questions about its ultimate stability.
Volcker did not answer his own question directly, but he said: "The fact is there are no practical alternatives today or for many tomorrows to the United States dollar as an international currency.
"I think it should be clearly understood that the central responsibility of the United States -- in its own interest, in China's interest and in the world's interest -- is to maintain both the purchasing power of the dollar at home and in international markets, and a strong and open financial system."
To tackle the moral hazard of financial institutions that are too big to fail, Volcker said one approach would be to give only deposit-taking institutions access to deposit insurance and central bank liquidity facilities.
"In my view, it is unwarranted that those same institutions funded in substantial part by taxpayer-protected deposits be engaged in substantial risk-prone proprietary trading and speculative activities that may also raise questions of virtually unmanageable conflicts of interest," Volcker said.
But there may be a few instances in which such funds become so large as to suggest that official capital and leverage requirements would be appropriate, he said.
The vast majority of hedge and private equity funds could be appropriately monitored through their relationships with banks, he added.
On mark-to-market accounting procedures, Volcker said there is a strong case for reviewing the application of "fair value" standards to commercial banks, insurance companies and perhaps certain other regulated financial institutions.
Strict mark-to-market accounting that is appropriate for trading operations and investment banks may introduce a degree of volatility in banks' reporting that is incompatible with their basic business model of intermediating maturity and credit risks, Volcker said. (Reporting by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Andy Bruce)
