U.S. sends four Uighur detainees to Bermuda
2009-06-11 00:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Four Chinese detainees from Guantanamo Bay arrived in Bermuda on Thursday after being freed by U.S. authorities in the Obama administration's latest move to close the controversial prison camp for terror suspects.
Attorneys for the four Muslim men, who were held for seven years before being cleared by U.S. authorities as terrorism suspects, said they will take part in Bermuda's foreign guest worker program.
They arrived at Bermuda's international airport on a charter aircraft Thursday morning.
Speaking for the group, one of the freed detainees thanked the Bermudan government and people. "Growing up under communism," Abdul Nasser said, "we always dreamed of living in peace and working in free society like this one. Today you have let freedom ring."
The administration said earlier this year it was considering releasing the Uighurs in the United States, but a political firestorm erupted, with many members of the U.S. Congress opposing such a transfer.
'BERMUDA SHOWS UNITED STATES WHAT JUSTICE IS'
"When political opportunists blocked justice in our own country, Bermuda has reminded her old friend America what justice is," said Sabin Willett, one of the American lawyers for the Uighurs.
The 17 Uighurs, who come from China's largely Muslim far west region of Xinjiang, had been captured by the U.S. government during the invasion of Afghanistan after the September 11, 2001 hijacking attacks in the United Sates.
Their lawyers said the four men -- Huzaifa Parhat, Abdul Semet, Abdul Nasser and Jalal Jalaladiny -- never took hostile action against the United States and were sold to U.S. forces by bounty hunters.
Germany's Spiegel Online reported that Palau Foreign Minister Sandra Pierantozzi said, "The final decision on whether the men want to come to us is their own decision. We will ask each one individually."
She was quoted as saying the United States had promised to pay $85,000 for each prisoner Palau accepts.
In one of his first acts in office in January, Obama ordered the closing within a year of the Guantanamo prison camp, which now holds 234 detainees following the departure of the four Uighurs.
"By helping accomplish the president's objective of closing Guantanamo, the transfer of these detainees will make America safer," said Attorney General Eric Holder, who is leading the administration's efforts to shut down the facility.
Guantanamo was opened in 2002 under then-President George W. Bush and has drawn international condemnation and criticism from human rights groups. Since 2002, more than 540 detainees have left Guantanamo for various foreign nations.
Five Uighurs who were sent from Guantanamo to Albania in 2006 have not been engaged in criminal or terrorist activities since their release, the Justice Department said in announcing the release of the four other men to Bermuda.
The 17 Uighurs are part of 25 Guantanamo prisoners who have been ordered released by federal judges in Washington, D.C.
They have asked the U.S. Supreme Court to strike down a ruling that only the executive branch of the U.S. government, and not federal judges, has the authority to order their release into the United States.
The high court's justices are scheduled to consider whether to hear that appeal later this month.
(additional reporting by Andy Sullivan in Washington and Jane Sutton in Miami; editing by Paul Simao)
