Castrale fires 65 to lead LPGA Championship
2009-06-11 20:15:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Jun 11 2009
Thu, Jun 11 2009
Nicole Castrale from the U.S. watches her drive on the ninth hole during the first round of the LPGA championship at the Bulle Rock golf course in Havre De Grace, Maryland June 11, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Tim Shaffer
HAVRE DE GRACE, Maryland
Thu  EDT
HAVRE DE GRACE, Maryland
Castrale, with one title to her credit since first joining the tour in 2002, registered four sets of back-to-back birdies on an overcast day at the soggy course where players were allowed to lift, clean and place.
"The front nine all of my iron shots were going right at the pin," said Castrale, who made six birdies on the front nine. "It was a great feeling."
LPGA Tour rookie Anna Nordqvist of Sweden was one shot back, completing a 66 when she holed out from 40 yards to save par at the 18th in the season's second major championship.
Another stroke back among the early finishers was China's Feng Shanshan, who had six birdies against one bogey for 67.
Tseng Yani of Taiwan, who won last year as a 19-year-old, registered a one-over 73, one stroke worse than multiple major winners Lorena Ochoa of Mexico and Australian Karrie Webb.
Ochoa bogeyed her last two holes, the eighth and ninth.
"Obviously, I did not have a good finish," world number one Ochoa said. "I am going to go practice some right now before it starts to rain and hopefully have a better day tomorrow."
Tied on 68 were Americans Paige Mackenzie, Stacy Lewis and Moira Dunn, South Koreans Amy Yang, Choi Na-yeon and Aree Song, and South African Ashleigh Simon.
Michelle Wie, seeking her first LPGA title, was in a large group at two-under 70 along with Park Inbee of South Korea.
"It was an interesting start," Wie, 19, told reporters. "I missed some short ones early on. But it was fun."
Wie thought better rounds could be coming. "I left a lot out there," she said.
"It's good momentum for tomorrow," Nordqvist told reporters about her spectacular par-save on the final hole. "It's disappointing if you end bad."
(Editing by Justin Palmer and Ian Ransom; To query or comment on this story email sportsfeedback@thomsonreuters.com)
