Gold steadies, supported by weak dollar
2009-06-11 11:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold held steady in Europe on Thursday, supported by a weaker dollar and strong oil prices, but the market was restrained as fund interest in bullion softened.
Spot gold was bid at $953.90 an ounce at 1440 GMT (10:40 a.m. EDT), against $953.65 an ounce late in New York on Wednesday.
The U.S. currency later fell, making gold cheaper for non-U.S. investors, as markets concentrated on concerns about a rising U.S. budget deficit.
Buying by exchange-traded funds was relatively soft, with neither the largest gold ETF, the SPDR Gold Trust, or London's ETF Securities reporting inflows on Wednesday.
"Investment flows have slowed a little bit," said James Moore, analyst at TheBullionDesk.com.
"We've still got the background concerns surrounding inflation but for now the market may need to come a little bit lower to pick up some fresh demand."
Potential inflationary worries were reflected in oil prices, with crude now topping $72 a barrel .
"Whilst the longer term picture is still very supportive for gold, in the short term the market is overbought and possibly back to toward the $935, maybe the $925 area before we can pick up some fresh demand," TheBullionDesk's Moore added.
Gold buying in the world's largest bullion consumer, India, remained slow on Thursday, with dealers unwilling to make fresh purchases as the wedding season nears its end.
"Lack of physical demand has been one of the main problems for gold at these prices," said VM Group analyst Matthew Turner.
On the supply side, mine output from South Africa fell 13 percent in volume terms in April from a year before, official data showed.
Silver rose to $15.31 an ounce from $15.15 late in New York on Wednesday, while platinum was at $1,259.50 an ounce against $1,261, and palladium firmed to $254.50 against $253.
ETF buying of platinum continued, with ETF Securities reporting another small inflow of just over 3,000 ounces on Wednesday. Holdings of the company's ETFS Physical Platinum fund have risen 42,700 ounces or 14 percent in the last week.
While ETF demand is likely to support platinum, price gains could be limited by the chilling effect of this on jewelry buying, one of the only buoyant areas of consumption at a time when industrial demand for the metal is languishing.
"Further platinum price gains could dampen Chinese jewelry demand, which could increase the downside risks, as China is the biggest platinum consumer," Standard Bank said in a note.
(Reporting by Kylie Maclellan and Jan Harvey; Editing by Veronica Brown)
