UPDATE 3-National Semi posts loss but sees solid Q1
2009-06-11 19:36:00.0
(Reuters) - National Semiconductor Corp (
The chipmaker offered a sales forecast that beat analysts' average expectations but was far weaker than that delivered by rival Texas Instruments Inc TXN.N this week, hitting its shares in after-hours trade.
Shares of National Semi slid more than 3 percent to $14.00 after-hours, from a close of $14.47 on the New York Stock Exchange. They had surged nearly 54 percent since sinking to $9.40 in mid March.
National Semi, which announced plans to cut 26 percent of its headcount in March, said business conditions have improved, with the order cancellations that had been common earlier this year having subsided.
"The whole industry now agrees that we've stabilized," CEO Brian Halla said in an interview on Thursday. "It means the bottom has stopped falling out."
Halla cited pockets of strength, primarily for chips used in the new crop of high-end smartphones, but he said it was too soon to call a recovery.
For the current quarter, National Semi projected revenue of $285 million to $305 million -- better than forecasts for just $283 million and representing 2 to 9 percent growth from the fiscal fourth quarter.
On Monday, Texas Instruments boosted its sales forecast for the current quarter, projecting that revenue would be up 10 percent to 20 percent sequentially.
"You could argue that the raise they (National Semi) gave wasn't as big in magnitude as TI," Broadpoint Amtech analyst Doug Freedman. But he said the comparison between the two companies was not necessarily a fair one, owing to different seasonal business patterns.
National Semi makes analog chips used in a wide range of products from cell phones to automobiles. In March, the company announced plans to shut down a chip fabrication facility in Texas and a chip assembly plant in China, along with plans to lay off more than 1,600 workers.
In the three months ended May 31, National Semi posted a net loss of $63.7 million, or 28 cents a share, compared with net income of $83.2 million, or 34 cents a share a year earlier. The net loss included $116 million in restructuring charges. [ID:nWNAB9027]
Excluding those charges, National Semi earned 13 cents a share, versus an average forecast for a loss of 1 cent a share, according to Reuters Estimates.
Sales for the three months ended May 31 came to $280.8 million, above analysts' average expectations of $274.3 million. The company posted $462 million in sales in the 2008 fiscal fourth quarter ended May 25.
Halla said the company's chips were in Apple Inc's (
) iPhone and Palm Inc's PALM.O new Pre smartphone. Halla said the company is seeing strong orders for chips used in smartphones set for release in the second half of the year.
"We think there's a new smartphone cycle that's beginning," said Halla. (Reporting by Alexei Oreskovic; Editing by Edwin Chan, Gary Hill)
