U.N.'s Ban urges Security Council unity on North Korea
2009-06-11 13:58:00.0
(Reuters) - U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said on Thursday it was important for the Security Council to take a unified position on North Korea's nuclear program, which he said had global implications.
Key powers agreed a draft U.N. resolution on Wednesday, ending weeks of wrangling on a plan to expand sanctions against North Korea for its recent nuclear test. The Security Council may pass it as soon as Friday.
"The Security Council seems to be ready to take action on the DPRK's nuclear test," Ban told a news conference, using the acronym for the North's full name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Ban, a former foreign minister of South Korea, said he had consistently argued that "the security council should take a unified position on this issue."
"Once (a) Security Council resolution is adopted, it is again very important for all the members of the United Nations including DPRK to fully comply with and cooperate with this resolution," Ban said at his regular monthly briefing.
The agreement ended more than two weeks of closed-door negotiations that pitted five powers demanding tough sanctions against Pyongyang for its May nuclear test -- United States, Britain, France, Japan and South Korea -- against Russia and China, which argued against harsh penalties for North Korea.
The end result, Western diplomats said, was a watered-down version of an initially tough draft resolution that now represents a moderate expansion of the sanctions imposed on Pyongyang after its first nuclear test in October 2006.
Diplomats from the 15 council members were holding technical discussions of the draft text on Thursday and it might come to a vote on Friday, a Western diplomat said.
With the five veto-holding powers backing the resolution, there should be no hurdle to its passing, but some diplomats have said Security Council members Vietnam and Libya might not back sanctions.
(Reporting by Claudia Parsons; Editing by David Storey)
