UPDATE 2-Don't overplay 'green shoots', Bank of Canada says
2009-06-11 17:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney pledged on Thursday to stay the course on monetary policy and warned against excess optimism over "green shoots", saying there was no evidence yet of a sustainable global recovery.
Carney, speaking in Montreal, said it was important for countries to have valid exit strategies from stimulus spending, but they should not be too hasty in pulling away stimulus money, especially without signs the private sector is pulling its weight to boost economic activity.
"We shouldn't overplay at this stage the green shoots, to use the popular term. And we shouldn't underestimate the scale of the challenge," he told reporters after a speech.
"Economies are going to grow initially because of the scale of monetary and fiscal stimulus, not in spite of it ... and self-sustained private demand is not yet there."
Some markets in the United States, remarkably, have begun to price in a rise in interest rates later this year and European policymakers have clashed over the timing and speed of unwinding central bank help.
"This is a balancing act, you've got to be careful not to start pulling things away before they've had their effect," Carney said.
Carney repeated past language that he expects to keep the Canadian central bank's target interest rate at 0.25 percent through mid-2010, that he retains the flexibility to use unconventional measures, and that the recent sharp rise in the Canadian dollar could stifle recovery in the Canadian economy.
"The Bank of Canada is concerned about the rapid appreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent weeks and it will continue to monitor the situation," he said.
If the currency keeps on strengthening, it could persuade the bank to keep monetary policy accommodative for longer.
"It may not be enough to get the bank to ease further but certainly weighs against an early tightening of policy," said Sal Guatieri, senior economist at BMO Capital Markets.
Hours before Carney spoke, the Canadian government forecast a budget deficit of C$50.2 billion for the 2009-10 fiscal year, the biggest ever.
Carney declined to comment on the budget situation but said in general terms that Canada had a stronger fiscal position going into the crisis than any other industrialized nation and if the path to growth is well-managed, there should be no need to raise taxes to balance the books again.
"And if we do things right here, we have one of the best prospects of getting that path of growth back up," he said.
In remarks that appeared directed at least partly at China, he said countries must allow "real exchange rates to adjust to achieve external balance over time...Given the current, deeply synchronous global recession, the costs of free riding should be obvious to all."
He downplayed concerns that major emerging economies such as China, Russia and Brazil would diversify their foreign currency reserves out of the U.S. dollar - an issue on the agenda of a meeting of the so-called BRIC countries next week.
"I certainly have received no indications from those countries, with whom we meet regularly, of that intent," he said. (Additional reporting by Randall Palmer and Toronto Treasury team; editing by Peter Galloway))
