PRESS DIGEST-Australian General News - June 12
2009-06-11 17:04:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
The Australian economy has seen more than 125,000 full-time jobs lost in the past 10 months. Employers have been forced to reduce working hours as weak profits and falling demand eats into household incomes. Unemployment rose by 0.2 per cent to 5.7 per cent, with 1700 jobs lost last month. The March quarter saw hours worked drop by 1.2 per cent driving Australia's wages bill down by 1.1 per cent and reducing gross household disposable income by 3.2 per cent. Page 1.
Today, with the global economic hitting employers hard all wage increases or bonuses are off the table. "Now the tables have turned. They can shake you as opposed to you skaking them for more money", says a PricewaterhouseCoopers analyst. Performance reviews are becoming more formal, regular and tougher as employers try to extract the maximum out of employees in order to meet performance targets. Employees that do not meet the performance targets are made redundant, and those that survive fear the next review might be their last. Page 1.
The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) will pay closer attention to Australian directors and executives for undeclared income as the end of the financial year looms. The ATO will focus on anyone worth more than A$5 million, and those making "dodgy claims" for capital losses, employer obligations and employee work expenses. "The ATO had already found almost A$39 million in extra tax liabilities after reviewing the tax affairs of 362 executives and directors this financial year" ATO second commissioner, Jennie Granger said yesterday. Page 1.
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) says unlisted managed investment schemes and property trusts will be governed under tougher disclosure requirements in order to protect investors. "Our intention is not to make disclosure vulgar and higher for you, but to focus attention on clearer, short documents that make the real risks abundantly clear to the average reader. We believe this will build confidence of investors to re-enter the market", ASIC commissioner Belinda Gibson said yesterday. Page 3.
The World health Organisation has advised the state of Victoria to think about cancelling mass gatherings and Australian Football League matches in order to contain the spread of swine flu. Victoria has more than 1000 cases of swine flu and has become the highest populated area infected outside the Americas. According to estimates, if no action is taken Victoria could see up to 30 percent of its population infected with the H1N1 strain, "that is three times the normal flu season infection rate." Page 1.
The former lawyer for Schapelle Corby, Robin Tampoe, has been struck off the Queensland roll of solicitors for revealing confidential details about her family and inventing a defence for her client. "Robin Tampoe had brought the profession into disrepute when he made television appearances on the Sunday program in June 2005 and in a 2008 documentary, The Hidden Truth", said Queensland Supreme Court judge Roslyn Atkinson. Mr Tampoe had retired as a practicing solicitor before yesterdays' ruling. Page 3.
More than 2000 people attended the funeral of Australian surgeon Chris O'Brien at Sydney's St Mary's Cathedral yesterday. The mass service was delivered by Archbishop George Pell, with Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd delivering one of five eulogies, while Governor-General Quentin Bryce also delivered a reading. Mr Rudd was with Mr O'Brien hours before he died and during that time he read the citation for an Order of Australia, which he was due to receive in the Queen's Birthday honours list on Monday. Page 3.
The Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU) has called for a Senate inquiry into safety at Western Australian mines, after a miner spent 16 hours trapped underground. The miner, who did not want to be identified, works for BHP Billiton's Perseverance mine at Leinster. He become trapped 1 kilometre underground after an earth tremor collapsed part of the mine's roof. The AMWU said "the company's safety record was atrocious' and it was putting profits before safety. Page 3.
) that the Chinese Government will impose trade sanctions against the companies if their iron ore venture is not approved by Chinese competition authorities. "According to China's antitrust law, we can veto such a merger agreement if the concentration of overseas business operators will affect domestic market competition", the director of Foreign Investment Department at the Ministry of Commerce, Ma Yu, said yesterday. Page 1.
The Australian Crime Commission (ACC) released a report stating that Australia is in the middle of a cocaine boom. The annual report shows that Sydney is the epicentre of distribution, with more than 80 per cent of the 650 kilograms of cocaine smuggled into Australia seized in New South Wales. "Serious and organised drug crime is a real problem now and unless tackled effectively¡­ it will manifest itself in very damaging and dangerous outcomes for the Australian community," the ACC commission's chief executive John Lawler said. Page 1.
) should come clean about the high level of overseas maintenance on Australian aircraft' Steve Purvinas federal secretary of the Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association said. This is the second safety incident since February for the Qantas Group, owners of Jetstar. Page 2.
A Sydney man is standing trial on charges of conspiring to prepare a terrorist act or acts. Abdul Rkib Hasan said yesterday in the Supreme Court that "material he had acquired four years ago, including old batteries, distilled water and acetone' had been bought to start a business reconditioning batteries. Mr Hasan was also found to possess videos, books and CDs containing "religious and moral doctrines of jihad". The trial of Mr Hassan, who was arrested in November 2005, will continue on Monday. Page 5.
Victorian Premier John Brumby is losing support from within his own party over his bid to implement the Ombudsman's findings over a local council scandal, said a senior Government source. Mr Brumby will call for legislation to stop local councillors from working for Ministers of Parliament. The Ombudsman has recommended "that electoral officers, and ministerial and parliamentary advisers be disqualified from becoming or continuing to be councillors". Page 1.
Victorian health authorities will distribute the anti-viral drug Tamiflu for free and without prescription. Victoria has 1100 confirmed cases of the H1N1, and Federal Health Minister Nicola Roxon said the government is waiting for advice from the World Health Organisation to see if the alert level will be lifted to phase six. The Victorian Government will ask the Federal Government to release Tamiflu supplies from the national stockpiles in order to combat and prevent further cases. Page 3.
Business negotiators, Mick Gatto and John Khoury, have helped negotiate a multimillion dollar settlement between the board of Cape Lambert, its investors, a Russian millionaire and an A-League football tycoon. The feuding parties have been fighting over the sale of an iron ore project worth $400 million sold by Cape Lambert to a Chinese company. The parties involved included Perth Glory owner Tony Sage, Russian millionaire Roman Abramovich and investor Mick Shemesia. The meeting was arranged by oil baron and convicted heroin dealer Frank Timis. Page 3. --
