INTERVIEW-UPDATE 1-Siemens Mobility aims for firmer sales
2009-06-11 07:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Siemens' (
) Mobility business unit -- which handles the magnetic levitation railway Transrapid project in China -- is aiming for firmer sales of between 6 billion euros ($8.4 billion) and 7 billion in the current fiscal year, the unit's chief executive told Reuters.
Hans-Joerg Grundmann also said in an interview Mobility expects to meet its operating profit margin goal of 5 to 7 percent earlier than the autumn 2010 targeted date. Mobility's profit margin for fiscal 2008 was a minus 3.9 percent.
He said Mobility, which also produces road toll systems and sorting equipment for mails and packages, has an order backlog of 17 billion euros and its restructuring is proceeding on schedule.
"We are making progress in terms of reducing our overcapacity. We are doing well ahead of our schedule and therefore, we will be able to reach our target margins tentatively earlier than planned," he said.
Shares in Siemens were 0.2 percent higher at 1107 GMT, while the German DAX top-30 index
Grundmann said despite the current economic crisis, the future looks bright for the business unit.
"The overall market will grow further by 3 percent annually. I do not see a decline in demand in the coming years," he said. "Due to urbanisation and population growth, we see a rennaissance of passenger trams," he added.
He said Siemens will participate in the bidding for the high speed train project in France, which he expects to open by end of the calendar year.
Contrary to local media reports, Grundmann said Siemens has no concrete projects to build a magnetic levitation railway outside of China. He also said China's original plans to lengthen the Transrapid railway track have come to a standstill.
"At the moment, there are no signals that China will start soon the construction to extend the railway stretch in Shanghai," he added.
(Reporting by Jens Hack; Writing by Marilyn Gerlach; Editing by Hans Peters)
((Reuters Messaging: marilyn.gerlach.reuters.com@reuters.net; 00 49 69 7565 1279))
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nLB1038011
