U.S. wants more cooperation with Kyrgyzstan
2009-06-11 06:42:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama, trying to prevent the closure of a U.S. air base in Kyrgyzstan, has sent a personal appeal to the Central Asian nation urging it to expand cooperation, Kyrgyzstan said on Thursday.
While repeating that its decision is final, Kyrgyzstan showed more flexibility on the matter after receiving the letter, saying growing instability in the region would affect the nature of its cooperation with the United States.
In the strongest sign yet that there might be room for change, President Kurmanbek Bakiyev said he would consider Obama's proposal to expand ties.
"In his address, Barack Obama thanked Kyrgyzstan's people and leadership for their efforts on stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan and fighting international terrorism and drug trafficking," a statement issued by Bakiyev's office said.
"Moreover Barack Obama expressed hope to further strengthen various forms of cooperation between the United States and Kyrgyzstan," it said.
Kyrgyzstan announced its decision to close Manas after securing pledges of $2 billion in aid and credit from Russia, which operates its own air base in the former Soviet republic.
The move followed a long period of criticism by Moscow of the U.S. military presence in Central Asia, a region it sees as part of its sphere of interest dating back to Tsarist times.
A source close to the Manas talks, who asked not to be named due to the sensitivity of the matter, told Reuters that the Obama letter specifically singled out the Manas issue as an area where cooperation should be expanded.
"The letter addresses various forms of cooperation including the use of Manas," the source said.
Foreign Minister Kadyrbek Sarbayev said Kyrgyzstan would take into account growing instability in Afghanistan when responding to Obama's request. He repeated Bakiyev's earlier statement, however, that the Manas decision was final.
"I would like to stress that Kyrgyzstan is an active participant of the international fight against global threats and stability in Central Asia is in its interests," he told 24.kg news agency.
"I can state clearly that our response (to Obama) will be based on our national interests as well as the latest developments in the situation in the Central Asia region, particularly in Pakistan and Afghanistan."
The air base, named after an epic Kyrgyz hero, was set up in the impoverished mountainous nation in 2001 to help U.S.-led operations in Afghanistan.
It gained particular importance for the United States in 2005 when Uzbekistan, another Central Asian nation, evicted U.S. troops from a military base there in a row over human rights.
"The (Kyrgyz) head of state has ordered the Foreign Ministry to team up with relevant government agencies to prepare proposals on Kyrgyzstan's response (to Obama)," it said.
The issue is certain to dominate discussions at next week's summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a grouping of Central Asian states dominated by Russia and China, in the Russian city of Yekaterinburg which Bakiyev is due to attend.
(Writing by Maria Golovnina; Editing by Charles Dick)
