UPDATE 2-ECB's Noyer sees global economy turning up in H1 2010
2009-06-11 04:08:00.0
(Reuters) - The global economy could start growing again between the end of this year and the middle of 2010, helped by government stimuli, European Central Bank governing council member Christian Noyer said on Thursday.
"Certain indicators point to a deceleration of the slowdown in the second quarter, giving us cautious optimism," Noyer told an audience of businessmen in Hong Kong.
Various government stimuli would progressively feed into the economy, he said.
However, Noyer warned that rising unemployment could still affect consumption and hit growth prospects, though disinflation could boost purchasing power.
Noyer's visit to Hong Kong is part of a broader trip to China, which recently called for the U.S. dollar eventually to be replaced as the world's main reserve currency by the IMF's Special Drawing Right (SDR), a basket of currencies that includes the euro
, the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen
Noyer, however, said that SDRs could not replace real currencies and a reserve currency could not be decided by political will.
"I don't believe you can impose a currency as a reference currency by political will or administrative decisions. Market forces decide," he said.
"SDRs are a very useful instrument as a basket of currencies. It is an asset. But it's difficult to imagine you can use a basket in the same way as a real currency. It can't replace the currencies that comprise that basket."
currency, which is not fully convertible. Noyer said the world would naturally become more multipolar but currencies that are freely traded and fully convertible would continue to be the main currencies.
China would play a greater role in the IMF and other institutions and it was understandable that China and other major emerging economies were seeking to ensure they would be involved in setting new global financial standards, he said.
All countries needed to abide by the rules, including the United States, which might have helped stem some of the reasons for the global financial crisis if it had adopted the Basel II accord, he said. The agreement increases balance sheet assets and forces banks to allocate more capital to support loan portfolios.
"Once we adopt a rule, it has to be adopted globally," he said. "If Basel II had been adopted by the United States prior to the crisis, it probably would have helped mitigate some of the reasons why the crisis has arisen."
However, he said the United States' failure to adopt Basel II was due to its lengthy and difficult legal process not the will of the administration. (Editing by Kazunori Takada) (susan.fenton@thomsonreuters.com; +852 2843 6367; Reuters Messaging: susan.fenton.thomsonreuters.com@reuters.net)
