FOREX-Dollar falls ahead of next Treasury auction hurdle
2009-06-11 01:59:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell against a basket of currencies on Thursday, paring some gains made after the benchmark U.S. Treasury yield hit its highest point in eight months the previous day.
breaking above 10,000 to hit an eight-month high also helped boost risk appetite and the shift to commodity-linked currencies, dealers said. [O/R] [.T]
But trade overall was subdued in Asia as investors wait to see if an auction of 30-year Treasury bonds later in the day will add to rising U.S. long-term yields after the results of Wednesday's sales of 10-year Treasury notes heightened concerns over the balloning U.S. budget deficit, dealers said.
"The yield rise, which is triggering the dollar's rebound, is based on an improved U.S. economic outlook, halting the greenback's broad slide seen when the euro rose above $1.43," said a senior trader at a Japanse bank.
"But there's some focus on bond supply worries behind the yield rise, which in turn could be dollar negative, complicating the interpretation of the currency moves," the trader said.
U.S. Treasury prices fell on Wednesday, sending the benchmark 10-year yield up to 4.0 percent for the first time in eight months after an auction of 10-year notes. [US/]
The dollar index, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six other major currencies, fell 0.5 percent to 79.903 .DXY from late U.S. trade on Wednesday.
, resuming its rise towards a more than five-month high of $1.4339 touched last week before falling sharply near $1.38 earlier this week.
"The market doesn't seem to have a fixed view on how to take the talk of Fed interest rate hikes as well as the recent spike in Treasury yields," said Yousuke Hosokawa, treasury department senior manager at Chuo Mitsui Trust and Banking.
"It looks like the market is taking factors such as yield moves and stocks as an excuse to change positions," he said.
China has no choice but to keep buying U.S. Treasuries, Dai Xianglong, the chairman of China's National Social Security Fund (NSSF), said in remarks reported on Thursday. [ID:nPEK71592]
Dai's comments came after Russia's central bank said on Wednesday it will diversify its currency reserves by cutting U.S. Treasury purchases and buying IMF-backed bonds, which drove the dollar lower the previous day.
The New Zealand dollar rose after the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) kept its key interest rate steady at a record low 2.5 percent, the first pause in nearly a year, but left the door open to resume its aggressive easing cycle to combat recession. [ID:nWEL502629] [NZD/]
after the decision, up about 1 percent on the day. The currency rose 0.8 percent to 62.30 yen NZDJPY=R.
and 0.8 percent to 79.30 yen AUDJPY=R after Australia's jobless report for May showed only 1,700 job losses, which was much smaller than the market forecast of 30,000 job losses, reducing views for any more cuts in interest rates.[AUEMP=ECI]
The market took in its stride Japan's revised gross domestic product for the first quarter, which showed the economy shrank 3.8 percent from the previous quarter, less than economists' forecast for a 4.0 percent contraction. [JPGDR1=ECI] (Additional reporting by Satomi Noguchi; Editing by Michael Watson)
