REFILE-LG keeps mobile mkt share goal;eyes No.2 spot by '12
2009-06-11 01:25:00.0
REFILE-LG keeps mobile mkt share goal;eyes No.2 spot by '12 | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
REFILE-LG keeps mobile mkt share goal;eyes No.2 spot by '12
Thu  EDT
SEOUL, June 11
), the world's third-largest mobile phone maker, will maintain its global market share target at 10 percent for this year and aims to become No.2 by 2012, the head of its handset business said on Thursday.
With the mobile phone market expected to shrink by up to 10 percent this year amid the global economic downturn, handset makers are striving to prop up sales by focusing on a few growth areas such as smartphones and emerging markets.
"Our goal of a 10 percent market share remains unchanged," Skott Ahn, president and CEO of Mobile Communications at LG, said at a news conference. "We will become the global No. 2 in 2012, and that goal applies to smartphones as well."
In handset terms, LG trails Nokia (
), but is ahead of Motorola Inc MOT.N and Sony Ericsson (
). In 2008, LG sold 100.7 million phones to claim about 9 percent of the market.
Ahn was speaking at the domestic launch of LG's new premium model "ARENA", a touchscreen phone with a three-dimensional user interface. LG aimed to sell at least 5 million units during the ARENA's lifecycle, Ahn said.
Ma Chang-min, vice-president in charge of marketing strategy for Mobile Communications, said LG would unveil about 80 handset models globally in 2009, of which 12 would be premium models.
Sales of smartphones that provide computer-like functionality will jump 28 percent in 2009, according to research firm Gartner.
) to enhance its smartphone offering and also plans to unveil a handset running on Google Inc's (
LG has scheduled the launch of its own download store for July in the Korean market, aiming to eventually make it a place for LG phone users to access applications and digital content such as games and music.
"Open operating systems will be the mainstream," Ahn said.
Companies from device makers to mobile service operators are offering virtual download stores, following the success of Apple Inc's (
(Reporting by Rhee So-eui; Editing by Chris Lewis)
