WRAPUP 1-Chinese investment surges, offsetting export fall
2009-06-11 03:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese investment surged by more than expected in May on the back of government pump-priming and a recovery in the property sector, helping to offset persistent weakness in demand for its exports.
The strong investment figures provided fresh evidence that the world's third-largest economy is leading others on the path to recovery with its fiscal firepower, while the greater-than-expected fall in exports underlines its continuing vulnerability to events outside its control.
Investment accounts for a much greater portion of economic growth than net exports, meaning strength there is likely to help offset weakness in external demand.
Investment in urban areas in fixed assets such as apartment buildings and roads rose 32.9 percent in the first five months from a year earlier, compared with 30.5 percent in the first four months, the National Bureau of Statistics said on Thursday.
Economists said that translated into a 40 percent leap in May alone. Adjusted for inflation, the increase was even greater because Chinese prices have been falling for several months.
"I think this is a welcome sign of momentum building in the Chinese economy, and it's good for the global outlook," said David Cohen with Action Economics in Singapore.
Underpinned by optimism over the Chinese economy, commodity-related stocks in Asia rose for a third straight day on Thursday while oil prices extended gains to seven-month highs. [MKTS/GLOB]
The median forecast of economists polled by Reuters was for a rise of 31.0 percent, but the figure of 32.9 percent had been whispered in China's financial markets earlier this week.
Given that rumours of Wednesday's inflation figures also proved to be spot on, the accuracy of the leak lends credence to talk in the market -- reported by two newspapers -- that data on Friday will show industrial production rose 8.9 percent in the year to May. That would be the sharpest rise since September.
Economists attributed the strength in investment to the government's 4 trillion yuan ($585 billion) economic stimulus plan, announced in November, and an associated record surge in credit growth from the state-dominated banking system.
Markets focused more on those signs of improvement than on the weak trade figures, which showed that exports fell 26.4 percent from May 2008, while imports fell 25.2 percent -- the seventh month in a row that they have both fallen, and both at an accelerated pace from April.
(For a graphic on trade, double-click
"External demand remains weak as the U.S. and European economies are still contracting, so it'll be hard for China's exports to see a quick rebound," said Feng Yuming, an economist with Orient Securities in Shanghai.
After seasonal adjustment, however, exports rose 0.2 percent in May from April and imports rose 4.4 percent, the customs administration said.
Moreover, Sherman Chan with Moody's Economy.com in Sydney said trade flows today reflect orders placed several months ago, when the global economy was in dire straits.
"If you look back at, say, half a year ago, business sentiment was very, very weak and also household consumption was subdued around the world, which is why China's exports would have been weak," she said.
Therefore, investment is a better leading indicator because it represents money entering the economy in the actual reporting month. Here, economists saw greater grounds for optimism.
Spending on new projects in the first five months surged 96 percent from a year earlier, while investment in railways soared 110.9 percent.
The real estate sector, which accounts for almost a quarter of fixed investment, saw growth of 6.8 percent, up sharply from 4.9 percent in the January-April period.
"We believe this to be sustainable, and could help cushion the downside by underpinning organic domestic demand in the event or a prolonged recession in the G3 economies beyond 2009." Investment and consumption both accounted for 4.1 percentage points of China's 9 percent gross domestic product growth last year, while net exports were responsible for just 0.8 percent.
However, some economists cautioned that the government-led investment boom could not last forever and is no silver bullet for the economy.
"There is little that the government can do about weak external demand, except to offer exporters support through tax benefits and VAT rebates," said Jing Ulrich, managing director and chairman of China equities with J.P. Morgan in Hong Kong.
"For China's nascent economic recovery to be sustainable beyond the short-term, policymakers must take steps to ensure that consumption remains on a firm growth trajectory, and that the investment boom does not exacerbate the economy's structural imbalances," she said in a note to clients. (Additional reporting by Zhou Xin; Editing by Neil Fullick)
