Australia iron ore miners jump amid China moves talk
2009-06-10 22:18:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
An iron ore train arrives at the Fortescue Metals Group loading facility at Port Hedland, about 1,600 km (960 miles) north of Perth May 26, 2008. Picture taken May 26, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Tim Wimborne
Wed  EDT
), Australia's third-largest iron ore producer, jumped as much as 21 percent on Thursday amid market talk that it could be the focus of Chinese bid interest.
) scrapped a planned $19.5 billion tie-up with China's Chinalco in favor of an iron-ore tie-up with rival BHP Billiton Ltd (
"It's all to do with the BHP/Rio deal," said Chris Kimbers, a client adviser with Bell Potter Securities.
"Everybody is waiting now that the Chinese have missed out. They still need to have their iron ore supply. It's likely that they will come back and do another deal with Fortescue," he added.
Fortescue shares climbed as much as 21 percent to an eight-month high of A$4.27. It last traded at A$4.20, having soared about 52 percent since Friday.
China's Hunan Valin Iron and Steel already owns about 18 percent of Fortescue, and traders said it was likely that Valin would look to raise its stake.
) added 4.6 percent to A$2.05, Sundance Resources Ltd (
) rose 5.7 percent to A$0.19, Iron Ore Holdings (
"The collapse of the proposed US$19.5bn investment by Chinalco in Rio is likely to accelerate China's assessment of other investment alternatives," CLSA said in a report dated June 10.
But CLSA downgraded its recommendation on Fortescue to underperform, saying the upside from a production expansion to up to 120 million tonnes a year was reflected in the share price. ( Reporting by Denny Thomas; Editing by Jonathan Standing)
