Europe stocks close up 1.2 pct; commods, banks rise
2009-06-10 00:38:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares closed higher on Wednesday, with banks leading the movers, while energy stocks were given a boost by surging crude prices and miners rose as copper producer Antofagasta (
"It has been a good day, but I am not entirely sure if there is entirely any real justification behind it. There is no real news that has really caused anything to change - we all know that the U.S. banks have been trying to pay back taxpayers funds," said Peter Dixon, economist at Commerzbank.
"I think the market is going up in advance of a recovery. I am not sure if this is sustainable," he said.
), Banco Santander (
), UBS (
), Credit Suisse (
On Tuesday, the U.S. Treasury said that 10 of the nation's biggest banks were approved to pay back $68 billion in taxpayer funds under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) [ID:nWEN0231] [ID:nN09372318]
The banks will be free from restrictions on executive compensation, dividend payments and share purchases once they buy back their preferred shares from the U.S. government. [ID:nN09364348]
"The news about TARP is certainly one main reason why we're seeing strong gains here (in Europe), as this suggests the sector returns to stability," said Carsten Klude, strategist at M.M. Warburg in Germany.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was up 0.7 percent, Germany's DAX
gained 1.1 percent and France's CAC 40
), BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
) jumped 8.1 percent after it said prices may rise for its most profitable product, ferrochrome.
), BHP Billiton (
), Rio Tinto (
In China, newspapers said factory output rose in May at the fastest pace since last September, while official data showed British industrial output rose in April for the first time in more than a year and Italian output rose after 11 straight monthly falls. [ID:nLA1031268]
However, economists cautioned that difficulties still lay ahead across the globe.
In individual stock movers, Adidas ADSG.DE rose 7.3 percent after it said it expected sales in South Africa to grow at a double-digit rate in the years to come thanks to the football world cup in the country next year. [ID:nFAB013151]
On the downside, defensives were out of favour as investors turned towards cyclical stocks.
), Sanofi-Aventis (
) down 0.8 to 1 percent. (additional reporting by Christoph Steitz; Editing by Hans Peters)
