U.N. powers agree draft sanctions on North Korea
2009-06-10 11:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Seven key U.N. powers agreed on a draft U.N. resolution on Wednesday, ending weeks of wrangling over a plan to expand sanctions against North Korea for its recent nuclear test and weapons program, diplomats said.
The draft resolution, penned by the United States and endorsed by the five permanent Security Council members, plus Japan and South Korea, will be discussed at a closed-door meeting of the full 15-nation Security Council, U.N. diplomats told Reuters.
"We're expecting a vote on Friday," one of the diplomats said. Both spoke on condition of anonymity.
The agreement ended more than two weeks of closed-door negotiations that pitted five powers demanding tough sanctions against Pyongyang for its May nuclear test -- United States, Britain, France, Japan and South Korea -- against Russia and China, which argued against harsh penalties for North Korea.
The end result, Western diplomats said, was a watered-down version of an initially tough draft resolution that represents a moderate expansion of the sanctions imposed on Pyongyang after its first nuclear test in October 2006.
Until recently, those sanctions had been widely ignored and unenforced.
Chinese envoy Liu Zhenmin made clear to reporters that Beijing, the nearest North Korea has to a major ally, was satisfied with the draft resolution.
"I hope countries will endorse the text," he said.
Two diplomats from among the Security Council's five permanent members said Tuesday night they believed China had agreed with the U.S.-drafted text of a resolution within the last 24 hours, but Russia had raised new concerns.
Russia -- like China, the United States, Britain and France -- holds a veto in the council. U.N. diplomats told Reuters that Moscow had raised some concerns about the language in the draft resolution, but those concerns were resolved overnight.
With Russia and China on board, Western countries are hoping for a unanimous vote in favor of sanctions that would send a strong signal of international unity.
Council members Vietnam and Libya, however, are seen as potential hurdles to a unanimous vote, Western diplomats say.
