Global stocks surge on recovery hopes
2009-06-10 07:16:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks hit a one-week high on Wednesday, led by banking shares, while resource-related stocks also rallied after improving Asian economic data and a weak dollar pushed oil to a fresh 7-month high.
European banking stocks got support after the U.S. Treasury said on Tuesday that 10 big banks will repay $68 billion received under the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP, to the government.
Signs of a recovery in the global economy -- backed up on Wednesday by media reports of stronger factory Chinese output and rising Australian consumer confidence -- are fanning expectations that demand for commodities will recover, which would help to boost profits in resource-related stocks.
"Optimism on the recovery continues unabated and investors are looking on the positive side, and looking for indicators that show that the market has reached its bottom," said Grahame Exton, fund manager at Tilney Investment Management. MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS rose 1.3 percent, edging closer to a 7-1/2 month high set last week. The FTSEurofirst 300 index
Jim Stride, fund manager at AXA Investment Managers, said his funds are increasing the weighting on financial sector stocks to neutral from underweight.
"The actions taken by authorities to stabilize the financial sector appear to be working and that is the central precursor to a return to a normal economic condition... Our objective is to be broadly neutral in that (financial) area," he said.
Two Chinese newspapers reported that factory output in China rose in May at the fastest pace since September last year. If confirmed by official figures on Friday, this would be a major positive surprise. In Australia, a key measure of consumer confidence posted its biggest monthly rise in 22 years.
U.S. crude oil rose as high as $71.65, driven by a weaker dollar, an American Petroleum Institute report showing a larger-than-expected drop in crude oil stocks and a forecast by the U.S. Energy Information Administration that falling oil demand may have bottomed.
Oil has more than doubled from the low $30s hit in December, although prices are still more than 50 percent below a record high of $147.27 hit last July.
"The problem at the heart of the credit crisis... has not disappeared. Instead, much of the burden has been transferred from the private to the public sector. As a consequence, government borrowing is surging," Dirk Wiedmann, head of investments at Rothschild Private Banking & Trust, said in a note.
(Additional reporting by Simon Falush; Editing by Victoria Main)
