UPDATE 2-OZ Minerals may get new proposal as China fumes
2009-06-09 23:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian bank Macquarie may trump a Chinese bid for assets of debt-heavy miner OZ Minerals (
), a daily said on Wednesday, which could stoke further anger in China after its massive deal with Rio Tinto (
However, OZ Minerals said it had not received any new offers other than those it had already rejected as inferior to its $1.2 billion deal to sell most of its assets to China's Minmetals.
) is set to offer a new A$1.4 billion ($1.11 billion) proposal to recapitalise OZ Minerals, the Australian Financial Review said, just a day before OZ shareholders vote on the Minmetals deal.
OZ Minerals is so far sticking to the Minmetals deal as the surest way out of its debt problems, with A$1.1 billion in bank loans due by the end of this month. However, firmer commodity prices and a rally in its shares have drawn alternative offers.
The new Macquarie proposal would involve a share placement and rights issue worth up to A$1.4 billion, both underwritten, the Review said. The injection of new equity would allow the company to pay down its debt and keep its assets.
"We have had discussions but like all things it's got to be a firm position before we can commit," said Paul Xiradis, chief executive of fund manager Ausbil Dexia.
"But for it to work, it has to be some form of equity raising," he added. Xiradis said his fund owned less than 5 percent of OZ Minerals, but declined to give the exact holding.
If successful, the Macquarie proposal would rub salt into fresh Chinese wounds after a similar combination of events killed Anglo-Australian miner Rio Tinto's planned $19.5 billion tie-up with Chinalco, another firm owned by Beijing.
"Certainly in today's market the (Minmetals) proposition ... isn't as attractive. If funding can be obtained elsewhere in the form of equity, that would make a bit of sense for the board to consider," Xiradis said.
"Time is running out, either it happens very, very shortly or it won't happen," he added.
OZ shares were firmer at A$0.915, lagging a 1.7 percent rise in the benchmark S&P/ASX 200 index .AXJO, suggesting the market was sceptical that a last-minute recap plan would emerge.
Rio Tinto, emboldened by a sharp rally in its own share price, called off the Chinalco deal last Friday and instead shocked Beijing by forging a new iron ore alliance with mining rival BHP Billiton (
On Wednesday, China's official Xinhua news agency slammed Rio Tinto's "perfidy" for scrapping the deal with Chinalco, saying the agreement fell apart due to "possible political prejudice".
OZ Minerals shares have surged 73 percent since the miner and Minmetals agreed a revised deal on April 1, underpinned by a recovery in prices for OZ Minerals' main metals, zinc and copper.
A Minmetals spokesman in Australia said its offer was the best on the table. "Our proposal continues to offer certainty to shareholders and other stakeholders," he said.
OZ Minerals has already rejected two recapitalisation proposals, one from investment advisory firm RFC Group and Royal Bank of Canada (
), and the other reported by local media to be from either Macquarie or Morgan Stanley (
). (Writing by Mark Bendeich; Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
