TREASURIES-Shorter bonds surge on strong auction
2009-06-09 16:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Short-dated Treasuries rallied on Tuesday, pulling yields back from recent seven-month highs after a solid auction of three-year notes diminished some worries over the massive load of U.S. debt being issued this year.
The Treasury's $35 billion sale of three-year notes drew robust demand and investors were heartened by a strong measure of foreign participation, giving maturities in the two-to-seven-year range a strong boost.
Longer dated issues were less fortunate, however, with that part of the market struggling as it awaits its big test in the form of $19 billion in 10-year notes for sale on Wednesday and $11 billion in 30-year bonds on Thursday.
"You are seeing some people setting up for the next auction with this one out of the way," said John Canavan, market strategist with Stone & McCarthy Research Associates in Princeton, New Jersey.
"This is a good way to kick off this week's auctions," Canavan added about the three-year results.
Existing three-year Treasury note US3YT=RR rallied 7/32 in price, pushing the yield down to 1.89 percent from 1.97 percent late on Monday. Before the auction it was up 4/32.
By contrast, the 30-year long bond US30YT=RR fell more than a full point on the day during afternoon trade. It was last down 19/32, pushing yields up to 4.65 percent from 4.61 percent at Monday's close.
The benchmark 10-year Treasury note US10YT=RR was last up 2/32, yielding 3.86 percent versus 3.87 percent at Monday's close.
Bonds with maturities up to 5.5-years saw very high volume compared to their 30-day averages, according to data on Tradeweb.
Tuesday's three-year auction was the first installment of a total of $65 billion worth of coupon securities set to come to market this week.
"We've seen maybe the market just kind of turn," said Suvrat Prakash, U.S. interest rate strategist with BNP Paribas in New York. "Maybe the selloff is seen as having run out of legs for now."
The high yield at the auction was the highest since May 2007, when it was 4.574 percent.
Despite the rise in the yield at the auction, other signs were positive. The bid-to-cover ratio of overall demand was 2.82, up from 2.66 at a sale in May and the average of 2.49 over the seven previous sales.
It was the highest bid-to-cover since November 2008, when three-year notes were reintroduced after being mothballed.
The indirect bidder category, a proxy for foreign demand, was a robust 43.6 percent -- the highest since February and up from an average of about 37 over the last seven auctions.
Overseas central banks, particularly in Asia, have been huge buyers of U.S. debt in recent years and own more than a quarter of marketable Treasuries. China recently overtook Japan as the biggest such buyer.
Indications of their interest in Treasury auctions are always watched closely, particularly after investors began to wonder last month whether the United States' prized AAA credit rating may be living on borrowed time.
However, Tuesday's auction results appeared to give no cause for concern about the marketability of U.S. debt, though the longer dated issues later in the week will be a bigger test.
Prakash, at BNP Paribas, added: "The auction was clearly firmer than expected...strong bidding from overseas central banks."
(Additional reporting by Richard Leong, Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
