UPDATE 1-Bain, FountainVest bid for Citi's China medical co
2009-06-09 06:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Global and Chinese private equity funds including Bain Capital and FountainVest Partners have submitted bids to buy into a Chinese medical device maker backed by Citigroup (
), sources said on Tuesday.
Citi Venture Capital International (CVCI) bought about a 70 percent stake in Landwind, a diagnostic imaging equipment distributor and manufacturer, for about S$127 million ($87 million) in 2007, when the Chinese company decided to delist from the Singapore market, according to Singapore media reports.
Bain and FountainVest were among eight first-round bidders for a major stake in Landwind. Others included several domestic funds, which had also submitted formal bids, said sources with direct knowledge of the deal.
Landwind has a nationwide network in China of more than 20 sales offices with a focus on medical diagnostic imaging devices, which are supported by more than 50 distributors and 200 resellers, according to CVCI's website (www.citigroupai.com).
The sources said buyers were expected to pay a premium over the Citi deal, but they declined to give a specific estimate of the deal size since the deal structure was not yet fixed.
Bain, FountainVest, Citigroup and Landwind all declined to comment. The sources declined to be identified as the bidding process is confidential.
U.S. private equity giant Bain is keen to invest in China's consumer-driven sectors despite the global financial crisis. Last week, Bain agreed to buy into China's top home appliance retailer GOME (
), Reuters reported. [ID:nHKG3512]
FountainVest, launched late last year, is a $1 billion China-dedicated fund backed by Singapore's sovereign wealth fund Temasek Holdings [TEM.UL]. [ID:nSHA102967]
CVCI plans to sell part of its 70 percent stake in Landwind and will remain as a minority shareholder of the Chinese company, said one of the sources.
Landwind also plans to issue new shares or convertible bonds to a new investor, who is expected to be the new controlling shareholder of the company after the deal, the source said.
The Chinese government has said it will reform its public health care and pension systems, which dealmakers expect will boost business growth of medical-related companies as a result. ($1=1.460 Singapore Dollar)
(Additional reporting by Samuel Shen in Shanghai; Editing by Chris Lewis)
