China agrees South China Sea talks amid new row with Manila
2013-06-30 08:11:00.0
(Reuters) - China agreed to hold formal talks with Southeast Asian nations on a plan to ease maritime tensions on Sunday as the Philippines accused it of causing "increasing militarization" of the South China Sea, one of Asia's naval flashpoints.
The rebuke by Philippine Foreign Minister Albert del Rosario at a regional summit in Brunei came a day after China's state media warned of an inevitable "counterstrike" against the Philippines if it continued to provoke Beijing.
China agreed to hold "official consultations" on a proposed Code of Conduct (CoC) governing naval actions at a meeting with ASEAN in China in September, a step that Thailand's foreign minister hailed as "very significant".
The two sides had already agreed to hold the foreign ministers' meeting, which will follow a special ASEAN ministers' gathering on the South China Sea issue in Thailand in August.
"We agreed to maritime cooperation to make our surrounding sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation," Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi told reporters in Brunei.
In the latest stand-off, the Philippines accused China of encroaching on its territory after three Chinese ships converged just 5 nautical miles from a small reef where the Philippines maintains a small military force.
This month the Philippines moved more troops and supplies to the reef, which is within its 200-nautical mile economic exclusion zone. China, which does not recognize the zone, condemned it as an "illegal occupation".
"The statement on counterstrike is an irresponsible one. We condemn any threats of use of force," Del Rosario told reporters following a meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers.
He said the ministers had discussed China's ongoing "illegal" occupation of the Scarborough Shoal, which is just 124 nautical miles of the Philippine coast.
The worsening dispute comes as Philippine-ally the United States, which says it has a national interest in freedom of navigation in the South China Sea, shifts its military attention back to Asia. Secretary of State John Kerry is due to arrive in Brunei on Monday to join the regional summit.
Critics say China is intent on cementing its claims over the sea through its superior and growing naval might, and has little interest in rushing to agree a code of conduct with ASEAN nations, four of which have competing claims.
Divisions among ASEAN over the maritime dispute burst into the open a year ago when a summit chaired by Chinese ally Cambodia failed to issue a closing communiqu¨¦ for the first time in the group's 45-year history.
(Additional reporting by Megha Rajagopalan; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Obviously the Chinese want to steal other people¡¯s property whenever possible. They become more like the US every day.
Jun 30, 20135:19am EDT--
Obviously the Chinese want to steal other people¡¯s property whenever possible. They become more like the US every day.
Jun 30, 20135:19am EDT--
What people don¡¯t realize, the next great War will take place in the Asian region. China has been a rising Star for some time now and the neighbors don¡¯t like it. When that region goes, it will push the populous of Earth into the next World War and give the entire World the reboot it so desperately needs.
Jun 30, 20135:49am EDT--
