UPDATE 1-S.Korea's KNOC plans debut dollar bond sale -source
2009-06-09 04:54:00.0
(Reuters) - State-owned Korea National Oil Corp (KNOC) has hired six banks to arrange its debut dollar bond sale, a source with direct knowledge of the deal said on Tuesday.
KNOC is expected to become the latest state-owned South Korean firm to tap overseas debt markets. (For list of upcoming debt sales from Asia, see [EUB/ASIA])
Korea Hydro Nuclear Power, part of electricity provider Korea Electric Power Corp (KEPCO) (
), has attracted strong demand for an ongoing sale of benchmark five-year dollar bonds expected to price as early as later on Tuesday. [ID:nHKG252224]
KNOC has hired Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, Barclays Capital, BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, JPMorgan, and Korea Development Bank to arrange the offering, said the source, declining to be identified ahead of a formal announcement.
The oil and exploration firm has not yet decided on the timing or on the details of an offering, said the source.
The firm is rated "A" by Standard's & Poor's and "A2" by Moody's Investors, both at the sixth-highest investment-grade rating and in line with South Korea's sovereign rating.
KNOC is an aggressive buyer of foreign assets as part of efforts by South Korea, the world's fifth-biggest importer of crude oil, to increase its reserves.
In February KNOC and Colombia's Ecopetrol ECO.CN (
) jointly bought Petro-Tech, a privately held U.S. oil firm with offshore assets in Peru, for $900 million. KNOC has also made a $2.1 billion investment in Kurdish oil fields in Iraq.
, but the currency has since rebounded sharply amid improving confidence about Asia's fourth-largest economy.
Other Asian mining and oil giants such as from China, have also struck deals overseas this year as they seek to secure supply, and as distressed firms -- suffering from the commodity price slump earlier in the year -- hive off quality assets.
KNOC will not be alone in tapping debt markets overseas from South Korea, according to analysts.
KEPCO itself and some of its units are also expected to follow Korea Hydro, while state-run lenders such as Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) are expected to return to overseas markets after already raising debt early this year. (Reporting by Rafael Nam and Joseph Chaney; Editing by Ken Wills)
