Jailed journalists complicate U.S.-North Korea dispute
2009-06-09 12:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Two U.S. journalists jailed by North Korea may become bargaining chips in an escalating nuclear standoff with Pyongyang, although the Obama administration hopes to keep the two issues separate.
Aides to President Barack Obama have been working behind the scenes to secure the release of the two women, Laura Ling and Euna Lee. North Korea sentenced them on Monday to 12 years of hard labor.
"Part of what the North Koreans may be interested in doing is using the journalists and their release as a way of mitigating a possible response at the U.N. Security Council," said Scott Snyder, a Korea expert at the U.S.-based Asia Foundation development assistance organization.
"I'm sure the North Koreans perceive themselves as having great leverage with two Americans in their hands," Snyder said.
Snyder said the Obama administration will need to walk a fine line, attempting to play down the perception that North Korea has leverage "without devaluing the objective" of achieving the return of the journalists.
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in an interview with ABC News that was aired on Sunday, said the administration did not want the issue of the journalists "pulled into the political issues that we have with North Korea or the concerns that are being expressed in the United Nations Security Council."
"This is separate. It is a humanitarian issue," Clinton said.
White House spokesman Robert Gibbs echoed that comment on Monday, saying, "Their detainment is not something that we've linked to other issues. And we hope the North Koreans don't do that either."
GORE OR RICHARDSON?
Richardson, who served as ambassador to the United Nations and energy secretary in the Clinton administration, has been tapped previously for high-level talks with North Korea. In 1996, he played a key role in securing the release of a U.S. citizen arrested for crossing into North Korea.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il is widely believed to have suffered a stroke last year, and there is speculation that his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, may be in line to succeed him.
The nuclear and missile tests indicate that North Korea's leaders are calculating that the durability of their grip on power hinges on being recognized as a "de facto nuclear power," former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger wrote in an opinion piece in the Washington Post on Monday.
Nicholas Szechenyi, a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank, said Pyongyang may be seeking to escalate tensions to see how the United States and the international community will respond.
"This situation with the journalists complicates an already delicate situation and gives the North Koreans an opportunity to be even more uncooperative," Szechenyi added.
(Additional reporting by Sue Pleming in Washington and Louis Charbonneau at the United Nations; Editing by Will Dunham)
