Mengniu in buyout talks with KKR-backed China Modern Dairy: report
2012-08-14 02:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Aug 8 2012
Mon, Jul 30 2012
Mon, Jul 23 2012
Tue  EDT
) has held talks about buying China's largest raw milk producer, KKR & Co-backed China Modern Dairy Holdings Ltd (
), a media report said on Tuesday.
) and Mengniu Dairy's largest shareholder, China's state-owned COFCO Corp, have been involved in the talks, Bloomberg said, citing people with knowledge with the matter.
Officials from China Modern Dairy and Mengniu, the country's top dairy products producer, were not available for comment. KKR declined to comment.
Shares in China Modern Dairy extended gains to trade up as much as 18 percent on Tuesday, hitting HK$2.37, its highest since March, and valuing the company at about $1.5 billion, according to Thomson Reuters data.
The shares stood at HK$2.23 as at 0614 GMT, up nearly 11 percent and outperforming a 0.6 percent gain in the benchmark Hang Seng Index
Modern Dairy, which supplies most of its milk to Mengniu Dairy, has said it aims to have 30 farms by 2015, each with 10,000-40,000 cows. A deal would give Mengniu more control over its milk supply.
China's dairy market remains in its infancy, with consumption of dairy products growing at an annual compound rate of 20 percent, a stark contrast to U.S. and European markets where demand has been shrinking in the past decade.
Demand for high quality milk is increasing rapidly, especially in the wake of a massive industry scandal in 2008, when melamine-tainted milk powder was blamed for the deaths of at least six children.
The scandal hit major dairy product makers including Mengniu, Bright Dairy & Food Co Ltd (
(Reporting by Donny Kwok; Additional reporting by Stephen Aldred; Editing by Richard Pullin)
