UPDATE 2-Trade bloc says global crisis could crush Africa
2009-06-08 10:42:00.0
(Reuters) - African states must work together so that the global economic crisis does not crush them, trade bloc COMESA said on Monday.
Global slowdown has brought an abrupt end to the African expansion of the last five years, tipping some mining-reliant economies into recession and others towards marginal rates of growth.
"Although it may appear as if it is far from us, the truth is that recession is knocking on our door," Swaziland's King Mswati III said after a Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) summit.
"If we fail to work together, the economic crisis will crush us. We can expect a fall in foreign direct investment. For far too long, we have been sending our raw materials abroad and buying finished products at a higher price," he said.
Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe launched a new customs union at the gathering, hoping it will boost investment and strengthen economic ties on the world's poorest continent.
Under the union, the 19 members of COMESA, stretching from Swaziland in the south to Egypt in the north, will impose the same tariffs on goods from outside the region.
But Zimbabwe, hit hard by years of hyperinflation and economic contraction, is unlikely to immediately benefit from the customs union. Zimbabwe has more than half of its 12 million people surviving on food handouts from aid groups.
Mugabe's new unity government with rival Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai is battling to raise funds for its $8.3 billion recovery programme. So far, the administration has raised over $1 billion in credit lines for the private sector from African institutions, including COMESA.
Hosting the summit could boost the standing of Mugabe, whom critics have accused of wrecking Zimbabwe's economy.
In Amsterdam, Tsvangirai said he was trying to "reconnect with the international community" on his first major trip since the unity government was formed.
Tsvangirai, who will be in Britain, France, Sweden and Brussels, seat of the 27-nation European Union, is also scheduled to meet U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington.
COMESA took a tough stand on Madagascar, saying military intervention could be an option to restore democracy. It condemned the military-backed opposition revolt which ousted Madagascar's President Marc Ravalomanana in March. (cris.chinaka@reuters.com; +263 4 799112-5) (For full Reuters Africa coverage and to have your say on the top issues, visit:
