Ping An, Shenzhen Bank in tie-up talks: sources
2009-06-08 10:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Ping An Insurance (Group) (
) are in talks over a potential tie-up, sources close to the deal said, as the foreign-controlled Shenzhen bank looks for a long-term strategic partner.
A tie-up being discussed as recently as a week ago would see Shenzhen Development Bank issue new shares, which Ping An would then buy to become the lender's largest stakeholder, a source close to Shenzhen Development Bank said, asking not to be named.
A successful tie-up could eventually lead to a merger of Shenzhen Development Bank with Ping An's own smaller bank, industry experts said.
"But this deal will be very difficult to achieve," said the source.
Both Ping An and Shenzhen Development Bank's shares were suspended on Monday.
Late on Monday, Ping An said in a statement on the Chinese version of the Hong Kong stock exchange website that it is currently in discussions about a major transaction, and its shares will remain suspended until the matter is resolved.
Shenzhen Development Bank has been seeking new investors as U.S. private equity firm TPG Capital TPG.UL, the biggest shareholder, wants to sell its 17 percent ownership as a lock-up of shares lapses next year.
Ping An, the world's second-biggest insurer by market value, aims to boost its banking business and become a financial conglomerate.
"A tie-up between Ping An and Shenzhen Bank would be a win-win situation," said Zhang Jixiu, analyst at Bohai Securities Co. "TPG will sell its majority ownership sooner or later, while Ping An is very ambitious in growing its small banking unit. They're also both based in Shenzhen, so it's a good match."
She added that a new share placement by Shenzhen Bank would be likely as the lender needs fresh capital to support expansion. The bank's capital adequacy ratio stood at 8.53 percent at end-March, lower than the 10 percent regulatory requirement for mid-sized listed lenders.
Another source at one of the companies said the two were negotiating a tie-up, but talks were still at an early stage, while an investment banking source close to the deal confirmed the talks, but did not provide more details.
Shenzhen Development Bank shares have more than doubled this year, giving it a market capitalization of $9 billion, according to Reuters data. The bank said in a statement to the Shenzhen Stock Exchange that trading in its shares would resume after related announcements by June 13.
Ping An declined to comment, but said it would make an announcement in due course. Both Ping An's (
) China- and Hong Kong-listed shares were suspended. Based on its last traded price, Ping An has a market value of $51 billion.
Shenzhen Development Bank's share price surge has been fueled partly by months of market speculation that it has been in talks with potential investors as TPG plans to exit.
TPG's Newbridge Capital fund originally bought 18 percent of the bank in 2004 for $155 million as a financial, rather than long-term strategic stakeholder.
"A restructuring deal between Ping An and Shenzhen Bank wouldn't surprise me at all," said Chen Jiwu, president of private asset manager Shanghai Vstone Capital Co, a Ping An shareholder.
"TPG is merely a financial investor and is eager to pull out of Shenzhen Bank, while Ping An has been looking to strengthen its banking business."
Ping An Chairman Peter Ma, aiming to build a financial supermarket, plans to grow banking, asset management and insurance as the group's three pillars of business in five years.
Richard Jackson, head of Ping An's banking unit, told Reuters in March that Ping An Bank would consider acquisitions to boost its distribution network and scale. Ping An lost a bid for control of Guangdong Development Bank to Citigroup (
(Additional reporting by Carolyn Qu, George Chen, and Joseph Chaney in Hong Kong, and Edmund Klamann in Shanghai; Editing by David Cowell)
