UPDATE 3-Silvercorp launches unsolicited bid for Klondex
2009-06-08 16:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Canada's Silvercorp Metals Inc (
) on Monday launched an unsolicited, all-stock bid for Klondex Mines Ltd (
In a separate deal, Medoro Resources Ltd MRS.V has agreed to acquire cash-strapped Colombia Goldfields GOL.TO. The deal is contingent on Colombia Goldfields reaching agreements with its key creditors on the repayment of outstanding debt.
Vancouver, British Columbia-based Silvercorp said Klondex shareholders will be entitled to receive 0.50 common shares of Silvercorp for each Klondex common share validly tendered to the offer.
Based on Friday's close, the offer value Klondex at C$2.18 per share, a 59 percent premium to Friday's closing price.
"We were unsuccessful in our efforts to engage Klondex in discussions regarding a negotiated transaction, and as a result we are presenting our proposal directly to Klondex shareholders," Silvercorp Chief Executive Rui Feng said in a statement.
Silvercorp, which is involved in the acquisition and exploration of silver-related properties in China, said the deal is expected to be accretive to its net asset value per share.
Klondex, founded in 1974, is engaged in acquiring, exploring and developing gold and silver properties in Nevada. Its flagship asset is the 100 percent owned Fire Creek Property, in Nevada.
Due to tight credit markets Klondex has substantially reduced its capital spending in 2009, in order to preserve capital.
"We are pleased that the industry has begun to recognize the substantial value that we have built at Fire Creek but are surprised by the haste of Silvercorp in making this unilateral bid for our prized assets," said William Solloway, president of Klondex, in a statement.
Shares of Klondex closed up rose more than 40 percent at C$1.95 on Monday, while those of Silvercorp fell more than 12 percent to C$3.82.
Medoro said it has signed a binding agreement with Colombia Goldfields to acquire all of its outstanding shares, in exchange for common shares and warrants of Medoro.
Toronto-based Medoro will issue 29.3 million shares and 940,720 warrants to the stockholders of Colombia Goldfields in exchange for the 104.5 million outstanding shares of Colombia Goldfields.
The deal is subject to regulatory approval and stockholder approval by Colombia Goldfields. On closing, Colombia Goldfields' shareholders will own about 25 percent of Medoro based upon Medoro's issued and outstanding shares as of today.
Colombia Goldfields has been developing a large gold resource in Colombia, South America.
In March, Colombia Goldfields said it was halting drilling activities at the site due to capital constraints. It also said it had begun evaluating strategic options, in a bid to address its short-term and long-term project development goals.
Colombia Goldfields shares closed at 6 Canadian cents on Friday on the Toronto Stock Exchange, while those of Medoro closed at 17 Canadian cents on the TSX Venture Exchange. ($1=$1.11 Canadian) (Reporting by Euan Rocha; Additional reporting by Koustav Samanta in Bangalore)
