Global airlines eye consolidation amid crisis
2009-06-08 09:37:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Jun 9 2009
Tue, Jun 9 2009
Mon, Jun 8 2009
Mon, Jun 8 2009
Mon, Jun 8 2009
Mon  EDT
), the world's leading carrier by market value, is still eyeing acquisitions in China and India, where demand for air travel is seen growing in coming years as consumers start to have more disposable income.
Airplane maker Airbus's (
"I think more consolidation is definitely a possibility," Leahy said in an interview.
) Air Lines swallowed rival Northwest Airlines in October to create the world's largest airline.
Airlines in Europe went through a spurt of mergers and acquisitions last year, in which Deutsche Lufthansa (
British Airways' BAY.L CEO Willie Walsh said on Monday he was confident on ongoing merger talks with Iberia IBLA.MC after the Spanish carrier warned last week it had alternative options to a tie-up with the British carrier.
Carriers in Europe are facing 2009 losses of $1.8 billion as demand for premium services in all markets they serve collapsed, the International Air Transport Association has said.
In Asia, the picture is more bleak as carriers there are expected to post bigger losses than their peers.
Global airlines will likely post $9 billion of losses this year, of which about $3.3 billion will come from Asia-Pacific carriers, IATA said.
It had once estimated that China's international passenger traffic would grow an average of 8.8 percent per year until 2011, outpacing international growth of 5.1 percent.
But after years of double-digit growth, China's airlines are now facing strong headwinds from the global financial crisis. China's top three carriers, including Air China (
), lost more than $4 billion in 2008.
Singapore Airlines said last month it had put on hold plans to expand into China, saying it would not revive stalled talks for an investment in China Eastern Airlines (
"We're still interested in the consolidation of the industry," CEO Chew Choon Seng told Reuters in an interview, pointing to China and India as markets he was most keen on.
In a fresh twist, shares of China Eastern Airlines and smaller Shanghai Airlines 600591.SS were suspended after media said the two loss-making carriers were close to a merger deal.
Such a deal would give the combined carriers more than half of the market share in Shanghai, a city fiercely competed over by domestic and foreign carriers.
(Additional reporting by Sara Webb, Jean Yoon, Donny Kwok and Fang Yan, Writing by Maria Sheahan; Editing by David Cowell)
