China says need balanced U.N. resolution on North Korea
2009-06-07 23:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's foreign minister on Sunday called for a strong U.N. Security Council resolution against North Korea after its latest nuclear test, but his Chinese counterpart said a "balanced" resolution must be adopted.
Japan's Hirofumi Nakasone and China's Yang Jiechi met in Tokyo amid rising tension after North Korea fired a long-range rocket over Japan in April followed by a nuclear test in May.
U.N. diplomats in New York have been in closed-door negotiations for over a week, but the five permanent Security Council members -- including China -- and Japan had yet to produce a deal on the sanctions resolution against North Korea.
"The Security Council must adopt a resolution with a strong content that will make North Korea understand that a nuclear test is not acceptable," a Japanese foreign ministry official quoted Nakasone as telling Yang.
Yang told Nakasone: "China agrees for an appropriate and balanced Security Council resolution to be passed as swiftly as possible," the Japanese foreign ministry official said.
Traditionally, China and Russia have been reluctant to back sanctions, but the two permanent members of the Security Council have said they want a "convincing response" to North Korea's nuclear test from the Security Council.
Beijing, fearing destabilization of the region and a flood of refugees from the North if order breaks down, may not be so forceful.
One sensitive issue facing the council is the inspection of cargo going in and out of the North, and China was unhappy about language in a draft resolution calling for inspection of vessels with North Korean cargo that might constitute a violation of a partial trade and arms embargo against Pyongyang, diplomats said.
Nakasone and Yang's meeting followed ministerial-level economic talks in Tokyo on Sunday between Japan and China, the world's second and third largest economies.
The two Asian giants agreed to cooperate on issues such as working to revive the world economy and holding meetings to discuss intellectual property protection, but failed to resolve the issue of Beijing's plan to certify high-tech information security products.
