FACTBOX: A look at North's Korea's international finances
2009-06-08 12:06:00.0
(Reuters) - World powers are looking at ways to punish North Korea for its nuclear test in late May but have limited options because the state's economy has already been badly weakened by years of sanctions and mismanagement.
Following is a look at the international finances of North Korea, whose yearly GDP is about $20 billion, according to estimates by the South's Bank of Korea.
The U.S. Treasury brought North Korea's international finances to a virtual halt in 2005 by cracking down on a Macau bank suspected of aiding the North's illicit financial activities. Other banks, worried about being snared by U.S. financial authorities, steered clear of the North's money.
The impact was seen as especially painful for the country's leadership, which was unable to move money around easily.
North Korea's two biggest trade partners are China, with $2 billion in annual trade, and South Korea, with about $1.8 billion.
The neighbours are worried about instability in the North spilling over, and are unlikely to push for measures designed to topple Pyongyang's leaders.
Studies indicate that trade with North Korea did not decline after U.N. sanctions were imposed in 2006 following Pyongyang's only other nuclear test.
Beijing, the closest Pyongyang can claim as a major ally, is reluctant to accept any new sanctions that would significantly undercut its economic ties to North Korea or push an already weak economy into collapse.
South Korea too is worried about sudden collapse in North Korea and the estimated bill of $1 trillion to absorb its destitute neighbor, which could wreck its own economy.
North Korea has large mineral deposits and its exports to China include lead, zinc ore and coal. Its exports to South Korea are mostly from a joint industrial park in the North's city of Kaesong.
Estimates say the North's yearly exports are valued at about $920 million to $1.7 billion. They include textiles, foodstuffs and fisheries products.
The North, seen by the global business community as a high risk partner, has a few small joint ventures including a mobile telephone deal with Egypt's Orascom Telecom. Chinese companies dominate the limited foreign investment that does exist.
The United States and others have said they suspect North Korea of selling arms, missile parts and proliferating nuclear know-how in violation of U.N. measures.
They have also accused the North Korea of producing and selling narcotics, printing fake U.S. currency and manufacturing counterfeit cigarettes.
(Reporting by Jon Herskovitz and Kim Junghyun in Seoul and Lucy Hornby in Beijing; Editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
