RPT-EXCLUSIVE-Fast-growing Malawi wants investors-president
2009-06-08 03:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Malawi may be a poor country but its economy is growing fast and President Bingu wa Mutharika, in his second term in office, wants to lure investors to help diversify away from tobacco and ensure stability.
In an interview with Reuters, Wa Mutharika said he would not change the constitution to stay in power, possibly reducing chances of new standoffs with opponents that could unnerve investors and Western donors.
"I have said that democracy is a relay race, I have run my baton for five years and now people of Malawi have given me another five years and after that, I must happily hand over to somebody," he said.
Wa Mutharika, sworn in last month, had based his election campaign on a record of making Malawi a net food exporter and delivering three years of growth above 7 percent in the country of 13 million.
"We are stable, we have a stable economy, the interest rates are predictable, inflation is low and I intend to bring it down to four or five percent in the next three to four years," he said.
The Economist Intelligence Unit has forecast Malawi will have the world's fastest growing economy after Qatar this year, but annual gross domestic product is estimated at only $313 per capita and AIDS has orphaned about one million children.
That may be one reason why wa Mutharika wants to diversify away from the southern African nation's mainstay tobacco, accounting for more than 70 percent of exports and 15 percent of its gross domestic product. For the last two years low prices have led to cuts in production.
"Malawi cannot continue to rely on tobacco, because for one thing the (anti-smoking) lobbying is still very strong," he said.
"But even if that were not the case, you cannot depend on one commodity, and so we will be diversifying and we are looking at sugar in a big way."
Malawi is also banking on rice to boost foreign exchange earnings but must quickly take advantage of opportunities in world markets, said wa Mutharika.
"There is heavy demand as a result of the shortage of rice globally. At the moment the major rice producers like India, Pakistan, Indonesia and the People's Republic of China and Malaysia are not producing enough," said wa Mutharika.
Wa Mutharika's success may depend on how he manages Malawi's stormy politics, even though his Democratic Progressive Party won 114 of the 193 parliamentary seats.
A protracted power struggle between Muluzi and wa Mutharika almost paralysed parliament, prompting a failed impeachment bid and allegations of a coup plot. This unnerved Western donors who provide more than one third of budget financing for the country which recently began producing uranium.
Hailed as a hero in 1994 for removing dictator Kamuzu Banda, Muluzi stepped down a decade later after unsuccessfully trying to change the constitution to allow him to stand again.
The economy grew by an estimated 9.7 percent in 2008, boosted by expansion of the telecommunication industry, high tobacco sales and a strong maize harvest, according to the International Monetary Fund.
Malawi is one of the countries hardest hit by HIV/AIDS. But it has made progress since 2004, when it started to offer free antiretroviral therapy. Wa Mutharika predicted more gains.
