CCB targets Brazil, India, Russia for offices
2009-06-07 19:06:00.0
CCB targets Brazil, India, Russia for offices | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
CCB targets Brazil, India, Russia for offices
Wed, Jun 10 2009
Wed, Jun 10 2009
Wed, Jun 10 2009
Tue, Jun 9 2009
Mon, Jun 8 2009
Chairman of state-controlled China Construction Bank (CCB) Guo Shuqing poses for a portrait in New York June 7, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Eric Thayer
Sun  EDT
), the world's second-biggest bank by market value, would like to set up branch offices in fellow BRIC nations Brazil, India and Russia, its chairman Guo Shuqing said on Sunday.
Guo, who attended ceremonies in the past week to mark CCB's establishment of a subsidiary in London and a branch in New York, said that altogether the bank may add about 10 branches around the world in the next three years.
Next on its list are upgrading a representative office in Sydney, Australia into a branch, and setting up a bank in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
But he made it clear that the bank, whose second-largest shareholder is Bank of America (
) with about 11 percent of its H shares, is going to remain almost 100 percent focused on China or those who want to do business with China.
He said that he expects further rationalization in the finance sectors in the U.S. and Europe, and he is still concerned about the potential impact of further house price weakness and the rising jobless rate on U.S. banks.
"I think that in the developed countries, the financial sector is overdeveloped, there is overbanking," he said, adding that in both employment and output he expected the sector to play a significantly smaller role in the future.
Guo said that if CCB did buy anything overseas it would most likely be a small bank in an emerging market. Even Taiwan banking, he said, was probably too crowded to consider buying another bank.
When asked about establishing branches in Brazil, India and Russia, he said: "Yes, we certainly want to."
Guo said that CCB is sticking by its target of achieving net profit this year of about the same level as last year, when the bank reported it rose 34.1 percent to 92.6 billion yuan ($13.6 billion).
He is confident about the target despite CCB's earnings dropping 18.3 percent in the first quarter of this year because of provisions for loan losses and a drop in net interest income due to a slide in interest rates.
He said the bank will compensate through new loan growth, cost reductions, and an increase in fee income.
Guo said he is proud that CCB has been able to reduce its ratio of non-performing loans to just 1.9 percent in the first quarter from 2.2 percent in the final quarter of last year, and said he expects to keep the ratio below 2 percent for the rest of the year.
He credited the bank's introduction in recent years of tough risk controls and it's focus on "knowing your customer."
Guo said that the Chinese government's stimulus spending on infrastructure projects was clearly helping the Chinese economy to weather the global downturn. It also helps CCB, which specializes in financing of major infrastructure projects, such as new roads and rail lines.
But he said there is a need for further moves to restructure the Chinese economy to improve infrastructure for the manufacturing industry, particularly in inland provinces.
Guo, who is a former head of China's foreign exchange administration, said that the government should also speed up the reform of the nation's social security, education and health systems so that the gap in opportunities between the rural poor and those living in cities could be narrowed.
"I think we need further actions, no matter whether you call that a stimulus package or not," he said.
(Reporting by Martin Howell; Editing Bernard Orr)
