Latest on th
2009-06-05 11:40:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
To see Reuters' Dealzone blog, click on:
While Wall Street banks pick themselves up from the mat and start putting together the billions they owe Washington for having saved the country's financial system from utter ruin, the government's long knives appear to still be plenty sharp for the two biggest casualties, Citigroup (
Rio Tinto's (
) agreement to scrap its refinancing deal with Chinese shareholder Chinalco [ALUMI.UL], join its iron interests in Australia with arch rival BHP Billiton (
) and raise $15 billion from investors is a remarkable coup, solving many of the miner's problems.
After weeks of speculation, miner Rio Tinto finally walked away from its $19.5 billion Chinaclo tie-up, paying a $195 million break-up fee.
Cowdery's first move?
It's been six months since insurance entrepreneur Clive Cowdery raised a 600 million pound war chest for acquisitions.
Distressed debt investors seek to pick out the diamonds in the rough, the good companies that can be turned around given a fair wind and the right management and capital structure.
"This is not North Korea," Alexander Denner, managing director of Icahn Partners, called out after Bruce Ross, Biogen's(
) chairman, called a surprise midday recess.
) Chief Executive Rob Templeman told Reuters the company will price its 323 million pound rights issue at a modest discount, while Chinese state-owned metals firm Chinalco may revise its planned $19.5 billion investment in miner Rio Tinto before a June 14 deadline, according to two sources close to the deal we talked to.
Blackberry maker's CEO sends letters of reference to sway NHL
Jim Balsillie, the co-CEO of BlackBerry maker Research In Motion RIM.TO desperately wants a National Hockey League franchise to relocate to his native Southern Ontario.
Can this hybrid jump-start the IPO market?
One of the biggest criticisms made of the IPO process is that investment banks turn around and flip hot new stocks for a big, quick profit, crowding out institutional investors with a longer attention span, and showing no regard for a company's long term prospects.
It doesn't just feel slow, it is slow.
