Europe shares up 0.7 pct, buoyed by US jobs, Rio
2009-06-05 00:45:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares ended higher on Friday after U.S. jobless data came in below expectations, with miners, banks and oil producers leading the gainers.
index of top European companies closed up 0.7 percent at 872.29 points, after hitting its day's high of 882.16 soon after the release of the U.S. non-farm payrolls data. The index gained 1.2 percent this week.
Miners were among the top gainers on the pan-European index, boosted by Rio Tinto (
), which rose 10.3 and 6.8 percent, respectively.
Within the mining sector, Anglo American (
U.S. employers cut 345,000 jobs in May, the fewest since September and far less than forecast, showing more evidence that the economy's severe weakness was diminishing. [ID:nN05274048]
However, U.S. unemployment rate raced to 9.4 percent, the highest since July 1983, from 8.9 percent in April.
"It's clearly better than expected at the headline level, although the bear has pointed out that some of the underline details were less positive, especially the unemployment rate," said Ronan Carr, European equity strategist at Morgan Stanley.
"Our view is that we wouldn't be chasing the rally," he said, adding that the U.S. housing downturn and corporate earnings may not hit the trough until next year, and valuations looked a bit stretched as the trend growth for the next cycle is a period of sub par growth.
BANKS, OILS HIGHER; FOOD PRODUCERS WEAK
), Total (
Banks were generally firmer, with Barclays (
), Deutsche Bank (
), Societe Generale (
), Fortis FOR.BR and HSBC (
Also in the financial sector, Man Group (
) soared nearly 10 percent as a stronger dollar boosted the hedge fund manager, which has a large exposure in the United States.
Across Europe, Germany's DAX
added 0.2 percent and France's CAC
Britain's FTSE 100
gained 1.2 percent, shrugging off the political woes faced by Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who averted the immediate danger of government collapse with a cabinet reshuffle.[ID:nL51037958]
Food producers .SX3P, however, were in negative territory, with Nestle (
) down 2.8 percent after Goldman Sachs downgraded its rating on the world's biggest food group to "neutral" from "buy".
) slipped 1.1 percent, also hurt by Goldman downgrade to "sell" from "neutral".
Citigroup said in a European portfolio strategy note that equity markets had not yet fully priced in an economic recovery, despite the recent rally which as seen the FTSEurofirst 300 index rise 35 percent since an all-time low on March 9.
"The end of the world has been priced out. Recovery has not been priced in, yet," Citigroup said. "Confidence in economic recovery should build through 2009," it said, adding it had further raised its exposure to early cyclicals. (Editing by Rupert Winchester)
