ANALYSIS-Al Qaeda's Sahara wing blend terror with business
2009-06-05 10:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Al Qaeda's killing of a British hostage in the Sahara escalates the group's threat in the region but that menace is based as much on a complex blend of criminality and opportunism as it is on hard-line Islamism.
It was the first time the group had executed a Westerner in the Sahara, boosting its credibility amongst Islamists after other hostages were freed in return for reported ransom payments, and supporting Western fears that the vast empty desert shelters terrorists. [nL3400316]
But critics maintain the threat is inflated, or fabricated, for ulterior motives by regional and Western powers seeking to project influence in the oil- and gas-rich region.
Experts stress the relative scarcity of the attacks by the Sahel-Saharan arm of al Qaeda's North Africa wing, known as AQIM. And they say the group's readiness to mingle with nomadic rebels and smugglers involved in lucrative criminal networks shows ideology is not a dominant factor in its calculations.
Attacks have so far focused on army units and opportunistic kidnappings but with investments in oil, mining and a possible trans-Sahara gas pipeline, potential targets are increasing.
Born out of the Algerian GSPC Salafist movement, militants kidnapped a large group of foreigners in the Sahara in 2003 but appear to have been energised and become more focused since formalising links with al Qaeda in December 2006.
The northern arm of AQIM is more Algeria-focussed, making periodic bomb and gun attacks on Algerian security forces.
Mauritania has born the brunt of attacks of the southern wing's activities, with four French tourists murdered in December 2007, an attack on the Israeli embassy and the killing of 12 government soldiers in 2008.
Two Austrian tourists were kidnapped in the Sahara in 2008 before being released. Four other Westerners held with the dead Briton have been released, leaving a Swiss hostage in captivity.
"These need to be taken into account by businesses operating in these states. This group's track record is characterised by a mix of criminality and terrorist attacks," Lacher added, stressing the distinction between the group operating in the Sahara and the group striking Algerian forces in the northeast.
AQIM had demanded that Britain free Abu Qatada, a jailed Jordanian Islamist, but analysts were quick to link the Briton's death to the United Kingdom's stated refusal to pay ransoms.
"Some of them are radical Islamists but most of them are doing it for money," said a diplomat who follows the region.
SMUGGLERS OR TERRORISTS?
The threat of the southern arm of AQIM lies not in the group's numbers but in the ability of an estimated 100-200 men to move quickly and discreetly between southern Algeria, eastern Mauritania and the northern reaches of Mali and Niger.
"This is not a group that will invade a country. They just need a small number of people to be powerful. In fact, they don't have an interest in being big," said Alain Antil, head of the Sub-Sahara programme at the Paris-based IFRI think tank.
In these remote areas, where government influence is limited, analysts say the militants strike deals of convenience with Tuareg rebels and smugglers of arms, cigarettes and drugs.
One such deal seems to be buying kidnapped foreigners, for whom millions of dollars in ransoms are reported to have been paid, even though the countries involved deny it.
"The (southern) group has been the link between smuggling and what you would call genuine terrorism in the past, but it remains difficult to draw a line between the two," said Dave Hartwell, Middle East and North Africa analyst at Jane's.
Eastern Mauritania is home to the country's iron ore industry but companies are also exploring for oil in the Taoudeni basin the nation shares with gold-exporting Mali.
On top of a $5 billion oil deal with China, Niger will become a major uranium exporter with investment by France's Areva.
A planned trans-Sahara pipeline, through which Nigerian gas would flow to Europe, in an effort to reduce dependence on Russia, was "a potentially attractive" target, Hartwell said.
While the United States has highlighted the region as a frontline in the war on terror, critics like Jeremy Keenan, author of "The Dark Sahara, America's war on terror in Africa", argue that Washington and European allies exaggerate the perceived threat as a way of justifying their regional presence.
"This (killing) provides legitimacy for European forces to move into the Sahel. This is what they want as this is where the future of their energy is," Keenan told Reuters.
Britain has vowed to hunt down those who killed the Briton but, for now, it has little presence in the region.
The execution is likely to intensify pressure on the zone, where U.S. special forces are currently training Malian counterparts, potentially complicating AQIM's relationships with other groups profiting from the lawlessness for other reasons.
"It's more declarations than anything else. There is no exchange of information. There is a lack of trust between the actors in the region," IFRI's Antil said. (Editing by Giles Elgood)
