REFILE-U.S. payrolls, Rio move lift FTSE 1.2 pct
2009-06-05 00:17:00.0
(Reuters) - A rally in miners, bolstered by a surge in Rio Tinto after it dumped plans for a $19.5 billion tie-up with Chinalco and better-than-forecast U.S. jobs data, lifted Britain's FTSE 100 1.2 percent by the close on Friday.
closed up 51.62 points at 4,438.56. The index closed up 3.52 points on Thursday at 4,386.94, and has rallied 28 percent since its low for the year on March 9.
U.S. employers cut 345,000 jobs last month, the fewest since September and far less than forecast according to a government report, the clearest evidence yet that weakness in the economy is starting to abate. [ID:nN05274048]
"It was a much better number than expected and it yet again provides evidence that the economic data is bottoming out," said Philip Lawlor, chief portfolio strategist at Nomura.
The deal bolstered sentiment in the sector, which added 31.8 points to the index.
), Eurasian Natural Resources (
Oil majors were also stronger, with Royal Dutch Shell (
) gaining 1 percent, and BG Group (
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown's political woes, which have prompted him to reshuffle his cabinet, failed to dent the index, though they helped drive sterling EURGBP= to a two-week low against the euro. [ID:nL5358262]
Five senior ministers have quit the government in four days. Defence Secretary John Hutton and Transport Secretary Geoff Hoon became the latest in a succession of ministers to quit Britain's government.
That compounded Brown's political difficulties just as polls were closing in local and European elections that are expected to result in hefty losses for the Labour party, whose popularity has plummeted in the wake of an expenses scandal.
But market participants said political difficulties for the UK's Prime Minister -- widely disliked by traders -- would not likely have a long-term negative for equities.
"If any prime minister resigns, generally you get a knee-jerk reaction sell-off in equities," he said. "But in this instance it would probably be welcomed," Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads, said.
Finance minister Alistair Darling, who has been one of the key figures in battling Britain's recession, will keep his job in the reshuffle, a senior government source said. [ID:nLAL002238]
Banks were mixed, with Barclays (
Other financials stocks were broadly higher, benefiting from improved sentiment.
) gained 9.9 percent, with one trader pointing to the strength of the dollar supporting the hedge fund group, which has significant U.S. earnings. (Reporting by Simon Falush; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
