Tenneco says commercial vehicles growth focus
2009-06-06 05:22:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Jun 10 2009
Wed, Jun 10 2009
Tue, Jun 9 2009
Fri, Jun 5 2009
Thu, Jun 4 2009
Sat  EDT
Tenneco, an Illinois-based firm, has been putting more efforts into commercial vehicles rather than light vehicles as governments increasingly tighten regulations on diesel emissions.
"It is a core area of expertise for Tenneco," Chief Executive Officer Gregg Sherrill told Reuters in an interview.
"Over the next 5 years, commercial vehicles, which represent about 5 or 6 percent of our revenue now, will grow to about 25 to 30 percent of our revenues."
) or Chrysler LLC still posed a danger, the market appeared to be heading in the right direction, Sherrill said.
As the global vehicle market remains cloudy at best, the company is also focusing on cost-cutting measures.
North America and Europe, the firm's biggest cost centers and the source of 91 percent of its total revenues, were the focus of recent cost-cutting measures.
"We'll maintain our improvement that we saw in North America and we should see some incremental improvement in Europe," he said.
The executive said GM would remain a customer, as much of its business with GM lies in light trucks.
"That is definitely a part that they'll be keeping," he said.
Tenneco posted a net loss of $49 million in the first quarter of 2009, the third straight quarter of losses, but down sharply from a $298 million loss in the last three months of 2008.
"It's certainly not healthy ... but the good news is it's not continuing to go down," he said.
The company was also not worried about its outstanding $14.8 million in receivables extended to GM, as the amount was small and would be covered by the deal struck with the U.S. Treasury.
"It is a manageable amount," Sherrill said.
As the U.S. market shrinks, China's automobile market -- which overtook the U.S. as the world's biggest earlier this year -- will increasingly take on a greater importance.
"If there is a bright spot in the industry, it is probably China," he said.
Tenneco announced on Friday it has formed a new joint venture, its sixth in China, with Beijing Hainachuan Automotive Parts Co Ltd.
), starting next year.
It is also planning to set up another joint venture in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou later this year to supply Japan's Nissan Motor (
), he said, without providing details.
