Rio pulls up Europe shares ahead of U.S. job data
2009-06-05 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares traded higher by midday Friday, led by Rio Tinto (
The next big focus for investors is U.S. non-farm payrolls and unemployment data for May due at 1230 GMT, with the pace of job losses expected to decline. G7TODAY
Rio Tinto shares surged 11.5 percent and BHP Billiton climbed 7.5 percent, pulling the DJ Stoxx basic resources index .SXPP 4.8 percent higher, making it the top sectoral performer.
By 1110 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
Almost all sub-sectors were in positive territory, the notable exception being food producers .SX3P -- a traditional defensive safe haven. Here Nestle (
) was down 1.8 percent, making the stock Europe's top blue-chip loser.
"The overall sentiment is pretty good," said Ralf Groenemeyer, investment strategist at Silvia Quandt Research.
"The market is benefiting from better than expected economic sentiment indicators, which suggest that we will have a stronger economy in the second half (of 2009)," Groenemeyer said, adding: "Wishful thinking is sufficient to drive markets higher."
Rio Tinto scrapped a deal agreed in February with Chinese metals group Chinalco, opting instead for a cost-saving 50-50 iron ore joint venture with BHP Billiton and a $15.2 billion rights issue. [ID:nSYD73514] [ID:nSYD448331]
"We view this deal as very positive for both companies," ING said.
"Rio Tinto has listened to investors and is taking advantage of better market conditions to repair its balance sheet," Fairfax said.
"The continuing independence of the Rio Tinto board may be a relief to shareholders and regulators," Fairfax added.
Also in basic resources, miners Vedanta (
) were up 7.1 percent and 4.4 percent, respectively, and steelmaker ArcelorMittal (
"European steel prices and indicators such as scrap prices and iron ore prices have stabilised in recent weeks, indicating that a floor in steel prices might be near," JPMorgan said.
UPWARD POTENTIAL OR BACKLASH?
Citigroup, in a European portfolio strategy note, said equity markets had not yet fully priced in an economic recovery, despite the recent rally which has seen Europe's top-300 index rise 35 percent since an all-time low on March 9.
"The end of the world has been priced out. Recovery has not been priced in, yet," Citigroup said. "Confidence in economic recovery should build through 2009," Citigroup said, adding it had further raised its exposure to early cyclicals.
Other strategists, however, said stocks may have risen too fast and could be in for a correction.
"Moderate setbacks are possible," said Commerzbank's Gunnar Hamann, who attributed the recent gains to "a clear improvement in monetary and economic leading indicators, which has increased investors' risk appetite."
"Even assuming that the economic climate will continue to improve over the year, we do not expect valuation multiples of equity markets to sustain the same rate of expansion as in recent weeks," Hamann said, noting that the average 2010 price-to-earnings multiple for stocks in Germany's top-30 index
"The new stock market highs show, however, that investor readiness to buy maintains the upper hand over sustained profit-taking ... and this means that indexes could go on rising despite the overbought market situation," LBB added.
Next to miners, banks .SX7P -- tracking overnight Wall Street sector gains -- added the most points to the European benchmark index by midday on Friday.
) rose 3.6 percent, Deutsche Bank (
) traded 3.5 percent higher, Royal Bank of Scotland (
Across Europe, Britain's mining-heavy FTSE 100
was up 1.6 percent, the French CAC-40
rose 1.0 percent and the German DAX edged 0.5 percent higher. (Additional reporting by Brian Gorman in London; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
