G8 crisis consensus may fade as economy recovers
2009-06-05 10:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The world's financial policymakers appear to have steered a course through the worst of the credit crisis, but signs of recovery may now undermine their fragile consensus on policy.
When finance ministers from the Group of Eight rich nations meet next week, they are likely to sound considerably more optimistic than they did just two months ago, when the wider G20 group -- which includes India and China -- promised a trillion-dollar lifeline for the global economy.
Surveys of corporate and consumer sentiment in the G8 have started to improve in the past several months. This week, a purchasing managers' index for Britain's services sector showed a return to growth in May, suggesting Britain might become the first G8 economy to exit the recession.
But a budding global recovery would carry its own risks, tempting G8 members to backslide on policy promises that they feel are no longer as vital to keep, and reopening old policy divisions that were papered over at the height of the crisis.
The finance ministers' meeting in Lecce, Italy on June 12 and 13 will focus on the degree to which commitments made by the G20 are actually being fulfilled.
"If we can confirm that things are on track for the G20, that would be an achievement for this meeting," said an official involved in preparations for the talks among ministers from the United States, Germany, Japan, Britain, France, Italy, Canada and Russia.
In the worst case, a failure to carry through on G20 promises could undermine financial markets' confidence that policymakers can end the crisis. Currency jitters in Latvia this week, which hit markets in Sweden and central Europe, underline how shaky that confidence remains.
If the global economy starts recovering in the next few months, countries may see less urgency in stumping up tens of billions of international aid.
So far, the International Monetary Fund has not seen the full $500 billion that it was promised at the G20 meeting in early April to help it fight the crisis.
China said on Friday that it was conditionally willing to provide as much as $50 billion, but Germany and Italy still have not made their contributions clear.
Meanwhile, some financial and monetary officials are worried about the G20's pledge to have the IMF issue $250 billion of new Special Drawing Rights, its internal unit of account, to member countries to boost liquidity during the crisis.
The fresh liquidity may have appeared vital a few months ago but now, with investors regaining some of their appetite for risk and emerging market economies once again able to issue offshore bonds, the plan may be less attractive.
If the SDRs are converted into hard currency, they could prove inflationary at a time when surging government bond yields already show fears that economic recovery and the legacy of aggressive monetary easing will boost inflation.
G20 and IMF officials say they expect to move quickly to agree on details of the SDR plan, because it has the support of political leaders in the group.
But some G8 finance ministers may not ignore criticism from officials such as Juergen Stark of the European Central Bank's Executive Board. He denounced the plan as potentially inflationary, providing "helicopter money for the globe" -- money distributed randomly and irresponsibly.
Germany's deputy finance minister, Joerg Asmussen, said on Thursday that he opposed loosening the European Union's debt rules as proposed earlier this week by French Economy Minister Christine Lagarde.
Meanwhile, Germany's Angela Merkel criticized drastic monetary easing by the U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, and criticized the ECB for bowing to "international pressure" with its own radical easing plan.
Foreign exchange rates and monetary policy, which is the province of central banks, are not expected to be discussed formally or in detail by the finance ministers next week.
But the financial markets' expectations for an economic recovery are creating issues that could prove divisive. The euro has surged to multi-month highs against the dollar, prompting complaints by Eurogroup chairman Jean-Claude Juncker, who said it could hurt the European economy.
Cracks are also appearing between nations in implementing regulatory pledges made in April. The G20 agreed to centrally clear credit default swaps, but the United States wants to go a step further and push trading in over-the-counter derivatives onto platforms, a step that Europe has yet to take and which threatens to fragment the global market.
Within the European Union, France wants far tougher rules to regulate hedge funds than what the bloc's executive body has proposed. Britain has said these proposals already go too far.
(Reporting by G8 bureaux; Editing by Andrew Torchia)
