UPDATE 2-China ready to buy up to $50 bln in IMF bonds
2009-06-05 06:52:00.0
(Reuters) - China will buy as much as $50 billion in bonds issued by the International Monetary Fund, which needs more cash to lend to countries hit by the global financial crisis, a senior IMF official said on Friday.
"The Chinese authorities have indicated that ... (they) would be interested in investing up to $50 billion in these bonds when they are ready and we hope that other countries will follow suit," John Lipsky, the IMF's first deputy managing director, said in an interview with Reuters Television.
In Beijing, the official Xinhua news agency confirmed that China would contribute to the IMF's fund-raising drive.
"If the IMF bond conditions meet China's demands for security and a reasonable return on its foreign exchange reserves, China is willing to invest up to $50 billion in the new IMF bonds," Xinhua paraphrased the State Administration of Foreign Exchange as saying.
SAFE is the arm of the central bank that manages China's $1.95 trillion in foreign currency reserves, the largest stockpile in the world.
Russia has already said it is interested in buying up to $10 billion of the bonds, which will form part of an extra $500 billion in capital the IMF is seeking to nurse countries through the worst global economic slowdown in 80 years. [ID:nL5330603].
The United States, Japan and the European Union are providing $100 billion each as part of the fund-raising drive.
Speaking on the sidelines of the St Petersburg Economic Forum, Lipsky said the IMF's executive board would shortly discuss proposals for the issuance of the bonds and of $250 billion in Special Drawing Rights, the IMF's unit of account.
"The global economy has not hit bottom yet, but the worst of the slowdown is over," he said, adding that future economic performance could well surprise on the upside.
Still, he did not rule out that the IMF might lower its growth outlook for some other countries following its downgrade of Russia's 2009 GDP forecast. [ID:nL1655328]
"In general, the first-quarter results globally were weaker than anticipated," Lipsky said.
The IMF expects emerging market economies will return to growth in the second half of this year, followed by developed countries in the first half of 2010.
On oil, he expressed doubt that the recent rise in crude prices would be sustained but added that "we certainly don't look for a return to the very low levels".
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said after the G20 summit that China had pledged to buy $40 billion worth of IMF bonds. Until now, Chinese officials had not disclosed a figure.
The bonds could be issued to members' central banks or to sovereign wealth funds, according to IMF officials. [ID:nN04218310]
They are likely to be denominated in SDRs. This is an attraction for China, which wants to diversify the currency composition of its reserves, now invested primarily in dollars.
Buying SDR-denominated paper also fits in with central bank governor Zhou Xiaochuan's long-term proposal to replace the dollar as the world's main reserve currency with the SDR.
They have insisted that their contributions should not derail a broader effort to rebalance voting power in the IMF to better reflect the growing clout of the developing world, especially China, in the global economy. (Additional reporting by Zhou Xin in Beijing; Writing by Toni Vorobyova and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Neil Fullick)
