UPDATE 1-Asian steelmills weigh costs, benefits of Rio/BHP deal
2009-06-05 03:24:00.0
(Reuters) - A proposed iron ore tie up between BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto must feel like deja vu for Asian steelmakers, who had been relieved to see BHP drop its takeover bid for Rio last year.
Again facing the prospect of dealing with just two suppliers controlling 70 percent of global seaborne iron ore trade, steelmakers are not happy.
"It means we have to deal with fewer miners and a mega one with a bigger market share. This is not something we'd want to see," said a senior official at a leading Asian steelmaker, declining to be named.
The Rio/BHP combination would supply around 270 million tonnes of ore a year, while the world's top producer, Brazil's Vale (
), supplies around 240 million tonnes a year.
The steelmaker official did look on the bright side though, hoping that some of the cost savings touted by Rio and BHP as justification for the deal would find their way to customers.
"But we could push harder in the future and ask them to further lower raw material prices as both BHP and Rio are saying their deal would lower production costs sharply," he said.
) said on Friday they will combine their major Australian iron ore operations, scuppering a $19.5 billion bid by China's Chinalco to secure a stake in Rio and long-term access to its ore supplies. [ID:nRIO]
Rio and BHP see the combined entity generating more than $10 billion in synergies, even though the two firms have vowed to keep their marketing separate.
"It's definitely negative news to steelmakers as big miners, who already have bigger bargaining power thanks to their sizable market share, will further raise their leverage to control raw material prices," said G.J. Kim at Samsung Securities.
"While the deal may cause no material changes in iron ore talks this year, it could have a longer-term impact as big miners' monopoly will be tightened."
Both Japan's Nippon Steel (
) and South Korea's POSCO (
), the world's No.2 and No.4 steelmakers respectively, have yet to make any official response to the deal.
China Iron and Steel Association (CISA), which is leading the country's annual iron ore talks this year and holding out for a bigger than 33 percent price cut that its Asian rivals won from Rio Tinto for 2009/10 supplies, had no immediate comment.
The tie up could also move the annual contract talks closer to some sort of spot market or index-based pricing system, something that has been backed by BHP.
Until recently the first settlement reached between one of the top miners and a major steelmill constituted a benchmark that the rest of the industry followed, but this year BHP has offered an index-linked pricing plan as an alternative. [ID:nSP356938]
Industry publication Steel Business Briefing reported on Friday CISA and China's top steelmaker Baosteel (
) have internally agreed to accept the 33 percent price cut that Japan, South Korea and Taiwan had agreed.
Despite having already done a benchmark deal this year, Rio Tinto said on Friday it expected to sell a large part of its iron ore on the spot market, signalling benchmark deals would have less impact on its earnings and global iron ore trade.
BHP said the tie-up had no connection with its pricing talks with China and was unlikely to trigger a sudden change in the once-a-year pricing mechanism, although it reiterated its support for index pricing. (Additional reporting by Alfred Cang in SHANGHAI and Yuko Inoue in TOKYO; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
