Tilt toward emerging markets to keep US dollar down
2009-06-04 21:21:00.0
(Reuters) - While investors have been pleased to see recent improvement in U.S. economic data, some are happier about the prospects for growth outside the United States, and that may keep the U.S. dollar on the ropes.
In fact, if a record U.S. fiscal deficit keeps pushing up yields on longer dated securities, some think it will be the emerging markets, not the United States, that lead the world out of recession.
This view, investors say, has been one driver of recent rallies in the price of gold, oil and copper and the currencies of commodity producers like Brazil and Australia.
The U.S. dollar, on the other hand has plunged 7.0 percent in the second quarter .DXY as investors reach for these higher yields. Meanwhile, a looming $1.8 trillion U.S. budget deficit has boosted bond yields, making it more costly for the government to finance its spending.
"You cannot have the massive increase in money supply and debt without at least causing some concern about the future of the dollar and U.S. interest rates," said Robert Kowit, international bond fund manager at Federated Investors.
For now, he said those fears are making it even easier for investors to buy into higher-yielding emerging market assets because they can use the weak dollar to finance those trades.
And since developing markets are expected to emerge from the crisis with much lower government debt, largely intact banking systems, and more room to grow, their assets and currencies look increasingly attractive.
"Emerging market countries are now 60 percent of world growth and the U.S. is a much smaller piece of that growth," James Swanson, chief investment strategist at MFS Investment Management, told reporters this week.
U.S.-based investors in particular should boost investment in overseas assets, he said, adding "if people are looking for long-term growth in financial assets, I think the old 5-10 percent in international is an outdated idea."
While Swanson does expect the U.S. recession to end this year, he said by the time the United States grows 2.0 percent a year, China will again be logging double-digit annual growth.
Paresh Upadhyaya, who helps manage $21 billion in currency assets at Putnam Investments in Boston, said high savings, low debt and monetary policy flexibility suggest emerging countries will lead the global recovery.
For example, while Brazil's interest rates are falling, at more than 10 percent, they still offer a hefty premium to near-zero U.S. or Japanese rates.
What's more, he says industrial production declines in the emerging economies have been shallow -- India's industrial output has slipped 4.0 percent during the crisis, he says, compared with 37 percent for Japan and 14 percent for the United States.
Of course, markets have been down this road before, and not so long ago. Robust global growth and easy credit through mid-2007 had so de-sensitized investors to risk that emerging market debt netted less than two percentage points over Treasuries and real estate cost more in Riga than Vienna.
Those spreads widened dramatically last year, though they have narrowed in recent months .JPMEMBIPLUS.
Ernest Stern, partner at The Rohatyn Group that specializes in emerging markets and a former managing director at The World Bank, called it a natural rebound after the out-sized losses seen in emerging assets during the worst of the crisis.
"Now that a degree of stability has returned....the prospects for growth in these countries are by and large better than for industrialized countries," he said.
"If the world is going to turn around next year, they are very well positioned to grow more rapidly than the <Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development> countries," he added.
The debt burden on U.S. consumers who drive economic activity with their spending is still being worked off, meaning their wallets will likely stay closed even as some sectors begin to replace depleted inventories.
And since it has been massive government spending that has kick-started the economy, ballooning the deficit in the process, investors wary of inflation will continue to demand higher yields to hold U.S. debt, said Henrik Pedersen, chief investment officer at Pareto Partners in London.
"Mortgages will still be difficult to get, you're seeing public budgets getting cut, so I just don't see people going bananas again with their spending," he said. "But in emerging Asia, there's scope for some economies to generate demand."
The benchmark 10-year Treasury yielded 3.65 percent on Thursday. That's low by historical standards but some 130 basis points above where it was at the start of 2009 despite Federal Reserve efforts to keep long-term yields low.
"They are debasing the dollar but they are debasing other currencies too. So relative to each other it doesn't make a whole lot of difference at the moment," said James Melcher, founder and president of macro-global hedge fund Balestra Capital Ltd.
