Teck Resources sells more coal, sees China demand
2009-06-04 13:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Teck Resources (
) painted a brighter picture of demand for its coking coal on Thursday, saying it sold more than it will produce during the second quarter, and predicting rising demand from a Chinese steel industry in transition.
"China has embarked on a program of rationalizing their steel business. This will require them to import more coking coal... and we have seen this starting to occur this year," Doug Horswill, the company's vice-president of external affairs, said at an investment conference in New York.
Teck became one of the world's top producers of coking coal -- which is used in the steelmaking business -- when it acquired Fording Canadian Coal Trust last year.
"Our understanding is that there's something in the order of 180 million tonnes of obsolete steel capacity in the interior of China that the government intends to see closed and replaced by the consolidated plants on the coast," he said.
Teck's shares were up 97 Canadian cents, or 5.5 percent, at C$18.57 on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Thursday afternoon.
Teck has said it will produce 18 million to 20 million tonnes of coal this year -- following a production cut in January -- but Horswill said customers have overbooked, forcing Teck to contemplate raising capacity.
The $13 billion takeover of Fording gave Teck full ownership of the Elk Valley Coal Partnership, but also saddled Teck with $9.8 billion in additional debt that became very difficult to pay off once prices of coal, copper and zinc -- Teck's main products -- plunged last year.
The company's fortunes have rebounded in the past month, however, as Teck managed to issue $4.2 billion in bonds to retire the bulk of a $5.8 billion bridge loan that was due in October.
Teck has embarked on an asset sale program that has seen it divest the majority of its gold properties, from which it expects to wring a total of about $900 million.
Teck is also planning to sell 20 percent of the coal business, and is in "active discussions" to do so, Horswill said.
Horswill suggested Teck will not follow the lead of other mining companies and issue equity, saying that the planned and concluded asset sales provided sufficient support for the balance sheet.
Teck's shares, which at one point early this year were down 94 percent from their 2008 peak, have since more than quintupled after hitting a low of C$3.35 in March.
($1=$1.10 Canadian) (Reporting by Cameron French; editing by Peter Galloway)
