European shares edge up on banks, oils; ECB eyed
2009-06-04 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares edged up at midday on Thursday before an interest rate decision from the European Central Bank, driven by gains in banks, drugmakers and oil producers. By 1108 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
of top European companies was up 0.3 percent at 870.28 points, after losing 2 percent on Wednesday.
Oil producers were among the top gainers, tracking gains in crude prices CLc1. Goldman Sachs raised its end of 2009 oil price forecast to $85 a barrel from $65 and introduced a new end-2010 forecast of $95.
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), Total (
Financials were also in demand, with Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Barclays (
), Deutsche Bank (
), Societe Generale (
All eyes were on the ECB's interest rates decision, due at 1145 GMT, after the Bank of England left rates unchanged at a record low 0.5 percent as expected.
"The sentiment appears to be that come the middle of third quarter, we will be looking some of the economic numbers and won't be saying, the second derivative is slowing, i.e. the rate of change or the rate of decline is slowing," said Stephen Pope at Cantor Fitzgerald.
"Things are picking up a little bit and I am quite encouraging in that regard," he said, adding clients were still sitting on cash and the rally would be sustainable.
However, Pope said his main concern was the amount of debt from the Group of Seven countries, which could hit investor sentiment.
On the economic front, euro zone retail sales inched up month-on-month in April for the first time in five months when their annual decline was lower than expected, in another sign recession may be easing. [ID:nL3625873]
But unemployment jumped in France in the first three months of 2009 to more than 9 percent, its highest level in over two years, showing how the global economic crisis has rapidly eroded France's labour market. [ID:nL4370736]
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index fell 0.2 percent, while Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
U.S. stock index futures DJc1 SPc1 NDc1 also traded higher, pointing to a stronger start on Wall Street.
PHARMAS HIGHER, MINERS DOWN
), GlaxoSmithKline (
), Roche (
), Novartis (
Miners, however, were in negatively territory, with Vedanta Resources (
), BHP Billiton (
), Lonmin (
), Anglo American (
) before a June 14 deadline to avoid further delays in Australian government approval, two sources close to the deal said.
) shed 4.5 percent, hurt by a downgrade to 'sell' from 'neutral' from UBS.
) rose 4.3 percent, making it among the top gainers in Europe, after Banc of America-Merrill Lynch upgraded it to 'buy' from 'neutral' and lifted its price objective. "There is not much room left on the upside for stocks," said Alexandre Le Drogoff, technical analyst at Aurel-BGC.
"The DJ Stoxx 600 .STOXX is stuck around its 200-day moving average, and it's getting more and more difficult to break out from this zone as people are getting cautious again and prone to take profits," he said. (Editing by Dan Lalor) (Additional reporting by Atul Prakash and Blaise Robinson)
