UPDATE 2-Synergy Health says strong growth continues
2009-06-04 09:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Health services firm Synergy Health Plc (
) said on Thursday that growth had continued from last year, backed by the sector's resilience to the economic downturn.
The company said pretax profit for the year to March 29 rose 4.8 percent to 26.1 million pounds ($42.5 million), in line with estimates of between 26 million and 27 million pounds in a Reuters Estimates poll of three analysts.
"In the first two months of this (financial) year the performance of the business has seen the strong growth continue," Chief Executive Richard Steeves told Reuters in a telephone interview.
Steeves said the global healthcare market had proved resilient during the economic downturn, with demand remaining strong as a result of demographic trends, the enforcement of regulatory health standards and government spending commitments.
Synergy, which warned last year that it had been hit by rises in commodity and energy prices, said operating margins fell 1.6 percent. It said that while the devaluation of sterling had put further pressure on its margins, cost reductions of 1.5 million pounds had helped put it back on track to restore them in 2009.
Analysts said the results would reassure investors that the company was taking steps to recover margins, and that the issues it faced were not structural. The outlook was also encouraging, said Investec analyst Sebastien Jantet.
"Synergy should be one of the main beneficiaries of increased outsourcing in healthcare as the downturn increases the focus on cost reduction," he said in a research note.
CEO Steeves said he was comfortable with analysts' forecasts for a full-year profit of around 30 million pounds in 2010, and reported the forward order book was 850 million pounds, up 6.3 percent on the same point last year.
Synergy said it was focusing on Asia, where markets remained relatively strong, with its new facilities in China expected to see strong growth over the next three to five years, boosted by the government's increased investment in healthcare.
The company said it would pay a dividend of 11 pence, up 8.9 percent from last year. (Editing by Karen Foster) ($1=.6144 Pound)
