European shares advance ahead of BoE, ECB decisions
2009-06-04 04:54:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities climbed on Thursday ahead of rate decisions from the Bank of England and the European Central bank, with banks and drugmakers gaining ground and oil shares rising on the back of higher crude prices.
At 0822 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
index of top European shares was up 0.5 percent at 872.74 points after slipping more than 2 percent in the previous session. The index, which slumped 45 percent in 2008, has jumped 35 percent since falling to a lifetime low in early March.
Energy stocks were among top gainers as they tracked crude oil prices CLc1, which rose 1.3 percent. BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), Tullow Oil (
), Repsol (
), Total (
Financial stocks also advanced, with Barclays (
), Lloyds (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), UBS (
Investors awaited interest rate decisions later in the day and were avoiding big trading moves, analysts said.
"Investors will look quite closely at the details, but this is not a big deal to drive the markets in any direction as no big decisions are awaited. The markets will be torn between positive equity news and profit-taking," said Franz Wenzel, strategist at AXA Investment Managers, in Paris.
"The market will remain shaky. After a decent performance for three months in a row, people are getting tempted to take some profits despite the fact that we are seeing more and more green shoots," he added.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100 index
, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
In the last few days, the FTSEurofirst 300 index has tested and held technical support on the bottom of its uptrend channel extending back to early March, now at 872 points. The top of the channel is currently at 945 points.
"There is not much room left on the upside for stocks," said Alexandre Le Drogoff, technical analyst at Aurel-BGC.
"The DJ Stoxx 600 .STOXX is stuck around its 200-day moving average, and it's getting more and more difficult to break out from this zone as people are getting cautious again and prone to take profits," he said.
Pharmaceutical shares, often seen as defensives, gained ground. AstraZeneca (
), GlaxoSmithKline (
), Novartis (
), Anglo American (
), Antofagasta (
) rose 2 percent after the Wall Street Journal said that UAL Corp's UAUA.O United Airlines has asked Boeing Co (
) and EADS's Airbus to propose competing bids for up to 150 new airliners. The deal could be worth more than $10 billion for the two aircraft makers, the paper said. [ID:nBNG120955]
) rose 0.8 percent. Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said on Wednesday his government would be willing to intervene with Germany to support Fiat's bid for Opel if the Italian car maker were to ask for it. [ID:nRON004651] (Additional reporting by Blaise Robinson; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
