RPT-UPDATE 3-Australia's Rudd faces first ministerial crisis
2009-06-04 06:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd faced his first political crisis since taking office when his defence minister resigned on Thursday over travel and lobbying activities involving family and friends.
The development is a blow to Rudd, as outgoing Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon was a factional supporter and senior minister from the most populous New South Wales state, a key to winning national elections.
While the controversy surrounding Fitzgibbon, who was portrayed as politically clumsy, had led to a series of damaging headlines, analyst Nick Economou said his resignation would allow Rudd to draw a line under the affair and so keep open the option of an early election in late 2009 or early 2010.
"I suspect Rudd is thinking seriously about an early election. They needed to clear the decks, and Fitzgibbon had to go," Economou, from Melbourne's Monash University, told Reuters.
"There was more and more coming out about Fitzgibbon, which was hurting him and hurting the government."
The political crisis comes a day after Rudd and Treasurer Wayne Swan claimed credit for Australia avoiding slipping into a technical recession, defined as two consecutive quarters of economic contraction, thanks to more than A$52 billion ($42 billion) in economic stimulus since last October.
Fitzgibbon's resignation would stall the political gains from the good economic news, but in the longer term would not harm Rudd's high standing in opinion polls, Economou said.
The resignation gives Rudd the option of reshuffling his cabinet, although Rudd told Australian television his ministry was functioning "exceptionally well" and he "would not be foreshadowing any major changes".
Possible replacements include former union leader Greg Combet, currently a junior climate change minister, another former union boss Bill Shorten, or veteran minister John Faulkner, currently Rudd's Special Minister of State.
Rudd said Fitzgibbon had paid a high price for mistakes he made in disclosing travel and gifts, and for a potential business conflict involving his brother and the Defence Department.
"Obviously I feel sad about this, but it's important that we maintain high standards of ministerial accountability. That's why I believe the minister has acted appropriately," Rudd told reporters.
As defence minister, Fitzgibbon oversaw the withdrawal of Australian combat forces from Iraq, and the development of a new defence strategy for Australia for the next 20 years, including plans to buy new ships, planes and submarines.
But Fitzgibbon has been targeted by the conservative opposition since early 2009 for failing to properly disclose trips to China, taken before he was a minister, paid for by a Chinese-born family friend with close ties to Beijing.
Fitzgibbon earlier this week told parliament he also failed to disclose the cost of a night in a hotel, paid for by health insurance company NIB Holdings, run by his brother.
But his resignation came after it was disclosed Fitzgibbon's ministerial office was involved in meetings between his brother's company and his own defence department.
"To protect the integrity of the government, I have decided to resign as a member of the executive, effective immediately," Fitzgibbon said in his letter of resignation. ($1=1.247 Australian Dollar) (Editing by Bill Tarrant)
