North Korea puts two U.S. journalists on trial
2009-06-04 04:54:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea put two U.S. journalists on trial on Thursday on charges of illegally entering the state with "hostile intent," in a case that could worsen tension with Washington after Pyongyang's nuclear test last week.
The journalists, Euna Lee and Laura Ling of the U.S. media outlet Current TV, were arrested in March near the border between China and North Korea while working on a story. The TV network was co-founded by former U.S. Vice President Al Gore.
North Korea's KCNA news agency said in a one-sentence dispatch that the trial would begin at 0600 GMT (3 p.m. local time) at one of the country's highest courts.
Analysts said the two had become bargaining chips in high-stakes negotiations with the United States, which has long sought to end the North's nuclear ambitions.
"The country is being very careful in dealing with the two U.S. citizens and is aware of international attention and the implications of the case," said Park Jeong-woo, a law professor at Kookmin University and an expert in the North's legal system.
In a separate incident that increased tensions with its neighbor, a North Korean patrol boat briefly crossed a disputed maritime border with South Korea but retreated after a warning, the Yonhap news agency quoted the South's office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as saying.
North Korea also appears ready to raise tension through tests of a long-range missile that could reach U.S. territory and of mid-range missiles that can hit all of South Korea and most of Japan. The North was punished by the United Nations for an April rocket launch, seen as a disguised missile test.
Pyongyang also needed to realize that China, the closest North Korea can claim as a major ally, had been shifting from its previous reluctance to join international censure of the North's nuclear and missile tests, Steinberg said in comments provided by Lee's office.
Little has been heard of the two journalists since their arrest but they were seen last month by Sweden's ambassador to Pyongyang on behalf of Washington, which has no diplomatic ties with North Korea.
"When I first got here, I cried so much. Now, I cry less," Ling was quoted as saying in a letter sent to her sister in May.
Human rights groups have said jails in impoverished North Korea are brutal, with torture common and prisoners often killed through malnutrition and abuse.
Prior to the trial, the families of the journalists called for North Korea to quickly release Lee, who has a four-year-old daughter, and Ling, who was being treated for an ulcer.
"We aren't certain of the details of what happened on March 17, but we can say with absolute certainty that when the girls left U.S. soil, they never intended to set foot onto North Korean territory," they said in a statement.
North Korea has also held a South Korean worker in custody for about three months at a joint factory park located just inside the heavily fortified border dividing the peninsula on suspicion of insulting Pyongyang's leaders.
Bill Richardson, a former official in the Bill Clinton administration and now governor of New Mexico, went to the North to secure his release and help settle a $5,000 "hotel bill" imposed by the North to cover the cost of Hunziker's detention.
(Additional reporting by Kim Junghyun and Jack Kim, editing by Jonathan Thatcher and Dean Yates)
