PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - June 4
2009-06-03 16:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) has added further pressure to the ongoing viability of the traditional annual benchmark pricing system for iron ore by entering into index-pricing talks with a major Chinese steel producer. The traditional system is favoured by BHP rival Rio Tinto, but BHP has been agitating to change the system for several years. Analysts believe the most likely outcome to emerge from the situation is a mix of a benchmark plus spot and index pricing. Page 16.
) has given an optimistic outlook for the retail sector based on stronger than expected consumer spending and economic growth. According to Michael Luscombe, consumers were generally in a better financial position now than a year ago as a consequence of lower mortgage rates and fuel prices and government stimulus payments. "Between now and December on a relative basis households are in a much better cash position," Mr Luscombe said yesterday. Page 17.
) chief executive Mike Smith has urged the Federal Government to lobby global forums such as the G20 for the withdrawal of the wholesale funding guarantee. Mr Smith believes the guarantee has served its purpose and there is now a case to argue that it is in fact disrupting the market. The guarantee, which came into effect in October last year, has provided the Government with a revenue stream of around A$1 billion, according to analysts. Page 20.
) may come under added pressure after a key customer, Toll Holdings (
), has shown interest in buying rail assets from the Queensland Government. Toll is Asciano's largest user of intermodal rail services, and any asset acquisition by Toll would significantly reduce its use Asciano's services. Toll has shown interest in Queensland Rail's freight forwarding business, QR National, and has indicated if it can negotiate a reasonable price, the company will make an offer. Page 21.
The tax treatment of employee share schemes is unlikely to see any major changes as a result of an options paper produced by Assistant Treasurer Chris Bowen. In the recent budget the Federal Government controversially changed taxation laws requiring employees to pay tax up-front on their shares. The major issue for the government is non-qualifying schemes, which have been subjected to a generous capital gains tax regime since 1999 that encouraged rorting. Page 21.
Financial services firm JPMorgan has become the latest shareholder to join the ranks of those opposing the proposed US$19.5 billion deal between miner Rio Tinto and Chinese company Chinalco. "I would rather Rio maintained its separate nature as a company," JP Morgan's Ian Henderson said yesterday. Rio Tinto is currently canvassing shareholders' opinion, but ultimately it must wait for the Foreign Investment Review Board to hand down its ruling on the deal, which is due by June 15. Page 21.
) will be asked next Thursday to vote on the proposed sale of A$1.5 billion of assets to Chinese company Minmetals. OZ Minerals chairman Barry Cusack said that the company had all the necessary approvals to proceed with its proposal, and analysts indicated that the transaction would provide a better return for shareholders than the alternative recapitalisation scenario. "The board continues to unanimously recommend the offer for Minmetals," Mr Cusack said yesterday. Page 24.
). China NonFerrous Metals Industry's Foreign Engineering and Construction Co will purchase an 11 percent stake in Terramin, becoming the miner's largest shareholder. The executive chairman of Terramin, Dr Kevin Moriarty, said yesterday that he expects to see more of these type of investments announced soon. Page 24.
) will run its own race rather than compete with its rival Woolworths, according to Coles chief executive Ian McLeod. Coles is currently rolling out its new-format stores and launching a Qantas Frequent Flyer loyalty card scheme. At present only six Coles stores have been revamped out of 760 outlets, but Mr McLeod says certain key stores will be prioritised in the program. Mr McLeod also says the retailer will continue with its focus on a larger choice of fresh foods. Page 25.
Low budget airliner Jetstar will extend its reduction of flights between Australia and Japan into the month of July having originally planned to finish the cutbacks in June. Spokesman for Jetstar, Simon Westaway, said yesterday that a significant number of cancellations and fewer forward bookings had forced the move. Jetstar's parent company Qantas (
), has seen its international operations suffer a decline in travel bookings since February. Page 25.
) has apologised for a security breach that has allowed shareholder addresses and account details to be made public. The error occurred in a PDF document that included the information as white type against a white background. When the document was converted into text by several business websites the text became visible and was posted on the internet. "It was our mistake, it was our fault, and we have already apologised to the people affected," Westpac spokesman David Lording said yesterday. Page B1.
) has written to shareholders saying that the election of former company chairman Nic Burton Taylor and former director Chris Roberts would be a backwards step in the perceived independence of the board. At stake are seats on the AAco board, and the comments by chairman Brett Heading are expected to lead to a fiery annual general meeting scheduled for next week. Page B3.
Gas demand in the east coast markets of Australia has fallen to its lowest level in three years due to the impact of the global financial crisis, according to industry consultant EnergyQuest. Gas demand fell by 5.6 percent in the March quarter but the weakness in the sector was offset by stronger than expected oil production. EnergyQuest chief executive Graeme Bethune said yesterday that Australia's investment plans for oil and gas showed considerable courage in a time that is increasingly tough for the industry globally. Page B3. --
