North Korea holds trial for two U.S. journalists
2009-06-03 17:03:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea plans to put on trial on Thursday two U.S. journalists it says illegally entered its country with "hostile intent" in a controversial case that comes as Pyongyang faces international anger for last week's nuclear test.
Experts said a guilty verdict is certain and that the two, captured on North Korea's border with China in March, are likely to become bargaining chips in high-stake negotiations with the United States which has long sought to end the North's nuclear ambitions.
The journalists, Euna Lee and Laura Ling, of U.S. media outlet Current TV, will be tried at one of the North's highest courts.
"North Korean law states that a person convicted of highly hostile acts can be subject to forced labor for a period of 10 years or more," Park Jeong-woo, a law professor at the South's Kookmin University and an expert on the North's legal system.
Very little has been heard of the two since their arrest but they have been seen by Sweden's ambassador to Pyongyang on behalf of Washington, which has no diplomatic ties.
"When I first got here, I cried so much. Now, I cry less," Ling was quoted as saying in a letter sent to her sister on May 15.
Human rights groups have said jails in impoverished North Korea are brutal, with torture common and prisoners often killed through malnutrition and abuse.
The families of the two women called for North Korea to quickly release Lee, who has a four-year-old daughter, and Ling, who was being treated for an ulcer before her departure.
"We aren't certain of the details of what happened on March 17, but we can say with absolute certainty that when the girls left U.S. soil, they never intended to set foot onto North Korean territory," they said in a statement.
Bill Richardson, a former official in the Bill Clinton administration and now governor of New Mexico, went to the North to secure his release and help settle a $5,000 "hotel bill" imposed by the North to cover the cost of detention.
(Additional reporting by Kim Junghyun and Jack Kim; Editing by Jonathan Thatcher and David Fox)
