CORRECTED - CORRECTED-UPDATE 2-MOVES-Merriman, Credit Suisse, Nir, Oppenheim
2009-06-03 22:08:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Wednesday. To inform us of other job changes, send an e-mail to moves@thomsonreuters.com.
Merriman Curhan Ford Group MERR.O created an independent advisory board to advise the investment bank's management: Patrick Arbor, former Chicago Board of Trade chairman; Dean Barr, former chief investment officer of Deutsche Asset Management; Raymond Minehan, former CFO of Hambrecht & Quist; Michael Moe, co-founder and former CEO of ThinkEquity Partners; Steven Town, ex-CEO of Amerex Group North America; and Timothy Vaill, CEO of Boston Private Financial Holdings Inc (
Arbor, Minehan and Town recently stepped down from Merriman's board of directors.
Brian Finn of Credit Suisse Group has joined Asset Management Finance as chief executive, replacing co-founder and industry veteran Norton Reamer. Finn has been AMF board chairman since August 2008, when Credit Suisse purchased a majority interest.
Finn, 48, relinquished duties as chairman of alternative investments at Credit Suisse Asset Management but will remain a senior adviser. Previously, Finn was a member of the Swiss bank's executive board, president of Credit Suisse First Boston, president of investment banking, co-president of institutional trading and co-head of mergers & acquisitions.
Finn spent five years with private-equity firm Clayton, Dubilier & Rice before rejoining Credit Suisse in 2002.
NIR Group, an alternative investment firm, has opened an office in Singapore, to be headed by Shoham Cohen. Prior to joining NIR, Cohen was managing director at Superfund Group, and before that director of Innovation Fund, a fund-of-hedge funds in the Cayman Islands.
) said it appointed Paul Tanner as managing director, fixed income sales and trading in London. Tanner joins from Landsbanki.
STANDARD & POOR'S RATINGS SERVICES
The credit ratings provider said it appointed Suzanne Smith as managing director, ratings, south and southeast Asia.
The firm has appointed Charles Li to replace Paul Chow as chief executive and an ex-officio member of the board, effective Jan. 16, 2010. Li, who is currently with JP Morgan China, will join HKEx on Oct. 16 this year.
) unit said it appointed Bradley Ball, Edwin Groshans and Ariel Schochet to equity research and institutional sales coverage in the financial services sector. Ball was previously at Citi Investment Research, while Groshans and Schochet join from Omega Investment Advisors. They will be based in New York.
The real estate investment trust appointed Scott Anderson as senior vice president-chief accounting officer, effective July 1. Anderson joins from Apartment Investment Management Co.
The accounting firm said Edward Nusbaum will serve as the next chief executive, effective Jan. 1. Nusbaum currently serves as chief executive of Grant Thornton LLP.
The life and property insurer said it appointed Victor Chang president and chief executive of Hartford Life Insurance KK, its Japanese unit, from July 1. Chang was previously at Morgan Stanley Asset and Investment Trust Management in Japan.
The company said it promoted its leisure director, David Trunkfield, to the position of the head of Gaming for the UK practice. Trunkfield had previously worked at the COBA Group.
