European shares down led by banks on weak U.S. data
2009-06-03 13:13:00.0
(Reuters) - European stocks fell on Wednesday, led by banking, energy and mining shares, as weaker-than-expected U.S. economic data cast doubts about a return to growth and a recovery in corporate earnings.
Among individual stocks, Nokia (
) fell 5 percent after a study showed the mobile phone maker's popularity among teenagers was fading [ID:nL330848] and construction-to-telecoms firm Bouygues (
The slide erased most of Monday's steep advance and left the European benchmark with a gain of 4.3 percent so far this year and 34.5 percent above the all-time low it set on March 9.
Credit Suisse downgraded equities to "benchmark" from "overweight", saying in a strategy note: "Risk appetite has returned to levels not observed since November 2007, and equity-only risk appetite has reached euphoric levels".
In many sectors, stocks have risen to reach valuation levels consistent with a return to long-term economic and earnings growth, a situation which the latest data suggests is not yet on the cards, Credit Suisse said.
Steffen Neumann, equities strategist at German bank LBBW, said stock markets were correcting from Monday's upward surge, which he felt had been exaggerated.
Below-consensus U.S. data was one trigger for Wednesday's sell-off.
The U.S. Institute for Supply Management's non-manufacturing index for May and U.S. new factory orders for April came in below market expectations [ID:nN03458817], while a U.S. private sector employment report showed more job losses than expected in May. [ID:nN03546607]
"The U.S. data disappointed," Neumann said. "The improvement in leading indicators recently led to hopes that the hard data would be better but it did not turn out that way."
"An evaporation of the stock price fuelled confidence gains of recent months could accelerate any downward adjustment that may be building," ING said.
"If the balance of consensus shifts towards the perception that all the low-hanging fruit left in the wake of the stock market lows earlier this year has already been picked, we may be in for a sell-off as traders cash in their stock holdings and book profits," Jones said in a note.
Banks, which outperformed the broader market during the recent rally, took most points off the benchmark index on Wednesday.
) fell 5.0 percent, extending Tuesday's 13.5 percent slide after Abu Dhabi sold an 11 percent stake in the British bank, UBS (
) closed down 4.2 percent, and Deutsche Bank (
Referring to valuations for European banks, which rose 116 percent on the DJ Stoxx sector index .SX7P between March 9 and June 1, Credit Suisse said that "investors have to price in the most optimistic normalized earnings scenario in order to see further upside. We remain cautious".
Among the oil and gas stocks, .SXEP which lost ground on the back on a 3 percent drop in the price of crude oil CLc1 [ID:nSP477138], Repsol (
) fell 3.3 percent, Total (
) shed 3.0 percent, ENI EI.MI lost 2.3 percent and BP (
Basic resources stocks .SXPP, notably miners and steelmakers, gave up some recent gains as copper MCU3 [ID:nL3460063] and gold prices XAU= [ID:nL3734926] fell.
Among miners, Vedanta (
) tumbled 8 percent, Anglo American (
) fell 6.0 percent, Rio Tinto (
"A sustained recovery in supply/demand is unlikely before 2011 at the earliest. Global utilization rates ex-China are close to 60 percent," UBS said in a steel sector research note.
"We expect demand to rebound after recent destocking, but we believe this will not be enough to support (a) sustained steel price increase."
Britain's FTSE 100 index
fell 2.1 percent, Germany's DAX
dropped 2.0 percent. (Additional reporting by Catherine Bosley and Brian Gorman in London; editing by Karen Foster)
