UPDATE 2-Magna sees Opel deal in September, Berlin cautious
2009-06-03 13:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Canadian car parts group Magna MGa.TO said on Wednesday it expected to complete its takeover of Opel in September but the German government made clear the door remained open to rival bidders.
Berlin agreed on Saturday to provide 1.5 billion euros ($2.14 billion) in bridge financing to Opel as part of a deal to shield the company from U.S. parent General Motors' (
) Chapter 11 filing, the biggest U.S. industrial bankruptcy ever.
The basis for providing the funds was a preliminary deal between Magna and GM, but Germany has stressed so far that other bidders, including Italy's Fiat (
) and China's BAIC, still had a shot if they improved their bids.
"The process is still open to all the bidders," government spokesman Ulrich Wilhelm told reporters in Berlin.
Earlier, a German official told Reuters that representatives from BAIC met members of the government on Tuesday and made clear they would "seriously consider" a more detailed bid if talks with Magna failed.
The German government has an interest in keeping up the pressure on Magna until a deal is closed that fully satisfies Berlin's demands.
But Magna is the clear favourite to do a deal for Opel, particularly as its main rival bidder, Fiat, has said it was focusing on reviving recently acquired Chrysler.
Magna co-Chief Executive Siegfried Wolf met Opel workers in the carmaker's Ruesselsheim headquarters on Wednesday and vowed to seal a deal rapidly.
"We think that we will be finished in the next four, five weeks and then there's the final signing," Wolf said.
"After the signing, all approvals have to be given, and I think that we can expect a closing in September, end-September."
After Magna and Russia's Sberbank SBER03.MM agreed on Friday with GM in principle to take a combined 55 percent stake in Opel, European governments have been lining up a total of 4.5 billion euros in loan guarantees.
In Germany, a state bailout so close to federal elections on Sept. 27 has become politically charged as a raft of German companies seek government support and tries to cut staffing costs amid the global economic crisis.
German Vice-Chancellor Frank-Walter Steinmeier has said Magna could cut some 10,000 jobs at Opel. GM Europe had previously said Opel's staff costs needed to be cut by $1.2 billion to return the carmaker to profitability by 2011.
Negotiations over the future of sites in Britain's Luton and Belgium's Antwerp would be "a hard nut", senior Opel labour leader Klaus Franz said, adding it was unclear at this point whether unions would succeed in keeping these plants open.
"The question will be whether we can succeed in the end and what the future perspective for the company looks like -- do we reach the 2 million mark in vehicle sales?" Franz said.
Last year, Opel volumes amounted to 1.50 million cars. In May, sales in Germany rose 57 percent from a year earlier, with year-to-date sales up by roughly a quarter, according to official German statistics.
Even the ultimate shareholder structure may not yet be finalised, Franz added, explaining that a full evaluation would reveal if GM retains 35 percent of Opel or if the workforce gain more than the planned 10 percent at the U.S. carmaker's expense.
For a FACTBOX on Magna's deal to buy Opel click on [ID:nLU524498]
