UPDATE 4-Iran says signs gas deal with China, replaces Total
2009-06-03 00:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran said it signed a $4.7 billion contract with a Chinese state firm on Wednesday to develop a part of a major gas field in the Gulf, replacing French energy company Total which it had accused of delays.
With Western firms wary of investing in the Islamic state due to its nuclear row with the United States, Tehran has increasingly been looking towards energy-hungry Asian countries for investment to help exploit its vast gas and oil reserves.
Despite the global economic slowdown, China is keen to ensure energy does not constrain future growth and force up the prices it pays.
Iran announced the deal with China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) on developing phase 11 of South Pars on the same day as its foreign minister was to meet French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris to discuss Tehran's nuclear activity.
It was signed in Beijing by Seifollah Jashnsaz, managing director of the state National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC), and his CNPC counterpart, the official IRNA news agency said.
"The signing of the cooperation agreement between Iran and China took place as CNPC has replaced the French company of Total," IRNA said.
Total had no immediate comment on the report. In Beijing, CNPC officials were not immediately available for comment.
South Pars, the world's largest reservoir of gas, is shared by Iran and Qatar. The Iranian part is divided into 24 phases.
Jashnsaz accused Total of delays and said Iran had given it an ultimatum six months ago to finalise work or Tehran would "move forward" with another partner, IRNA reported.
But he suggested the Paris-based company could still become involved in the field's downstream development and efforts to start producing liquefied natural gas (LNG).
"If interested, Total can continue negotiations for the downstream sector of this phase and the Pars LNG project," he said.
In April, Total's chief executive Christophe de Margerie said it saw the investment terms offered by Iran for developing gas fields as "not attractive enough".
Earlier in 2009, the French firm had said it did not expect to sign an agreement on South Pars anytime soon.
Iran has the world's second largest gas reserves, almost 16 percent of the world's total, but currently has no major net exports partly because U.S. and U.N. sanctions have deterred investment by Western firms with expertise and technology.
Iran is drawing interest from Indian and Chinese firms seen as less susceptible than many other companies to such pressure, but industry experts say it will be many years before Iran becomes a major gas exporter despite its resources.
"Total stopped its investment because of the political situation, they were not progressing," said Irene Himona, an analyst with Exane BNP. "The South Pars project has been in a no man's land for years now because of the political situation."
Like France, China is among six major powers engaged in efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the dispute over Iran's nuclear work, which the West suspects is aimed at making bombs. Tehran denies the charge.
China, as well as Russia, gave reluctant backing to three rounds of U.N. sanctions imposed on Iran since 2006.
Iran said on Sunday it planned to issue $12.3 billion of foreign currency and rial-denominated bonds over three years to help finance the development of South Pars. Investment for remaining projects at the fields would be around $50 billion. (Additional reporting by Hossein Jaseb in Tehran and by Muriel Boselli in Paris; editing by Anthony Barker)
