Japan should shun option of 2020 rise in CO2: U.N
2009-06-03 08:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan should shun a "politically inexplicable" option of a rise in greenhouse gas emissions when it sets a 2020 target in coming days, the U.N.'s top climate change official said on Wednesday.
Yvo de Boer told Reuters he hoped that both Japan and Russia, the two largest industrialized nations which have not yet outlined 2020 goals, would issue goals for cuts during June 1-12 talks in Bonn working on a new U.N. climate treaty.
"I think it would be politically inexplicable for Japan to take on a target that would amount to an increase in its emissions above its current Kyoto commitment," de Boer said of the weakest goal, which is backed by many industries.
Under the U.N.'s Kyoto Protocol for curbing global warming -- named after the Japanese city where it was agreed in 1997 -- Japan has committed to cut it emissions to at least 6 percent below 1990 levels by 2008-12, he noted.
Japan is the world's fifth largest emitter of greenhouse gases, mainly from burning fossil fuels and its emissions were 8 percent above the 1990 benchmark in 2007. By that yardstick, a four percent target implies a slight cut.
De Boer said Aso had indicated that "the minus 25 would be prohibitively expensive" amid a recession. That meant Japan's goal would be "somewhere in between" the extremes, said de Boer, who is head of the U.N. Climate Change Secretariat in Bonn.
"I hope that they (Japan) submit their number at this session," de Boer said during the 181-nation talks on a new climate treaty due to be agreed in December in Copenhagen.
Developing nations such as China and India want rich nations on average to sign up to cut emissions by at least 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 to avert the worst effects of climate change such as heatwaves, extinctions and rising sea levels.
They say developed nations have to outline promised cuts in emissions -- both national and collective goals -- by June 17, or six months before a Copenhagen deal.
De Boer said it was too early to tell if the deadline would be met. "It's not a legal requirement but it was a decision that those ranges would be agreed here. So if they're not, that deadline will be missed," de Boer said.
"There are still numbers missing from Japan and Russia. Once the list is complete the question is: 'can we reach an agreement on an aggregate figure, and on individual figures?'."
