FOREX-Asian comments prompt a large boost to the dollar
2009-06-03 11:30:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar recovered on Wednesday from a 2009 low against the euro hit earlier in the day after monetary sources in Asia said they would keep buying U.S. Treasuries even if the U.S. credit rating were to be cut.
The remarks from sources in China, Japan, India and South Korea [ID:nSP412010], compiled by Reuters from separate interviews, helped to stem recent selling that has driven the dollar index .DXY to its lowest this year and down more than 7 percent since the start of May.
Traders viewed the comments as an expression of support for dollar-denominated assets from the nations that control about half of the world's currency reserves. Dollar weakness would erode the value of U.S. investments.
"We have said that official rhetoric from central banks would trigger a meaningful bounce in the U.S. dollar and that is the driving force behind this morning's dollar rally," said Kathy Lien, director of currency research at Global Forex Trading in New York, in a note to clients.
Some of the dollar's slide in past weeks has been attributed to speculation that the U.S. credit rating could be downgraded, a move that could prompt nations to diversify their foreign reserves away from U.S. Treasuries.
A warning by S&P on the UK's credit rating recently raised fears that the United States could be next.
Midway through the U.S. session, the euro traded 0.8 percent lower at $1.4198 on electronic trading platform EBS
, after hitting a session low of $1.4153 and falling from the year high of $1.4339 hit in early trade.
The dollar index, which tracks the currency's moves against a basket of six currencies, rose as much as half a percent after the comments, keeping just above its lowest level of the year hit on Tuesday. The index .DXY was last at 79.138.
The comments by the monetary sources in Asia came after a visit by U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner to China, the world's biggest holder of Treasuries, during which he assured Beijing its U.S. investments were safe because Washington is committed to a strong dollar policy.
Analysts said the dollar-positive comments prompted traders to lock in profits against the suffering U.S. currency and might help to stem the dollar's recent selling for the time being but was unlikely to change the trend.
fell as low as $1.6372, according to Reuters data, tumbling from $1.6664 hit in early trading, the highest since since October. It last traded at $1.6442.
Economists say the possibility of a U.S. credit rating downgrade is highly unlikely, but none of the Asian officials dismissed such a possibility, while adding that such a move would have limited impact on their reserve management policy.
Analysts said the comments were significant, given that they come as a handful of countries around the world have questioned the dollar's role as the world's reserve currency.
On Tuesday, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev said the world's biggest emerging markets may discuss the idea of a supranational currency given a changing perception of the U.S. dollar because of weakness in the country's economy.
The Fed's Bernanke warned on Wednesday that rising U.S. debt was contributing to a spike in longer-term interest rates, and said now was the time to start working on reining in deficits.
But as expected, he gave no clue as to whether the U.S. central bank would step up its purchases of government debt or mortgage-backed securities to offset the rising borrowing rates, something investors have been watching for. [nWEQ001068]
"Bernanke's comments were dollar-negative, but right now, the market seems to be focused on buying the dollar after steep losses in recent sessions," said Brian Dolan, chief currency strategist at Forex.com in Bedminster, New Jersey.
The U.S. services sector shrank again in May, according to a report released on Wednesday. [nWEN9983]
. (Additional reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss in New York; Editing by Leslie Adler)
