UPDATE 1-Soccer-Man United agree shirt sponsorship deal with Aon
2009-06-03 00:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Aon Corp AOC.N, the world's largest insurance broker, has agreed a four-year deal to sponsor the shirts of English Premier League champions Manchester United from the start of the 2010-11 season.
United's current 14 million pounds ($23.25 million) a year deal with U.S. insurance giant American International Group (
"We are delighted to be entering such an important relationship with a company of the stature of Aon and to have its logo adorn our shirts from the start of the 2010-11 season," United chief executive David Gill said in a statement.
"We look forward to being closely aligned with the world leader in risk management, a firm which shares our values and is an exciting partner for Manchester United.
"Today's announcement clearly strengthens our position as one of the biggest clubs in world football."
The deal represents a coup for Aon, which has secured one of the most prestigious advertising deals in sport with United's huge global fan base making them one of the top prizes in sports sponsorship.
"It is a unique opportunity when two leaders in their respective fields can come together in a partnership such as the one we are announcing today," added Greg Case, president and chief executive officer of Aon.
"Manchester United has one of the most recognised sports brands in the world. David and his team are all about winning and about excellence; the same holds true for the Aon team."
Once the world's biggest insurer by market value, AIG averted bankruptcy in September last year with an $85 billion federal bailout, which later swelled to about $152 billion.
The company, which has sold assets and cut costs to repay part of the government rescue package, joins a string of other companies that have had to rein in spending on sport as the global economic downturn deepens.
United's appeal is enhanced by its growing legion of fans in the largely untapped Asian market. The club has exhibition games in China, Malaysia, South Korea and Indonesia planned for later this year.
With the global financial crisis biting deeper by the day, companies around the world are cutting costs and slashing sponsorship budgets.
