HIGHLIGHTS 4-BOJ's Kamezaki: may need swift steps for economy
2009-06-03 03:10:00.0
HIGHLIGHTS 4-BOJ's Kamezaki: may need swift steps for economy | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
HIGHLIGHTS 4-BOJ's Kamezaki: may need swift steps for economy
Wed  EDT
(For more stories on the Japanese economy, click [ID:nECONJP])
SHIZUOKA, Japan, June 3
Kamezaki, a former trading house executive who has mostly toed the BOJ's official line on monetary policy, also said it was not yet time for the BOJ to consider ending its unconventional policy steps.
Following are key quotes from Kamezaki's speech to business leaders in Shizuoka, west of Tokyo, and a news conference that followed:
"Long-term interest rates move in a way that reflects market players' expectations of economic growth and price developments, while also taking into account uncertainty over the outlook.
"If economic and price growth is high, long-term interest rates rise. It's desirable for long-term interest rates to move in a way that is consistent with the economic and price outlook.
"As such, it's important to ensure that fiscal discipline and market confidence in monetary policy are maintained ...
"I don't think current interest rate moves are one-sided. On the one hand they're moving on expectations about the economic outlook with hopes of it bottoming out. On the other hand, they are reflecting market views about the fiscal outlook.
"Financial markets are calmer than before, but we can't see the path towards resolving the roots of this financial crisis. They (financial markets) remain unstable.
"Given such a situation, we have not reached a point where we can consider ending unconventional policy steps."
JAPAN'S ECONOMY
"Japan's economy continues to worsen. But inventory adjustments appear to have run their course as manufacturers had sharply cut output, so we are past a situation where the economy was going down a steep hill.
"As for the outlook, we expect a recovery before long as the pace of declines in output slows and government measures to support the economy take effect. After that, it will take significant time for corporate output and sales to return to past levels.
"With earnings conditions expected to remain severe, any recovery in capital expenditure will remain moderate. Job and household income conditions are expected to worsen ahead so personal consumption may weaken further ...
"Our main scenario is for Japan's economy to gradually recover towards the latter half of the current fiscal year. In the near term, it will be due to the effect of government measures and the slowing pace of output falls as inventory adjustment proceeds. After that, we will see support from a recovery in exports as overseas economies pick up, thereby inducing domestic demand ...
"There are various uncertainties about the impact of such policy steps, such as whether jitters over the financial system could diminish their effect. It's uncertain whether tax cuts will lead to more consumption instead of going to savings. There is also uncertainty over whether huge government bond issuance could push up interest rates ...
"As such, the risks to the economy and prices are mostly to the downside. There is a significant chance of Japan's economy deteriorating again if recoveries in overseas economies are weak and exports don't pick up enough."
"On December 19 the Bank of Japan cut its overnight call rate target to 0.1 percent. Having come this far, there is very little room to cut interest rates further. But that is not the end of monetary policy. We increased our annual purchases of long-term Japanese government bonds to 16.8 trillion yen from 14.4 trillion yen (to $175.6 billion from $150.5 billion) ...
"Given the high uncertainty of the economic and price outlook, we must support the economy on the financial front by helping increase demand in the real economy and ease market jitters by continuing with our low-interest rate policy, liquidity-funnelling measures and steps to support corporate finance.
"We need to think proactively what measures are available and could be effective, and act swiftly depending on changes in economic circumstances."
"I expect the consumer price index to mark annual falls of about 2 percent towards the summer, mainly due to sharp declines in oil goods prices since last autumn ...
"In looking at prices, we need to be careful of developments in inflation expectations. If the economy doesn't recover in the way we forecast in our main scenario and lead to further declines in demand, the public's medium- to long-term economic growth expectations and inflation expectations may undershoot our forecast. This could lead to a deflationary spiral, so is very dangerous." ($1=95.67 Yen) (Reporting by Tetsushi Kajimoto and Leika Kihara; Editing by Michael Watson)
