Japan trade min cautious on big emission cuts-media
2009-06-02 23:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's trade minister has expressed caution about setting an aggressive target for cutting the nation's greenhouse gas emissions as he is worried about the ability of households and businesses to bear the cost, a newspaper reported on Wednesday.
Prime Minister Taro Aso is expected to finalise by mid-June a target for midterm emissions cuts in Japan, the world's fifth-largest greenhouse gas emitter. [ID:nT38553]
A government advisory panel has proposed six target options for Japan, one of which is to cut emissions by 15 percent by 2020 from 1990 levels. Environment Minister Tetsuo Saito has said achieving such a goal was possible. [ID:nT207755]
"Politicians need to think about its feasibility and how much of a burden households can take on," Trade Minister Toshihiro Nikai was quoted by the Asahi newspaper as saying in an interview.
Aso and four ministers involved in climate issues, including Nikai and Saito, met privately for discussions on Monday, and are expected to hold more meetings before Aso makes a final decision.
Aso's government has been looking at the six options for cutting emissions, ranging from plus 4 percent to minus 25 percent from 1990 levels. Japanese emissions have been rising recently, so that range is equivalent to one of minus 4 percent to minus 30 percent from 2005 levels.
However, the fate of any target that Aso picks is uncertain as opinion polls show that the opposition Democratic Party may win a general election that must be held by October. The main opposition party has advocated setting a target of a 25 percent reduction from 1990 levels, although whether it would stick to that stance once in office is unclear.
Japan is keen to carve out a role for itself as a leader on environmental issues, but the business community is nervous about setting stringent targets before signs that growing economies such as China and India are ready to agree to emissions cuts.
Many Japanese companies are also reluctant to go beyond their current energy conservation efforts while the world's second-largest economy struggles with its deepest recession on record.
Japan's emissions hit a record high in the year to March 2008 as offices and households increased emissions and power companies failed to meet their pollution reduction goals. [ID:nT173861] (Reporting by Yoko Nishikawa; Editing by Joseph Radford)
