UPDATE 1-US Senate considers 'clunker' plan for auto sales
2009-06-02 18:29:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. Senate considered a proposal on Monday to invigorate auto sales and boost distressed carmakers by underwriting some of the cost to consumers of buying fuel-efficient cars.
It also came as automakers began to report yet another month of recession-fueled sales declines, with purchases off about 30 percent in May from a year earlier.
"It's critical that we pass this at this time. It goes without saying when we look at what happened yesterday with General Motors and what we saw with Chrysler," Stabenow, a Democrat, said in remarks on the Senate floor.
"It's a humbling time for automakers globally," Brownback added, noting that overseas manufacturers are also struggling with depressed sales.
Brownback, a Republican, noted sales increases in Germany, France and China due to similar initiatives, and said a U.S. program would comply with international trade rules.
The Senate proposal, known as "cash for clunkers," would provide up to $4,500 in vouchers to car buyers who trade in their older, less fuel efficient models for vehicles that get better gasoline mileage.
New cars must get at least 22 miles per gallon while sport utilities and pickups -- the biggest sellers for U.S. manufacturers -- must achieve at least 18 mpg. Vehicles over $45,000 are ineligible.
"Around the world, consumers are already benefiting from similar programs, and the resulting economic stimulus has been significant," said Dave McCurdy, president of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, an industry trade group.
The Senate proposal is slated as an amendment to legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration new power to regulate tobacco products, officials said. A vote on the amendment could come on Wednesday while consideration of the larger bill could stretch into next week.
One senior Democratic lawmaker, who did not want to speak for attribution because the matter is not finalized, said leaders of the House of Representatives have agreed to go along with the Senate bill, if it passes.
A House committee has already approved a similar cash for clunker bill attached to climate change legislation. (Reporting by John Crawley, editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Carol Bishopric)
