FOREX-U.S. dollar slides to fresh 2009 low vs euro
2009-06-02 14:03:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell to fresh lows against the euro on Tuesday, as upbeat U.S. housing data reinforced optimism about the health of the global economy, weakening safe-haven demand for the greenback.
Higher-yielding and commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars gained against the U.S. dollar, benefiting from the equity markets' generally bullish tone in recent weeks.
The U.S. currency had recovered some of Monday's losses earlier in the global trading day, but those gains eroded as the New York session opened.
"The overall sentiment in the market remains dollar-negative," said Vassili Serebriakov, senior currency strategist at Wells Fargo in New York.
In early afternoon trading, the dollar index fell to a low of 78.395 .DXY, its weakest since mid-December. It last traded at 78.427, down 0.9 percent on the day.
on electronic trading platform EBS. The euro last traded at $1.4313, up 1.0 percent on the day.
AUSSIE, KIWI AT MULTI-MONTH HIGHS
, according to Reuters data, having fallen as low as US$0.8050. The Aussie was last at US$0.8226, up 1.6 percent on the day.
, according to Reuters data, and last traded at $1.6584, up 0.9 percent on the day.
, according to Reuters data. By early afternoon, it was up 1.5 percent at US$0.6586.
Comments by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on CNBC Television that the world needs a larger number of reserve currencies weighed on the dollar. Analysts said the start of the dollar's slide this morning coincided with his remarks.
His statements, however, were nothing new. In May, he had suggested that the Russian rouble should be made the new global reserve currency. But a repeat of these remarks has highlighted the dollar's vulnerability as the U.S. government tries to tackle an enormous fiscal deficit.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, for his part, tried to assuage fears about the dollar in China on Tuesday. He reiterated the U.S. government's strong dollar policy and sought to reassure China over its huge holdings of U.S. Treasury debt. [ID:nL2583776]
Still, despite the overall bearish tone on the dollar, not a few analysts have expressed concern about the speed and extent of the dollar's fall in recent days.
"More and more talk has been circulating that the current dollar downtrend is becoming extreme," said Brian Dolan, chief currency strategist at Forex.com in Bedminster, New Jersey.
"While we still have no concrete technical indications of a reversal, we are becoming increasingly cautious on chasing the dollar lower and today's modest new highs versus yesterday's suggests the short dollar trade has become more crowded." (Additional reporting by Nick Olivari; Editing by James Dalgleish)
