U.S., Japan and Germany see more positive signs
2009-06-02 00:38:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. pending home sales in April unexpectedly notched their biggest monthly gain in 7-1/2 years, a report showed on Tuesday, presenting evidence from a key sector of the U.S. economy that supports signs the global recession may be bottoming out.
Earlier, ministers from Japan and Germany said they saw signs of growth next year, while a global consumer survey found confidence stabilizing.
"The collapse of the housing market was the catalyst for the financial crisis," said William Hornbarger of Wachovia Securities in St. Louis, Missouri. "This stronger number will add to the increased optimism that is flowing through the stock markets at the moment."
Not all the news was good, however, as unemployment in the euro zone jumped to a near 10-year high. But the upbeat numbers were enough to keep Wall Street's three-month rebound intact while stocks in Europe also edged higher.
The National Association of Realtors said its Pending Home Sales Index, based on new sales contracts, rose to 90.3 in April from 84.6 in March.
Japan's finance minister, Kaoru Yosano, said the country's worst post-war recession has already hit bottom. But a full recovery might not come until early 2010 as manufacturers gradually lift output from very low levels.
His comment came after news that unemployment in the 16 countries using the euro jumped to 9.2 percent -- 14.6 million people -- in April, the highest level since September 1999, damping hopes of any quick recovery.
"Although there are mounting signs that the rate of economic contraction across the euro zone is moderating appreciably and business confidence has risen ... this is unlikely to prevent unemployment from rising substantially further," said economist Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight.
A survey by Ipsos and Reuters found global consumer confidence stabilizing after an 18-month fall, providing a further glimmer of hope for a world economy in which three quarters of households have cut spending.
British mortgage approvals for house purchases were slightly higher than expected in April but still at a subdued level, pointing to further house price declines, official data showed.
The Ipsos/Reuters survey, conducted in late April and early May, found consumer confidence in the United States rose two percentage points to 13 percent since the last poll in November.
In China, confidence jumped to 61 percent from 46 percent and in India it rose five points to 70 percent. But in Europe consumer confidence dropped nine points to 23 percent, and in Brazil it fell to 56 percent from 61 percent.
"It looks like we have hit bottom and so there are glimmers of hope," said Clifford Young of Ipsos Global Public Affairs, which polled 23,000 people in 23 countries.
"The stabilization is basically happening in the United States, India and China and that has staunched a bit the bleed around the world," he said. "That being said, Europe is still dicey, as well as Brazil and Russia."
In Beijing, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said China, the biggest holder of U.S. government debt, backed efforts by President Barack Obama's administration to pump up the ailing U.S. economy.
Geithner, on his first official visit to China, said: "I've actually found a lot of confidence here in China, justifiable confidence, in the strength and resilience and dynamism of the American economy."
China, which held $768 billion in Treasuries as of March, has watched uneasily as Washington spends lavishly to try to haul the economy out of its deepest recession in 80 years, fearing inflation will erode the value of its holdings.
Australia's central bank kept interest rates unchanged as data showed improvements in the export and housing sectors. It suggested the country might be one of the few to have dodged recession last quarter.
Switzerland said its economy shrank 0.8 percent quarter-on-quarter in the three months to March for its worst performance since 1992, as a slump in exports and construction continued.
Wall Street indices were mixed at midday after paring gains. World stocks were up 0.25 percent, just shy of the 0.3 percent gain by the Nikkei stock average
, which recorded a second-straight close at an eight-month high.
(Reporting by Reuters bureaus; Editing by Richard Balmforth and Dan Grebler)
