REFILE-FOREX-Dollar stays at 2009 low vs euro and dollar index
2009-06-02 09:07:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar on Tuesday again fell to its lowest level this year against the euro and a basket of currencies, reversing earlier gains, due to a persistent belief that the global economy is on the road to recovery.
The U.S. currency had recovered some of Monday's losses but gains faded as U.S. stock futures SPc1 DJc1 turned higher, helping to renew the recent rally in higher risk currencies.
Sterling hit a fresh seven-month high versus the greenback, while the Australian dollar rose to a fresh eight-month peak to extend the previous day's gains.
Analysts said the dollar's failure to recover shows that investors are convinced the global economy is over the worst, encouraging them to buy higher-risk currencies and assets.
"Currencies were generally weaker against the dollar today before strong demand at the London fix and a turnaround in equities drove some heavy dollar selling, to push a number of majors back into positive territory against the greenback," said Sacha Tihanyi, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto in a note to clients.
The dollar index fell to a low of 78.524 .DXY, its weakest since mid-December. The euro meanwhile hit a 2009 high of $1.4284
, on electronic trading platform EBS. The euro last traded at $1.4228, up 0.5 percent on EBS.
, according to Reuters data, having earlier fallen as low as $0.8050, while sterling hit a seven-month high of $1.6502
, also according to Reuters data
The New Zealand dollar, another higher-risk currency, also touched an eight-month high against its U.S. counterpart of $0.6568
, according to Reuters data.
Sterling had come under pressure earlier in the day, pressured by news that an Abu Dhabi government-owned firm sold its shares in major UK bank Barclays (
But investors soon bought back into the global economic recovery story as they continued to draw optimism from Monday's stronger-than-expected manufacturing activity surveys out of China, the euro zone, Britain and the United States.
They shrugged off Tuesday's news that the euro zone unemployment rate rose to 9.2 percent in April, the highest since September 1999. For more see [ID:nL21005033].
Analysts noted the dollar's recent fall has coincided with money shifting out of U.S. Treasuries and into emerging markets equities and other assets.
"It is not so much a flight from the dollar ... but an expressed preference for assets with greater yield-enhancement potential," said Neil Mellor, currency strategist at Bank of New York Mellon.
In other news Tuesday, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner reaffirmed his faith in a strong dollar and sought to reassure China over its huge holdings of U.S. Treasury debt, saying Washington is committed to keeping its currency strong and inflation low and stable. [ID:nL2583776]
. (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer in London; Editing by James Dalgleish)
