Energy Conversion guarded on '09 view
2009-06-02 11:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Energy Conversion Devices Inc ENER.O is sober in its outlook for the U.S. solar market for the rest of this year because access to project financing remains scarce and government stimulus funds have yet to kick in, Chief Executive Mark Morelli said on Tuesday.
"Near-term, I think it's going to be tough," Morelli said at the Reuters Global Energy Summit in New York. "We didn't give guidance, so any company that is not giving guidance obviously doesn't have a lot of visibility.
"We're being somewhat guarded on the second half because we were a bit optimistic coming into the New Year ... We don't know when the financing will come back; we just hope it will come back."
Energy Conversion Devices makes lightweight, flexible solar laminates for rooftops and buildings that convert sunlight into electricity.
The company, which is based in Rochester Hills, Michigan, has been hit hard by falling demand for solar power due to frozen credit markets that have dried up access to project financing. In May, it reported an 81 percent drop in quarterly profit and declined to provide any outlook, citing poor visibility.
Also this year, the company said it would slow expansion plans and cut production to bring supplies into line with weakened demand.
To help generate sales, the company is using its own balance sheet to fund selective projects, Morelli said.
"We do it specifically in the area of doing take-out financing, so we'll get our cash back in two to three years, to sell the deal," Morelli said. "This is currently an approach that we are working on a very selective basis to be able to sell into this market."
Other solar companies, including First Solar Inc (
), have also said they would help finance projects to keep them moving.
Access to credit has improved in Germany, one of the world's top solar markets, but the United States has yet to follow suit, Morelli said.
"The U.S. market in particular is very slow," Morelli said.
Funds from the U.S. government's economic stimulus package are unlikely to materialize until later this year, with most of the impact coming in 2010.
"The reality is a lot of that you won't even see until next year," Morelli said of the stimulus funds. "That's kind of unfortunate because we'd like to see the U.S. market take off sooner. Folks are looking for another large market, and I think the U.S. can be that large market, but it's going to take a little bit of time."
Energy Conversion Devices does much of its solar manufacturing in Michigan, though Morelli said he expects the company to add a facility overseas, where many of its customers are based. The company has a joint venture in China and its biggest European markets are France and Italy.
Longer term, however, Morelli said he is bullish on the U.S. market, and the company is following the lead of U.S. solar rivals like First Solar and SunPower Corp SPWRA.O in pursuing contracts in the growing U.S. utility-scale market.
Unlike SunPower and First Solar, however, Energy Conversion Devices' thin film solar laminates are better-suited to rooftops than the large solar farms that dominate the utility market for solar power.
"It takes some time to penetrate that space; First Solar has worked on it for about three years ... We are not quite at that level of maturity, but what makes our product interesting is we are going after the distributed power generation segment," Morelli said, adding that distributed power, mainly on rooftops, makes up anywhere from 7 percent to 25 percent of the growing utility solar market.
In the last six to nine months, Energy Conversion Devices has been hiring people to help it tap into the utility market, Morelli said.
"These things take some time to work out, but we're pretty confident we'll win some of that business," he said.
Energy Conversion Devices' thin film products are made from amorphous silicon and unlike traditional solar panels, do not rely on costly crystalline silicon as their primary raw material.
A sharp drop, however, in the cost of polysilicon has brought on more competition from silicon-based solar panels, Morelli said.
"Before when we were bidding on a rooftop, let's say in Italy, folks would clearly buy our value proposition ... Now they have a lot of low-cost polysilicon that may end up on that bid for that building," Morelli said. "We may end up winning that bid, but the problem is it just takes more time. There is more competition, clearly, and it just takes us time to work through those conversations."
Energy Conversion Devices shares were off 8 cents, or 0.5 percent, at $17.16 in morning trade on the Nasdaq.
(Reporting by Nichola Groom; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn and Gerald E. McCormick)
