Trade with China could boost U.S. jobs: Kirk
2009-06-02 14:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Enhanced trade with China could boost employment in the United States, U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said on Tuesday, adding that the Obama administration hoped to ease friction in commercial ties with China.
U.S. imports of Chinese goods have soared in recent years, pushing the trade deficit with China to a record $266.3 billion in 2008 and spurring criticism the Asian nation is using exchange rates to unfairly stimulate its exports.
In a speech to the U.S.-China Business Council, Kirk said shrinking the trade imbalance with China and gaining new access for U.S. exports to China could mean "extraordinary opportunities for job creation" in the United States.
"If we can do it by trade diplomacy, we will. If we have to file at the WTO (World Trade Organization), we'll file. And as appropriate, the U.S. will also apply trade remedies fully and fairly as provided for under WTO rules," Kirk said in prepared remarks.
The United States will urge China to encourage foreign participation, discipline state-led economic development, and strengthen accountability, while boosting growth in its services sector and doing more to enforce intellectual property rights, and environmental, labor and product safety standards, he added.
"I take our Chinese partners at their word: that China will work with the United States toward a positive and cooperative relationship on trade, investment, and economic issues," Kirk said.
During a trip to China, which is the largest holder of U.S. government debt, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner on Tuesday encouraged Beijing to let the yuan's exchange rate rise.
Later this fall, the two countries also will convene a meeting of the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, Kirk said, adding that his deputy, Demetrios Marantis, will soon visit China to begin meeting preparations.
"We must make meaningful progress on bedrock trade concerns that spring from the U.S. and China's differing economic approaches," Kirk said.
Boosting trade would also help the United States recover from recession -- and enforcing trade agreements will be part of the U.S. strategy, Kirk said, noting President Barack Obama will soon outline his trade policy.
The request was made under Section 421 of U.S. trade law, which allows the United States to restrict imports from China in response to a damaging surge. The U.S. International Trade Commission held a hearing on the petition on Tuesday.
Former President George W. Bush denied a number of Section 421 petitions that reached his desk, primarily on the grounds that they were not in the U.S. national interest and that other suppliers would step in if China imports were curbed.
(Reporting by Roberta Rampton and Doug Palmer; Editing by Paul Simao)
