FOREX-Dollar off year's lows but sentiment bearish
2009-06-02 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar steadied on Tuesday after hitting its lowest this year versus a basket of currencies the previous day, but underlying sentiment for the U.S. currency remained bearish on views of a stabilising global economy.
Commodity-linked currencies such as the Australian dollar, which hit an eight-month peak against the U.S. dollar, also eased, although analysts expect its uptrend to remain intact as commodity prices rise.
A surge in risk-taking appetite, fuelled by sharp gains in share prices, took a breather as European share prices dipped in early trade, while U.S. stock futures were flat.
"The dollar is still on unstable ground, although we are seeing a degree of profit-taking today," said Lee Hardman, currency economist at Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. "Signs of improvement in the economy as well as improving financial conditions continue to weigh on the dollar."
, having rallied to $1.4246 on trading platform EBS on Monday, its strongest since late December.
, after rising as high as 96.81 yen the previous day.
The Australian dollar slipped after the Reserve Bank of Australia held interest rates at a record low of 3 percent on Tuesday, but said there was scope to ease further if needed.
, off a seven-month high of $1.6497 on Monday.
"Two clear casualties of improved risk appetite remain the dollar and U.S. government bonds, with the dollar experiencing broad-based weakness whilst bond yields have pressed higher," said Calyon analysts in a note. "Market sentiment for the dollar has soured quickly and the downward trend is firmly entrenched for the medium term."
Generally upbeat manufacturing reports from the euro zone, Britain and China added to that optimism.
The market will keep a close eye on policy announcements from the European Central Bank and the Bank of England on Thursday. Both are expected to hold short-term borrowing costs steady, and the ECB is due to provide more details of its plan to purchase assets to stimulate the economy.
