European stocks dip, Barclays stake sale hits banks
2009-06-02 07:12:00.0
(Reuters) - European stocks slipped 0.2 percent at midday on Tuesday, weighed down by bank shares after Abu Dhabi sold an 11 percent stake in Barclays (
), igniting fears a sharp rally in bank stocks may be over.
The benchmark index rose 2.8 percent on Monday, hitting its highest close since Jan. 6.
Bank stocks .SX7P, which have jumped 112 percent since early March, were Tuesday's top faller. Barclays (
) was down 14 percent after Abu Dhabi's International Petroleum Investment Company sold its stake in the UK lender, reaping a $2.5 billion profit in just seven months.
) was down 1.4 percent, Deutsche Bank (
The sale by Abu Dhabi raised concerns that other big Barclays investors may also look to take profits. The bank raised funds from Qatar, China, Japan and Singapore investors last year. [ID:nL2185843]
"It's clearly a negative signal for the banking sector," said David Thebault, head of quantitative sales trading at Global Equities in Paris.
"People are getting nervous again about the market, and this piece of news could be enough to prompt other investors to cash in profits and kill the broad market rally."
But Tammo Greetfeld, strategist with UniCredit, said the Barclays news would not undermine the equity market's rally, which would depend more on healthy economic indicators.
"It's not what is going to determine the market for the next couple of weeks," Greetfeld said. "What's more influential is that the list of positive economic indicators is continuing to improve."
Investors were bracing for U.S. data on pending sales of previously owned homes for April USNCH=ECI, to be released at 1400 GMT. Chinese manufacturing data on Monday helped lift European markets by raising hopes of economic recovery.
Around Europe, UK's FTSE 100 index
was down 0.5 percent, Germany's DAX index
up 0.1 percent and France's CAC 40
Shares in mining companies fell on softer metal prices, with BHP Billiton (
U.S. crude oil CLc1 eased below $68.00 per barrel, after hitting near seven-month highs on Monday, prompting falls in oil company shares, with BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
Car stocks were on the rise, gaining ground after General Motors Corp (
"It's a breath of fresh air that it's finally happened," Howard Wheeldon, senior strategist at BGC Partners in London said of GM's effect on the auto sector. "It's a relief."
"There's a lot of slashing and burning to do yet before these companies become more efficient."
) surged 9.8 percent, with traders citing various factors including a short squeeze in the stock and hopes VW will benefit if majority shareholder Porsche (
), Peugeot (
) rose between 1.6 and 2.1 percent. (Additional reporting by Blaise Robinson in Paris; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
