FOREX-Dollar off year's lows, central bank meetings eyed
2009-06-01 23:15:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar steadied on Tuesday a day after hitting its lowest this year against the euro and a basket of currencies as reassuring economic data and a rally on Wall Street reduced the safe-haven allure of the greenback.
The U.S. manufacturing sector improved in May to post its highest reading since September and construction spending in April notched its biggest increase in eight months, bolstering the view that the global economy is on the mend. [ID:nN01259240].
Generally upbeat manufacturing reports from the euro zone, Britain and China added to that optimism and fuelled a sell-off in the dollar on Monday. [ID:nSP428779]
Commodity-related currencies such as the Australian and Canadian dollars, considered to be higher risk, retreated from eight-month highs against the greenback set on Monday but still hovered near them as oil prices CLc1 also jumped.
Traders said the market was likely to be range-bound, however, ahead of central bank meetings in Australia and Europe.
"Trade will likely be slow, at least until the end of the central bank meeting in Australia," said Minoru Shioiri, a senior manager of FX trading at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
The European Central Bank and the Bank of England hold policy-setting meetings on Thursday. Both are expected to hold short-term borrowing costs steady, and the ECB may provide more details on its plan to purchase assets to stimulate the economy. [ID:nLT554071]
"Profit-taking may also emerge in currencies that had gained quite a bit so far, such as the euro, if the central bank meeting in Europe mentions a rate cut or some unorthodox measures," Shioiri said.
DOLLAR UNDER PRESSURE?
, having rallied to $1.4246 on trading platform EBS on Monday, its strongest since late December.
Financial markets took in stride General Motors Corp's (
) bankruptcy filing on Monday, the third-largest in U.S. history and the largest ever in the U.S. manufacturing sector. [ID:nCARS1]
"Still, as a general trend, players will likely opt for selling the dollar going forward," said Daisuke Uno, chief strategist at Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp.
"A string of factors that would prompt dollar selling still exists, including the U.S. credit problems and the restructuring of GM among others."
, retreating from an eight-month high of $0.8154. The New Zealand dollar eased to $0.6466
, off a seven-month high it hit on Monday at $1.6497.
, after rising as high as 96.81 yen the previous day. (Editing by Michael Watson)
