JPMorgan, Amex to sell stock to get out of TARP
2009-06-01 17:54:00.0
JPMorgan, Amex to sell stock to get out of TARP | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
JPMorgan, Amex to sell stock to get out of TARP
Mon, Jun 1 2009
People walk past the JPMorgan Chase & Co building in New York March 17, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Chip East
Mon  EDT
) on Monday announced plans to sell $5.5 billion of common stock, hoping to position themselves to quickly repay funds from the government's bank bailout plan.
JPMorgan will sell $5 billion of stock and American Express will sell $500 million. The JPMorgan offering will be priced by Tuesday morning, a person close to the matter said. The person was granted anonymity because the timing is not public.
Both New York-based companies were among the 19 U.S. lenders to recently undergo the government "stress tests" of their ability to weather a deep recession, and were among the nine that regulators said did not need more capital.
JPMorgan took $25 billion from the Treasury Department's Troubled Asset Relief Program, and said it expects to repay the sum this month. It said repayment is in "the best interests of the country and the company."
American Express took $3.4 billion from TARP, and Chief Executive Kenneth Chenault said his company has always viewed TARP as a "temporary" program.
Many banks have criticized TARP for its restrictions, including on compensation, and a perception among investors that recipients are desperate for capital.
Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan's chief executive, in April called it a "scarlet letter" for a bank to participate.
The Fed said that to repay aid, banks must show their ability to sell equity, sell long-term debt not backed by the government, foster lending, maintain sufficient capital, meet their funding needs and obligations, and be a source of "strength" to their subsidiaries. [ID:nN01218884]
The companies include JPMorgan, American Express, Bank of New York Mellon Corp (
), BB&T Corp (
), Capital One Financial Corp (
), Goldman Sachs Group Inc (
), State Street Corp (
), the ninth company, did not take money from TARP.
), found to have small capital holes, to soon be eligible to repay the government.
) has said it has plugged close to $26 billion of its $33.9 billion shortfall, while SunTrust Banks Inc (
(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel; Additional reporting by Tim Ahmann and Mark Felsenthal in Washington, D.C.; Editing by Gary Hill)
