FOREX-US dollar falls to '09 low as risk tolerance rises
2009-06-01 16:39:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar on Monday slid to its lowest this year against the euro and a basket of currencies as stronger-than-expected U.S. data and sharp gains in equities reduced safe-haven demand for the greenback.
The dollar, however, trimmed losses in afternoon trading as investors took profits in other currencies, but traders said this did not change the dollar's overall weak trend.
Commodity-linked currencies including the Australian and New Zealand dollars, considered to be higher risk, hit eight-month highs against their U.S counterpart as oil prices CLc1 jumped and U.S. stocks rose
"The dollar is under pressure and equities are up because the market believes the U.S. economy is stabilizing and that we may have turned the corner," said John McCarthy, director of foreign exchange at ING Capital Markets in New York.
Various measures of tension in the financial markets have also eased, encouraging risk-taking in the market. The interest rates banks charge each other to borrow dollars dipped to a record low on Monday while euro rates also fell, as excess liquidity increased.
In late afternoon trading, the dollar index .DXY was flat at 79.231, after hitting its lowest since mid-December at 78.586 earlier in the global session.
, having rallied as high as around $1.4246, its strongest since late December, according to Reuters data.
POUND, COMMODITY CURRENCIES RISE
Among perceived higher risk currencies, sterling rose to a seven-month high against the dollar at $1.6478
. The pound was last at $1.6428, up 1.5 percent on the day.
Also adding to optimism about the global economy and jump-starting a sell-off in the dollar were generally upbeat manufacturing reports from the euro zone, Britain and China. [ID:nSP428779]
The dollar rose against the yen, climbing 1.2 percent to 96.40 yen
Financial markets took in stride General Motors Corp's (
) bankruptcy filing on Monday, the third largest in U.S. history and the largest ever in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
Still, some analysts remained skeptical about the market's upbeat view and were baffled by the sharp sell-off in the dollar.
"I don't really buy all this green shoots story," said ING's McCarthy. "Unless we see the economy creating jobs and retail sales coming back, we're not out of the woods yet. So that's why I don't understand why the market is selling the dollar."
Analysts at CIBC World Markets think the dollar could see a temporary rebound given the speed at which investors ditched the currency. They believe investors could focus once again on the weak economies in Europe, for instance.
. (Additional reporting by Nick Olivari; Editing by James Dalgleish)
