GLOBAL MARKETS-Oil, world stocks surge on factory data
2009-06-01 16:32:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks and oil surged to 2009 highs on Monday as factory activity from China to Europe and the United States suggested the global recession is easing, cutting the safety bid for the U.S. dollar and driving it to lows for the year.
U.S. Treasuries tumbled, with the benchmark yields poised for their biggest one-day rise in eight months, as the rising equity markets and surprisingly strong data sapped the safe-haven appeal of government debt.
Selling by mortgage players in response to the sharp rise in Treasuries yields also spurred selling of bonds, analysts said.
The economic data and the dollar's slide against a basket of currencies and the euro sparked a rally in commodities, with copper and oil rising to seven-month highs. Crude prices settled above $68 a barrel.
Contraction in the U.S. manufacturing sector slowed in May for the fifth straight month, while U.S. consumer spending fell modestly in April. China said industrial activity expanded in May and surveys in Europe showed the manufacturing recession was easing.
"Stock markets are rallying on improved global factory activity. The dollar is at another five-month low. All that is being translated into the idea that the worst of the recession is behind us," said Tom Bentz, an analyst at BNP Paribas Commodity Futures Inc in New York.
U.S. stocks rose more than 2.5 percent despite General Motors Corp's (
) filing for bankruptcy, the third-largest in U.S. history. Once an icon of American industry, GM was removed from the 30-stock Dow and delisted by the New York Stock Exchange.
Major industrials led a 220-point gain in the Dow, with Boeing Co (
) adding 5.1 percent. Energy companies also gained, with Chevron Corp (
"What this (data) means is things aren't really getting worse and I guess that is good enough for a rally," said Kim Caughey, senior investment analyst at Fort Pitt Capital Group in Pittsburgh.
closed up 221.11 points, or 2.60 percent, at 8,721.44. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
rose 23.73 points, or 2.58 percent, at 942.87. The Nasdaq Composite Index
added 54.35 points, or 3.06 percent, at 1,828.68.
European shares hit their highest close since Jan. 6, lifted by energy companies and miners.
Oil rose more than 3 percent, extending its biggest monthly gain in a decade last month as the improving global picture of factory activity bolstered expectations of economic recovery and increased for oil.
U.S. crude CLc1 settled up $2.27 to $68.58, the highest settlement since Nov. 4. London Brent crude LCOc1 gained $2.45 to settle at $67.97 a barrel.
Commodity-related currencies such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, which are considered to be higher risk, hit eight-month highs against the U.S. currency.
"Generally, this is still a case of better-than-expected data not necessarily good for the U.S. dollar," said Shaun Osborne, chief currency strategist at TD Securities in Toronto. "We expect no rebound in sight for the dollar just yet."
As measured against a basket of major currencies, the Dollar Index .DXY fell 0.01 percent at 79.233.
Against the yen, the dollar
was up 1.36 percent at 96.59, and the euro
Risk premiums jumped on U.S. agency mortgage bonds as Treasury yields leaped and swap spreads rose. Investors were concerned about the depth of the Federal Reserve's commitment to buy as much as $1.45 billion in mortgage-related securities and up to $300 billion of bonds.
MSCI's index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS advanced 2.2 percent to its highest level since Oct. 2, and is now up 55 percent since world markets bottomed on March 9.
Japan's Nikkei share average
ended 1.6 percent higher. (Reporting by Chuck Mikolajczak, Nick Olivari, Lynn Adler and Chris Rees in New York; Brian Gorman, Alex Lawler, Ian Chua, Michael Taylor and Maytaal Angel in London; writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Leslie Adler)
