Data fuels global rebound hope
2009-06-01 16:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Global manufacturing showed signs of improvement on Monday, suggesting the world economy may be over the worst of the recession even as General Motors Corp filed for bankruptcy protection.
U.S. manufacturing shrank at a slower-than-expected rate in May while in China, the world's third-biggest economy, industrial activity expanded in the month and surveys in Europe showed the manufacturing recession was easing. U.S. construction spending also rose in April while consumer spending fell modestly.
"The global recession seems to be losing force," said U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner even before the U.S. data was released, but he cautioned that credit was likely to be tight for some time.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 221.11 points, or 2.60 percent, to 8,721.44. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index rose 23.73 points, or 2.58 percent, to 942.87. The Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 54.35 points, or 3.06 percent, to 1,828.68.
The MSCI world equity index and the FTSEurofirst 300 index in Europe rose 2.8 percent, and Japan's Nikkei average gained 1.6 percent.
With unemployment high across the globe, the timing and speed of any economic recovery is uncertain. The recession is still "powerful and dangerous" in many countries, Geithner said on a visit to China.
U.S. President Barack Obama said the government is a "reluctant" shareholder in GM, in which taxpayers will end up with a 60 percent stake after injecting a further $30 billion in aid.
But, Obama said, "I am absolutely confident that if well managed, a new GM will emerge that can ... out-compete automakers around the world and that once again can be an integral part of America's economic future."
The plan is a high-stakes gamble by Obama, committing yet more taxpayer money as he seeks to limit the impact on GM's 92,000 workers in the United States in the depths of a recession.
His bailout strategy received a boost a day earlier when a bankruptcy judge approved the sale of substantially all of Chrysler's assets -- another U.S. carmaker being supported by the taxpayer -- to a group led by Italy's Fiat SpA.
Geithner, seeking to assuage Chinese fears about the United State's ballooning fiscal deficit, promised "very disciplined" spending in future and said Chinese holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds were "very safe."
Geithner also offered to support China's quest for more influence in the framing of international policymaking in a nod to Beijing's growing economic and financial might.
"China is already too important to the global economy not to have a full seat at the international table," he said in a speech at Peking University.
"It was better than expected, and I would put particular emphasis on the new orders component," said Michael Darda, chief economist at MKM Partners LLC. "This is more evidence that we're getting closer to the end of the recession."
China's official purchasing managers' index dipped in May to 53.1 from 53.5 in April, its third straight month above 50. The private-sector PMI stayed above 50 for a second month. Both surveys showed new export orders improving.
The euro zone manufacturing PMI posted its biggest monthly jump in the survey's 12-year history as the pace of new orders across its four largest economies contracted at a much less severe pace.
The index remains well below 50, however, and data provider Markit said there was no sign of stabilization in the jobs market.
"Today's data support our view that any recovery in the euro area economy is likely to be protracted and timid, rather than swift and strong," said Colin Ellis, European economist at Daiwa Securities.
Britain's manufacturing PMI rose to the highest level for a year.
