Global stocks, oil jump on economic optimism
2009-06-01 13:19:00.0
Global stocks, oil jump on economic optimism | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Global stocks, oil jump on economic optimism
Investors play Chinese chess in front of an electronic board with stock information at a brokerage house in Xiangfan, Hubei province June 1, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Mon  EDT
The dollar's slide against a basket of currencies and the euro sparked a rally in commodities, with copper and oil jumping to seven-month highs. Crude rose above $68 a barrel.
The U.S. manufacturing sector contracted at a slower rate in May, while U.S. consumer spending fell modestly in April. China said industrial activity expanded in May and surveys in Europe showed the manufacturing recession was easing.
"The market continues to buy the recovery story, as economic data suggests that the worst is behind us," said David Thurtell, an analyst at Citigroup.
"In my view, this is more evidence that we're getting closer to the end of the recession," said Michael Darda, chief economist at MKM Partners LLC in, Greenwich, Connecticut. He referred to the Institute for Supply Management's index of U.S. manufacturing, which rose more than expected in May.
European shares hit their highest close since January 6, with energy companies and miners among the biggest gainers. U.S. stocks rose sharply despite General Motors Corp's (
) filing for bankruptcy, the third-largest in U.S. history.
Once an icon of American industry, GM was removed from the 30-stock Dow and delisted by the New York Stock Exchange.
About 1 p.m. (1700 GMT), the Dow Jones industrial average
was up 216.25 points, or 2.54 percent, at 8,716.58. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 24.23 points, or 2.64 percent, at 943.37. The Nasdaq Composite Index
was up 50.00 points, or 2.82 percent, at 1,824.33.
Major industrials led the rise in the Dow, with shares of airplane manufacturer Boeing (
) up 5.5 percent, while basic resources also gained, including aluminum producer Alcoa Inc (
), up more than 7.9 percent.
"What this (data) means is things aren't really getting worse and I guess that is good enough for a rally," said Kim Caughey, senior investment analyst at Fort Pitt Capital Group in Pittsburgh.
In Europe, Anglo American (
) jumped 7.5 percent, Rio Tinto added (
Oil rose more than 2 percent, extending its biggest monthly gain in a decade last month as the weaker dollar boosted investor demand for oil and commodities.
"It's the dollar and equities," said Christopher Bellew, a broker at Bache Commodities. "It's maybe not so surprising if there is a chance of seeing some economic recovery and increased demand for oil."
Commodity-related currencies such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, which are considered to be higher risk, hit eight-month highs against the U.S, currency.
"Generally, this is still a case of better-than-expected data not necessarily good for the U.S. dollar," said Shaun Osborne, chief currency strategist at TD Securities in Toronto. "We expect no rebound in sight for the dollar just yet."
As measured against a basket of major currencies, the Dollar Index .DXY fell 0.28 percent at 79.015.
Against the yen, the dollar was up 1.13 percent at 96.37, and the euro was up 0.28 percent at $1.419.
Risk premiums jumped on U.S. agency mortgage bonds as Treasury yields leaped and swap spreads rose. Investors were concerned about the depth of the Federal Reserve's commitment to buy as much as $1.45 billion in mortgage-related securities and up to $300 billion of bonds.
MSCI's index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS advanced 2.2 percent to its highest level since October 2, and is now up 55 percent since world markets bottomed on March 9.
Japan's Nikkei share average
(Reporting by Chuck Mikolajczak, Nick Olivari, Lynn Adler and Chris Rees in New York; Brian Gorman, Alex Lawler, Ian Chua, Michael Taylor and Maytaal Angel in London; writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
