BarCap sees future oil spike on China, supply
2009-06-01 09:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil is on course for another price spike in the medium term and will hit OPEC's $75 target before the end of the year, a senior executive at Barclays Capital said on Monday, citing China and supply constraints as factors.
"Something below $80 is not going to put recovery in jeopardy," he told the Reuters Global Energy Summit.
At the Reuters summit almost exactly a year ago he predicted oil would hit $150, although he made clear it would not necessarily stay that high.
Around a month after his prediction made in June last year, U.S. crude hit its all-time peak of $147.27. By December, it had crashed to $32.40, its lowest in nearly five years.
On Monday, U.S. crude climbed to a session high above $68 a barrel, its highest for seven months. <O/R>
De Vitry said there was a forward-looking element in the price, which was anticipating a reduction in over-supply.
"If people did not expect the market to be more balanced in Q3, Q4, there would be no reason why the price would be where it is today," he said.
FAIR PRICE?
The market is only a few dollars away from the $75 level leading exporter Saudi Arabia cited last week, on the sidelines of a meeting of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, as a fair price for producers and consumers.
Looking to the longer term, De Vitry said supply would not be sufficient to meet recovering demand and would drive another spike at some point in the next 10 years.
"I firmly believe we will see another price spike," he said.
Although the most robust projects were finding credit, he said, underinvestment in the current climate of lower returns and reduced availability of finance, would eventually mean supply would fall short of demand.
"The period to restart the activity is longer than to shut it down," De Vitry said, adding it applied to all kinds of commodities -- from mining to electricity.
Demand growth is negative in the world's biggest energy consumer the United States, he said, but it is recovering in the world's second-biggest energy user China, where he said he had seen "significant demand growth over the last two months."
Data on China is notoriously elusive and De Vitry said it was a "very cyclical" buyer, meaning any demand numbers were not a straightforward reflection of energy use.
Overall, however, he said "the key driver demand has stopped falling."
Even after the price collapse that followed last year's peak and this year's close correlation between equities and commodities, De Vitry said the asset class remained firmly established and could still diversify an investment portfolio.
The sophistication of traders is ever greater, although the exotic financial instruments that caught on in the run-up to last year's record highs on the commodity market were less fashionable.
"Highly complex trade is not very active now," he said.
