U.S. on way to becoming climate leader: Yergin
2009-06-01 15:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States may soon take the mantle as the global leader on climate change in part because of its strong research and development on energy, said oil historian and analyst Daniel Yergin.
"The United States is way ahead of everybody else," on research and development of alternative fuels and energy efficiency, Yergin, chairman of IHS Cambridge Energy Research Associates (CERA), told the Reuters Global Energy Summit in Washington.
When that is combined with the Obama administration's recently proposed U.S. fuel efficiency standards for autos, mandates that utilities generate some of their electricity from alternative sources, and prospects that the climate bill moving though Congress will soon become law, the U.S. should soon assume global leadership on climate. "Then you have your climate leadership package," Yergin said.
Yergin said that would soon change, in part because of the EU's bureaucracy. "At such a time the U.S. has a climate regime in place, it will move into the leadership because of the coherence that the EU doesn't have, because the EU is all of those different countries."
Whoever takes the reigns on global climate change is expected to help bring rapidly developing countries such as China, which recently became the world's top polluter of carbon dioxide, to act on greenhouse gas emissions. The first big test will occur at a U.N. meeting on climate change in Copenhagen at the end of the year when nearly 200 countries are slated to hash out a pact to succeed the Kyoto Protocol.
Developing countries want rich countries, such as the United States, the No. 2 greenhouse gas polluter, to move first on greenhouse gas cuts because they have enjoyed more than a century of spewing greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.
More than half of the U.S. states require utilities to generate a percentage of their power from sources such as solar and wind power. A federal standard is also included in the climate bill, sponsored by Representatives Henry Waxman and Edward Markey, that would require utilities to generate about 12 to 15 percent of their power from such sources and take measures on energy efficiency.
And U.S. climate action will not come fast and easy, particularly as energy is a huge business in the country, the world's top consumer of oil. "It's pretty complicated to reshape 10 percent of the U.S. GDP," said Yergin.
But he said U.S. energy research and development was already the world's best and could soon expand. "The answers at the end of the day really are going to be technology, and a higher level of research and development spending on a bigger consistent long-term basis, that's where the innovation will come from."
(Reporting by Timothy Gardner; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)
