European shares close at highest level since Jan. 6
2009-06-01 00:49:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares closed at their highest level since Jan. 6 on Monday, with energy companies and miners among the biggest gainers as data from the United States and China sparked optimism on economic recovery.
index of top European shares rose 2.8 percent to 886.27. "There's more risk appetite. I think market participants are increasingly reassured about the strength of the economic recovery coming through," said Henk Potts, strategist at Barclays Stock Brokers, in London.
"(Historical) data tells us the situation isn't getting any worse, and the forward-looking data indicates a positive response to the monetary and fiscal stimulus."
Prices for crude oil CLc1 and copper MCU3=LX hit seven-month highs, sending shares in miners and energy companies up sharply.
), Antofagasta (
), BHP Billiton (
), Lonmin (
), Rio Tinto (
), Vedanta Resources (
The Basic Resources index .SXPP, which includes mining and steel companies, was a standout gainer, up 8 percent.
China's official purchasing managers' index (PMI) in May recorded its third straight month above the mark of 50 that separates expansion from contraction, fuelling optimism the worst of the global downturn may be over. [ID:nSP428779]
"Metals and mining remain the best avenue to gain exposure to a variety of themes: steepening yield curves, rebound in manufacturing activity, sustained Chinese and EM growth, global asset reflation, weakening dollar," JPMorgan said in a note.
The U.S. manufacturing sector contracted at a slower rate in May, while consumer spending fell modestly in April, according to reports on Monday, further evidence the deep recession may be easing. [ID:nN01259240]
In the euro zone, manufacturing PMI rose to a seventh-month high of 40.7, up from 36.8 in April and just above the flash reading and economists' expectations for it to hit 40.5.
Across Europe, with trading volumes reduced by public holidays in some countries, Britain's FTSE 100 index
was up 2 percent; Germany's DAX
As European bourses were closing, the Dow Jones
, S&P 500
For investors, the upbeat economic outlook more than offset any negative effects of the bankruptcy of General Motors (
), the biggest ever in U.S. manufacturing. [ID:nN01398575]
With crude at $68 a barrel, energy companies Total (
), ENI (
), BP (
European auto shares gained, with analysts describing the rise as a "relief rally" as GM's troubles move towards resolution. Peugeot (
) surged 9.6 percent, also boosted by a price target hike from Credit Suisse. Renault (
), BMW (
), Barclays (
), Deutsche Bank (
), Societe Generale (
), owner of British home improvement chain B&Q, and French conglomerate Bouygues (
) rose 3.9 and 5.1 percent respectively, ahead of updates to the market on Tuesday.
On the first trading day of June, the European benchmark made its biggest percentage gain since April 2. It is up 37 percent from the lifetime low hit on March 9, as investors have become more confident on the prospects for economic recovery.
The benchmark is above its 200-day moving average. (Additional reporting by Dominic Lau; editing by Dan Lalor)
