TOPWRAP 5-Data fuel recovery hopes, GM files for bankruptcy
2009-06-01 08:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Manufacturing from China to Europe is showing signs of improvement, suggesting the global economy may be over the worst of a recession despite U.S. carmaker General Motors (
China, the world's third-biggest economy, said industrial activity expanded in May and surveys in Europe showed the manufacturing recession was easing. A U.S. survey is expected to paint a similar picture to Europe later on Monday.
World stock markets and oil rose to their highest levels in around seven months, undeterred by news that General Motors (GM) had filed for the biggest bankruptcy in U.S. manufacturing history as part of a government-backed scheme. [ID:nWEN9775]
But with unemployment rising across the globe, the timing and speed of any economic recovery is uncertain.
The recession is still "powerful and dangerous" in many countries, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said on a visit to China, though he added it "seems to be losing force".
U.S. taxpayers will end up with a 60 percent stake in GM after injecting a further $30 billion in aid, a U.S. official said ahead of a speech by U.S. President Barack Obama later on Monday. [ID:nN31495007] [ID:nN31400726]
The plan is a high-stakes gamble by Obama, committing yet more taxpayers' money as he seeks to limit the impact on GM's 92,000 staff in the United States in the depths of a recession.
His bailout strategy received a boost on Sunday when a bankruptcy judge approved the sale of substantially all Chrysler's assets -- another U.S. carmaker being supported by the taxpayer -- to a group led by Italy's Fiat SpA (
Geithner, seeking to assuage Chinese fears about the United State's ballooning fiscal deficit, promised "very disciplined" spending in future and said Chinese holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds were "very safe".
Geithner also offered to support China's quest for more influence in the framing of international policymaking in a nod to Beijing's growing economic and financial might.
"China is already too important to the global economy not to have a full seat at the international table," he said in a speech to Peking University. [ID:nPEK144756]
China's official purchasing managers' index (PMI) dipped in May to 53.1 from 53.5 in April, its third straight month above the 50-mark, which separates expansion from contraction. The private-sector PMI stayed above 50 for a second month.
Both surveys showed new export orders improving, with the official reading of this sub-index climbing above 50 for the first time since June 2008. [ID:nPEK17043]
The euro zone manufacturing PMI posted its biggest monthly jump in the survey's 12 year history, rising to a seven-month high of 40.7 in May from 36.8 in April as the pace of new orders across its four largest economies contracted at a much less severe pace. [ID:nLAG003469]
The index remains well below 50, however, and data provider Markit said there was no sign of stabilisation in the jobs market.
"Today's data support our view that any recovery in the euro area economy is likely to be protracted and timid, rather than swift and strong," said Colin Ellis, European economist at Daiwa Securities.
Britain's manufacturing PMI rose to 45.4 in May, the highest level for a year. [ID:nLAG003470]
The MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS increased 1.6 percent to hit its highest since mid-October.Japan's Nikkei average
gained 1.6 percent, while the FTSEurofirst 300 index
in Europe was up 1.9 percent at 1210 GMT. (Writing by Mark Potter; Editing by Elizabeth Piper)
