FTSE rises 1.8 pct on global optimism, commodities
2009-06-01 06:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Optimism about the global economy lifted crude and metal prices, boosting commodity stocks and pushing Britain's top share index up 1.8 percent late morning on Monday.
was up 78.17 points at 4,496.11. The British benchmark rose 4.1 percent last month -- its third monthly rise in a row and the longest winning streak in two years and is on track for its highest close since early January.
The MSCI index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS jumped more than 2 percent to its highest point since October, after data showed China's official purchasing managers index stayed above the 50 level, which separates contraction from expansion, for a third straight month.
"It's a general across-the-board rally," said David Buik, senior partner at BGC Partners in London, adding that there was a lot of momentum trading building on Wall Street's rise on Friday and Asian markets.
"Any kind of improvement in the export and import business of the United States or Europe is going to come as a result of China," he said of the Chinese PMI data. "Any positive economic data that comes out of China has to be very, very positive."
On the FTSE, mining stocks led the charge higher, lifted by firmer metals prices, with Vedanta Resources (
), BHP Billiton (
), Rio Tinto (
), Xstrata XTA.L and Kazakhmys (
Rio Tinto has agreed to extend the deadline by which major Chinese shareholder Chinalco must confirm whether it will help fund the planned expansion of Rio's Yarwun 2 Alumfina refinery.
SIGNS OF LIFE?
UK data also showed signs that the economic slump may be easing. Britain's manufacturing sector contracted at its slowest pace in a year in May, but the market was expecting a healthier reading and the FTSE showed little reaction. [ID:nL1488357].
U.S. crude oil motored past $67 per barrel to a seven-month high, sending shares in BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
Oil giant Shell plans to cut 350-450 senior management roles as part of its restructuring programme, according to a website to which employees post internal information.
The FTSE has risen 30 percent since its low for the year on March 9. But Buik at BGC said he was unsure how long the FTSE's resurgence would continue.
"Little bits of economic data that come out have shown some improvement but many of us are scratching the back of our heads to decide the weight of this rally," he said.
) were up 3.8 percent, Standard Chartered (
) rose 1.3 percent, Lloyds (
) was up 2.8 percent, and HSBC gained 1.53 percent.
Life insurers and other financials also rose, with Aviva (
In the United States, officials said General Motors Corp will file for bankruptcy on Monday, forcing the 100 year-old automaker once seen as a symbol of American economic might and dynamism into a new and uncertain era of government ownership.
The move removes short-term uncertainty from the market, traders said. (Editing by Mike Nesbit)
