Citigroup eyes Asia energy, commodities growth
2009-06-01 05:56:00.0
Citigroup eyes Asia energy, commodities growth | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Citigroup eyes Asia energy, commodities growth
Mon  EDT
) will boost its Asia energy and commodities business by increasing its trade and marketing staff as it aims to sustain double-digit growth to capitalize on the region's rising influence on world markets, a senior executive said.
Its trading strategy is to link the bank's extensive client network, where it is seeing new investor appetite, with expertise across the oil barrel that will include naphtha; as well as coal, LNG, emissions and freight, filling the void left by some investment banks.
Citigroup will grow further into trading of agricultural commodities, which will become more popular among its clients as the economy recovers in China and India, and will give more focus to metals, said Ananth Doraswamy, Managing Director, Asia Pacific head for commodities.
"There is a tremendous opportunity in Asia in the commodities space and we will continue to invest in the franchise. We want to hire more people into energy trading and we are increasing our client coverage in areas as consumers and producers refiners," he said at the Reuters Energy Summit in Singapore.
"And we also want to expand into soft and some of the more esoteric commodities that we are currently doing out of London. It's a case of offering more of our global products to our Asian client base."
In a sign of improved confidence as it emerges from a credit crisis Citigroup, long considered one of the most troubled U.S. banks, sold last month $2 billion in debt, its first U.S. corporate bond sale without a government guarantee in nine months.
Citigroup's return to the corporate bond market came after government stress tests showed its capital position was better than many feared.
Doraswamy, a former software engineer, said the crisis had limited their hiring plans, but it did not force the bank to cut staffing for energy and commodities.
Since coming to Singapore in 2005 to beef up Citigroup's commodities and energy business, the trading and marketing staff has grown to 20 from three, with six in energy. It is now seeking to hire at least one more trader for naphtha or propane, and one or two for soft commodities.
Up to 2007-08, Citigroup's trading business is divided into 60 percent for oil, 30 percent for metals and 10 percent others.
In terms of Asian oil trading volumes, Citigroup's average transactions are around 1.5 million to 3.0 million barrels per day (bpd), versus 3.0-6.0 million bpd for top-tier trading firms.
Citigroup trades in the oil derivatives market and Doraswamy did not discount physical trading of oil. He said they have the ability to do so if the opportunity arises, though not in the near future.
Citigroup is now in the mid-tier bracket in terms of revenue, staffing level and client exposure among banks trading in oil and commodities. Goldman Sachs (
) have been trading oil, including physical cargoes, for the past 10-20 years, while JP Morgan (
Going forward, it aims to fill the void left by the departure of banks such as Lehman Brothers, or others that have reduced their presence.
For this, it must also vie with up-and-coming players such as Standard Chartered Bank (
), which has been aggressive in hiring to boost their energy and commodities businesses.
"We are ambitious and want to grow further, Asia Pacific is still churning out growth rates that are the envy of the world and we will continue to invest further in the business. I want to keep growing at double digits for the next few years," said Doraswamy.
"The numbers of competitors has reduced in the past year so there's some space out there to serve more clients."
Doraswamy added that efforts at developing exchanges across Asia would help to boost liquidity in the energy and commodities markets, though it is difficult for now to see prices being driven from Asia.
NYMEX Clearport volumes for Asia mainly for fuel oil during January to May 2009 showed a 300-600 percent jump versus the same period last year, signaling traders' shift toward clearing in a risk-averse climate.
But even as more over-the-counter (OTC) trades are being cleared by clearing houses, off-exchange transactions will continue in this region despite "a certain amount of pricing risk concerns that dried up some of the liquidity" in some of the products, he said.
