UPDATE 1-Peabody says eyeing coal investments in Asia
2009-06-01 06:19:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. coal miner Peabody Energy (
) is actively pursuing investments in the Asia Pacific region, particularly in Indonesia, to boost its production and trading capacity of thermal coal in the region.
Peabody President Richard Navarre told Reuters he expected a patchy recovery in demand for coking coal in the second half of 2009, mostly led by Asia, and that he did not see a significant price catalyst for coking coal for the rest of this year.
"We're eyeing investments in Indonesia closely," Navarre said on Monday on the sidelines of the Coaltrans conference in the resort island of Bali.
"The thermal coal market is going to see significant growth and if you're going to be in the export market, its something that you have to be interested in."
Peabody and Xstrata XTA.L are planning to bid for a majority stake in Indonesian coal miner PT Berau Coal in a deal that may be valued around $1 billion, two sources with direct knowledge of the deal told Reuters early last month. [ID:nHKG293444]
), Indonesia's second-largest coal producer.
Navarre declined to comment on specific companies, but said the regulatory environment of a country as well as the quality of a coal mine would be key in Peabody's investment decisions, adding that the firm had no target size on investments.
When asked if Indonesia's new mining policies were affecting its investment decisions, Navarre said: "The lack of clarity is certainly making it difficult to make a confident investment decision."
Navarre said Asia Pacific was becoming an increasingly important region in Peabody's coal business, adding that the share of its earnings before interest, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) from outside of the United States have jumped to more than 50 percent last year, compared with just 1 percent in 2003, largely underpinned by its Australian business.
Navarre said he saw no significant price catalyst for coking coal demand in the second half, and anticipated a patchy recovery in the sector, mostly led by China.
"The contangos are a clear suggestion that the market is expecting a real recovery, which will be strong and widespread," Navarre said earlier at the conference.
China and India will help spur recovery in global coal demand powered by strong growth in both economies, while the Pacific thermal coal market was likely to remain largely stable in the second of this year, Navarre said.
Peabody also forecast China would become a net coal importer of 10-20 million tonnes this year, as the closure of small mines and unsafe mines kept domestic prices high and underpinned imports, while India is forecast to be the region's strongest coal importer by 2013, shipping in between 80-100 million tonnes per year.
