China to launch key projects, spur private investment
2012-07-30 06:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China's government said on Monday it would make investments in key projects in a bid to encourage private sector finance to play a greater role in developing vital industry sectors including railways, utilities, finance and healthcare.
The announcement, made after a regular cabinet meeting, follows rules issued by China's top economic planning agency - the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) - to open up strategic industries presently dominated by state-owned companies to the private sector.
"The cabinet meeting urged various regions and government departments to take candid and effective measures to implement policies to create an environment that is fair, transparent and predictable to all market players including the private ones," the central government said in a statement on its website, www.gov.cn.
China must "launch some key projects, as soon as possible, to allow private investment in railways, public utilities, energy, telecommunications, financial, health and education industries, in order to set up examples," the State Council said, after a meeting chaired by Premier Wen Jiabao.
"I'm not quite optimistic about the short-term results," said Zhiwei Zhang, Nomura's China economist in Hong Kong.
"At a time when the domestic economy faces rising downward pressure, we must take timely and forceful measures to encourage companies to use new technology, new material and new equipment to speed up industry upgrade," the statement said.
To bolster growth, China has been "fine-tuning" policies since autumn and accelerated the pace recently, cutting interest rates twice in June and early July, fast-tracking investment projects and encouraging energy-efficient consumer spending.
Zhang said the recipe to bolster China's slowing economy in the short run was still heavy state-backed infrastructure investment.
China's Communist Party leadership remains acutely sensitive to the inflationary and speculative forces unleashed by the 2008 program which the government is still struggling to bring back under control, particularly in the real estate sector.
China's economy experienced its slowest three months of growth in more than three years in the April-June period, which expanded by 7.6 percent - only just above Beijing's target rate of 7.5 percent.
The economy is on track for its slowest full year of growth since 1999, albeit at a rate that economists in a Reuters poll forecast at 8 percent.
(Reporting by China economics team; Editing by Nick Edwards)
