UPDATE 1-China rejects iron ore terms accepted in Japan -CISA
2009-05-31 06:13:00.0
(Reuters) - China's steel mills won't accept the iron ore pricing deal that Rio Tinto (
) struck with Japanese and South Korean rivals last week, the China Iron & Steel Association said on Sunday.
CISA said the price cut of 33 percent for iron ore fines and 44 percent for lump did not reflect the real supply and demand situation on the international market, would drive Chinese mills into losses and did not represent a "win-win" relationship between the iron ore supplier and buyers.
"For this reason, Chinese iron and steel enterprises cannot accept this price, end of discussion," CISA said in a statement.
China is aiming to take iron ore prices at least back to 2007 levels, which would imply cuts of 40 percent or more.
CISA's statement confirmed information from a steel industry source, who told Reuters on Wednesday that the Chinese industry body would reject the terms agreed by Japanese firms. [ID:nPEK276584]
Rio Tinto last week became the first of the three big iron ore suppliers to agree a benchmark iron ore price, clinching agreements with several Japanese mills including Nippon Steel (
) as well as with South Korea's POSCO (
Rio's competitors BHP Billiton (
) of Brazil, the leading supplier, have yet to announce any similar deals.
Analysts have said Japanese steel firms were likely to be more eager to lock in a term price than Chinese mills because of the nature of Japanese steel price contracts, while China's steelmakers are counting on a well-supplied spot market.
China has imported record amounts of iron ore for the last three months and has huge iron ore stockpiles at its ports, while steel production may be forced to slow down sharply.
Chinese steel production has been running at higher rates than last year, when output totalled 500 million tonnes. This year, the government plans to cap output at 460 million tonnes, which would imply a more than 15 percent cut in steel production in the remaining months of 2009.
Analysts are split on the likely outcome of the negotiations between China's mills and the big miners, with some expecting China is under no pressure and others saying the iron ore market could tighten if Chinese production picks up and Rio Tinto's price agreements diverts iron ore shipments elsewhere.
To read a story on the various scenarios, please click on [ID:nSP279084]
