FOREX-Dollar loses footing as investors branch out
2009-06-01 02:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar lost its footing on Monday and headed back to multi-month lows against commodity-related currencies, the euro and sterling as investor appetite for higher-yielding assets continued to recover.
) would file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection later on Monday, a move long expected. [ID:nCARS1]
"The tone has not changed -- risk positive and dollar weakness," said Masafumi Yamamoto, head of FX strategy Japan at Royal Bank of Scotland in Tokyo.
In China, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner pledged the U.S. administration was committed to cutting its huge deficits as quickly as it could. [ID:nSP428779]
, edging back towards May's two-month low of 93.85. Two traders said Japanese exporters had been selling dollars and one said foreign funds were also selling.
"The underlying market trend is dollar selling, and investors are shifting funds to risk assets such as stocks," said Akira Takeuchi, a manager at Chuo Mitsui Trust and Banking.
"That said, there is also a risk that the recent optimism may wane if stocks fall on subsequent developments and the impact from an expected GM filing for bankruptcy protection. And this could prompt investors to buy back the dollar," he said.
Asian share markets were broadly higher, with S&P futures SPc1 up 1 percent, indicating a firm start on Wall Street.
Analysts say the impact of GM's bankruptcy filing could be felt more in the currency markets at a later date, when U.S. employment figures are released.
The Australian dollar, which hit a fresh eight-month peak of $0.8075
according to Reuters data, rose 0.5 percent to $0.8047 on Monday and the kiwi gained 0.5 percent to $0.6435
Markets are looking to China to help regenerate economic activity, with Australia particularly expected to benefit.
China's manufacturing sector expanded moderately in May as new export orders improved. [ID:nPEK17043]
Sterling too touched its highest against the dollar since early November, climbing to $1.6245
The euro was down 0.2 percent at 134.65 yen EURJPY=R, recovering from the day's low of 133.89 yen after the Nikkei share average rose
The Australian dollar rose 0.2 percent to 76.61 yen AUDJPY=R. (Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Editing by Michael Watson)
