Nikkei hits nearly 8-mth high on China hopes
2009-05-31 23:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average edged up 0.8 percent after hitting a nearly eight-month high on Monday as shippers including Kawasaki Kisen (
Data showing China's manufacturing sector continued to expand for the third month in a row added to tentative signs the world's third-largest economy is stabilising. [ID:nPEK17043]
) jumped nearly 9 percent to 1,080 yen after Goldman Sachs raised its rating on the office equipment maker to "Buy" from "Neutral".
Just after the morning session ended, a U.S. official said General Motors (
"The filing will basically eliminate one potentially bad factor and stocks could rise, though of course the longer-term impact is harder to gauge and may have to be watched," said Yutaka Miura, a senior technical analyst at Mizuho Securities.
"There's some expectation that U.S. shares could rise, and this is underpinning the Nikkei."
Automakers slipped by the end of morning trade, with Honda Motor Corp (
But positive sentiment was spreading in the market news that after U.S. consumer confidence rose in May to its highest in eight months, and after the Nikkei posted a third successive month of gains in May, the first such streak since April-June 2007.
"We're seeing a lot of shares up today on expectations for China's recovery as well, and while this is still of course just expectations, it's buoying all the so-called China plays: metals, shippers, trading houses and individual shares such as Komatsu," said Nagayuki Yamagishi, a strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
"The situation with GM also seems to be pretty well cleaned up, and this will remove a major source of uncertainty."
Others disagreed, however, noting that the benchmark Nikkei's sustained move above its 200-day moving average -- which now comes in a bit above 9,300 -- should have set the stage for sharp gains, but that inevitable worry about GM was keeping gains capped.
rose 75.08 points to 9,597.58 by the end of the morning after earlier rising as far as 9,626.13, its highest since Oct 8. The broader Topix
While China's official May purchasing managers' index (PMI) lost some momentum, falling to 53.1 from 53.5 in April, it was the third straight month it stood above 50. A reading above 50 indicates an expansion of activity in the manufacturing sector, while a reading below suggests contraction.
Shippers were boosted by this and by a rise in the Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI to an eight-month high on Friday on Chinese demand for goods.
The index, which gauges the cost of shipping resources including iron ore, cement, grain, coal and fertiliser, rose 5.94 percent on Friday and has set 2009 records for 12 straight sessions. [ID:nLT426111]
Kawasaki Kisen surged 7.7 percent to 464 yen, Nippon Yusen (
) rose 6.1 percent to 1,430 yen.
Trade was active on the Tokyo exchange's first section, with 1.1 billion shares traded compared to last week's morning average of 1 billion.
(Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Joseph Radford)
