RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Stocks fly on China hopes, relief on GM
2009-06-01 02:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks and the Australian dollar jumped to eight-month highs on Monday after a gauge of China's manufacturing activity offered fresh evidence of a recovery in the world's third-largest economy.
Major European equities markets were expected to open as much as 1.5 percent higher, according to financial bookmakers, on the back of bullish views on energy and mining stocks.
) will file for bankruptcy later in the day in a process that will pump another $30 billion of U.S. taxpayers' money into the ailing automaker. [ID:nN01398575]
U.S. stock futures SPc1 were up 0.6 percent, extending gains after details of the bankruptcy filing emerged with no major surprises, while Treasury futures <TYc1) extended modest declines.
In another bankruptcy case involving a U.S. car maker, a judge cleared the sale of nearly all of Chrysler's assets to a group led by Italy's Fiat (
"Now the hard part begins, which is making GM and Chrysler competitive. If they don't do that, then we'll be doing this all over again in a few years," said Christopher Richter, auto analyst with CLSA Asia Pacific Markets in Tokyo.
U.S. oil futures rose above $67 a barrel, their highest level since early November, as investors shrugged off surprisingly soft South Korean export figures for May and concentrated on China data showing new export orders growing last month for the first time since June 2008. [ID:nPEK17043]
"We expect manufacturing activity will continue to expand in the coming months, supported by the roll-out of the governments stimulus. Some bright spots have emerged in China's heavy industries," Jing Ulrich, managing director and chairman of China equities at JPMorgan in Hong Kong, said in a note.
China's official purchasing managers' index for May fell to 53.1 from 53.5 in April, but stayed above 50, which separates expansion and contraction, for the third month in a row and fueled hopes China will lead a global recovery.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
and China's Shanghai composite
led Asian equity markets higher, rising 2.8 percent and 3.1 percent, respectively.
Japan's Nikkei share average
ended 1.6 percent higher, with trading houses and industrial sectors performing well.
The MSCI index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS advanced 2.2 percent to its highest level since Oct. 2, having risen 55 percent since a global equity rally began on March 9.
The materials and energy sectors outperformed on Monday, as they have since the rally started.
News over the weekend that China would raise retail diesel and gasoline prices by 6-7 percent supported shares of domestic refiners, with PetroChina (
TOO MUCH MONEY?
, gaining some 16 cents in the last three months. The currency has become a proxy for global growth prospects because of Australia's big commodity exports to China.
Gold has benefitted from the falling dollar. It hit a three-month high on Monday of $983.15 an ounce XAU=, creeping closer to the psychologically significant $1,000 price.
"Gold is rising because the dollar is weak, the economy is stabilising, and interest rates are low," said Ronald Leung, director of Lee Cheong Gold Dealers in Hong Kong.
"There is too much hot money around as governments are printing money, and one option is to put that into stocks and the other is to gold," he said.
U.S. crude for July delivery CLc1 rose 1.2 percent to $67.12. Stock market optimism and sustained hope for a global economic recovery have supported the market's best monthly gains in a decade.
"My thinking is that most of the commodity markets, the base metals as well as oil, have moved to factor in economic recovery, and probably a fairly decent 'V'," said Commonwealth Bank of Australia commodity strategist David Moore in Sydney.
U.S. debt has also been hurt by concerns about the U.S.'s fiscal health, although Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner tried to reassure the country's biggest foreign owner of Treasuries -- China -- that its investments were safe. [ID:nPEK144756]
The 10-year futures TYc1 were down 0.3 percent after extending modest losses on the GM news, but still above the six-month low hit last Thursday.
