China hits back at West after Syria U.N. vote
2012-08-04 05:27:00.0
(Reuters) - China hit back on Saturday at criticism of its stance over the crisis in Syria following a vote at the United Nations which overwhelmingly condemned the Syrian government, repeating Beijing's position that outside interference will not help.
The special session of the 193-nation U.N. General Assembly approved on Friday the Saudi-drafted resolution, which expressed "grave concern" at the escalation of violence in Syria and condemned the Security Council for its inaction.
As expected, Syria's staunch ally Russia was among the 12 countries that opposed the resolution in the assembly, where no country has a veto but all decisions are non-binding. Others that voted against it included China, Iran, North Korea, Belarus, Cuba and others nations that often criticize the West.
Western diplomats said the vote highlighted the isolation of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's supporters Russia and China.
Speaking at a hastily arranged news conference in Beijing, Wang Kejian, deputy head of the Chinese Foreign Ministry's West Asian and North African Affairs Department, said China continued to support efforts at a peaceful, political solution for Syria.
"We should not easily close the window to a political solution let alone start military intervention," Wang said.
"We have on numerous occasions stressed to various parties that the legitimate demands and aspirations of the Syrian people for change and for safeguarding their interests deserve respect," Wang said.
"Those countries which have made unfounded criticism about China's position on Syria ... have, in pursuit of their own geopolitical interests in Syria, tried to hinder or undermine the political settlement process and are trying to shift responsibility for the difficulties onto other countries," he added.
Russia and China voted down a Security Council resolution on Syria last month, the third time the two countries have used their veto power to block resolutions designed to isolate Assad and end the 16-month conflict that has killed thousands.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
How long will it be before Russia and China start funding and arming anti-US rebels somewhere in our back yard, maybe like Mexico? And before, as with Israel, we get outraged that they would do such a thing after our meddling in Syria? Another good reason we cannot ¡°afford¡± to take care of the bottom 90% of our population or to make good on our ¡°Insurance Policies¡± which are backed by ¡°full faith and credit¡± statements that are ¡°optional entitlements¡± now. It is time to start rounding up officials of older administrations who acted to destroy our ¡°safety net¡±, strip them of their benefits and pay, and lock them up for the average amount of prison time given to poor people who smoke crack cocaine. That ought to be over 20 years. Why let criminal oath breakers in Government be above the law or, worse, above the retribution of the People whether lawful or not?
Aug 04, 201210:53am EDT--
If France, the UK and the US truly wanted an end to the conflict they could have it in months by simply withdrawing their support for Turkey¡¯s, Saudi Arabia¡¯s and Qatar¡¯s aid to the rebels. The truth is they are fomenting rebellion, using the Arab Spring to unseat governments not to their liking without a thought for what may come after.
Aug 04, 201211:16am EDT--
@usagadfly¡­How long will it be before Russia and China start funding and arming anti-US rebels somewhere in our back yard, maybe like Mexico? Syria is not in Russia or China¡¯s backyard. Check the map. Also your analogy is not apt. The ¡°west¡± or whoever you think are the bad guys here are not arming anti-russian or anti-chinese Rebels. A rebellion began against the Syrian regime due to their heavy handed tactics. Western countries support the rebels because Assad is an ally of Iran and a sponsor of Hezbollah, an avowed terrorist organization. Russia is allies with Syria because they have a port there. Chinese are allied because the Chinese don¡¯t support regime change, as China has a massive amount of dissidents within its country.
Aug 04, 20123:50pm EDT--
