U.S. says will not accept N.Korea as nuclear state
2009-05-30 15:05:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sat, May 30 2009
Fri, May 29 2009
Sat, May 30 2009
Sat, May 30 2009
Sat, May 30 2009
North Korean leader Kim Jong-il (front) visits Namheung Youth Chemical Factory in Anju, north of Pyongyang, in this undated picture released by North Korea's official KCNA news agency May 29, 2009. KCNA did not state when the picture was taken. South Korea said an increasingly belligerent North may be preparing aggressive moves after Chinese fishing boats were spotted leaving a disputed sea border dividing the peninsula. Credit: Reuters/KCNA
Sat  EDT
In a speech to the Asia Security Conference in Singapore, Gates said the threat from North Korea, which this week detonated a nuclear device and launched a series of missiles, could start an arms race in Asia.
"We will not stand idly by as North Korea builds the capability to wreak destruction on any target in the region or on us," he said. "We will not accept North Korea as a nuclear state."
North Korea -- one of the world's last remaining Communist states -- has said it was no longer bound by the armistice that ended the 1950-53 Korean War. It threatened further actions in response to any U.N. censure.
Impoverished North Korea has earned billions of dollars from exporting missile technology to Pakistan and the Middle East, defense analysts say.
Gates did not elaborate on how the United States might respond. He had earlier said no additional troops were being deployed to the peninsula, where 28,000 U.S. soldiers are stationed, and he emphasized diplomacy in his remarks.
"Preparations to move an ICBM from the Saneum Weapons Research Center near Pyongyang by train have been captured by U.S. spy satellites," South Korea's Dong-a Ilbo newspaper quoted a source in Washington as saying.
The research lab is the North's main center of research and manufacture of long-range missiles, the newspaper said.
South Korea's defense ministry had no immediate comment.
In New York, the United States and Japan circulated a draft U.N. Security Council resolution condemning the claimed nuclear test and demanding strict enforcement of sanctions imposed after the North's first atomic test in October 2006.
In Moscow, the Kremlin said Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso agreed on the need for a serious response to North Korea.
"The parties shared the view that there is a need to most seriously respond to these steps, representing a challenge to the international security system," a Kremlin statement said.
"If (the North Koreans) continue on a path they are on, I think the consequences for stability in the region are significant and I think it poses the potential for some kind of an arms race in this region," Gates said.
"Our hope is that all parties concerned will remain cool-headed and take measures to address the problem," Ma Xiaotian, The Chinese army's deputy chief, told the conference.
U.S. officials have urged China to pressure North Korea to step back from nuclear brinkmanship and return to stalled disarmament talks. But many Chinese analysts say Washington overstates Beijing's sway over Pyongyang, as well as their government's willingness to use that influence.
North Korea was celebrating the nuclear test in rallies and meetings across the country, "highly proud and honored with the status of the country as a nuclear weapons state," the official KCNA news agency said.
