BUY OR SELL-Is Galp a safe bet after rights issue ruled out?
2009-05-29 09:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Lisbon-based oil company Galp's GALP4.SA stock is climbing, outperforming European peers and the Portuguese market, as analysts hike price targets after it pared its investment plan to avoid a share sale.
However, others warn its refining arm is at risk from weak European fuel demand and that doubts remain whether it can fund its share of massive investments to extract the deep water Brazilian oil discoveries, with costs still uncertain.
RALLY SEEN OVERDONE, POSSIBLE SELL SCENARIO
"The market has welcomed their funding measures and the averted cash call, but in the long-term, we think the rally since the start of the year is a bit too much for the uncertainties that the company is facing," said Pablo Pena-Rich, a Madrid-based analyst with BPI bank.
Galp's partners in Brazil, including the multi-billion barrel Tupi field, are state-run giant Petrobras (
Galp stock has risen over 55 percent since the start of the year to 11.1 euros, compared with a 14 percent rise in the Dow Jones Stoxx Europe oil companies index .SXEP and a 14 percent gain in Portugal's PSI20
Galp rose around 4 percent in the last three sessions alone, while the PSI20 remained flat.
On Wednesday, Galp decided to cut dividends and expenditure on non-core projects instead of resorting to a capital increase or selling of some oil assets to finance its Brazilian exploration and production programme. [ID:nLR440341]
Galp cut its overall capex plan by 17 percent to 4.3 billion euros ($6 billion), maintaining its oil E&P budget at 1.9 billion euros. A dividend cut and other measures would reduce net cash outflow by a total of 1.2 billion euros, Galp said.
"It is a step in the right direction and certainly helps to alleviate a lot of concern, but it doesn't detract from a very high gearing level and a very stretched valuation ... despite their fantastic exposure in Brazil," said Oswald Clint, integrated oils research associate at Bernstein Research.
Clint has a 10-euro 12-month price target for Galp, which is lower than the current 11.1 euros, and a "neutral" rating.
"Buying, not at this time. We need to see some data from the Tupi flow-test first. We think Tupi is going to be the least economical field in Brazil and we wonder if all valuation for Brazil may be overdone," he said. Tupi started pumping crude in test mode on May 1.
"And we still expect a very depressed refining market in Europe with diesel exports from India and China creating oversupply," Clint added.
Almost all of Galp's EBITDA comes from downstream operations although its oil portfolio accounts for about half of the company's valuation.
"The volume of reserves is still an unknown. It's all based on estimates. Costs, the monetization of reserves are all uncertainties still," Pena-Rich said.
However, positive recommendations still flow in from major houses like Bank of America Merrill Lynch, UBS and Credit Suisse.
Credit Suisse, which raised its price target to 11 euros from 10.5 euros on Friday, called the new funding strategy "an important evolution of the story and "an innovative solution that relieves the cash shortfall without diluting existing sharholders or straining the balance sheet".
It also maintained an "outperform" rating, citing expectations of positive Brazilian drilling results at the Iracema area and the BM-ES-31 block.
UBS on Friday hiked its 12-month target by 8 percent to 13 euros, maintaining a "buy" recommendation.
A day earlier, Bank of America Merrill Lynch raised its price target to 14 euros from 12 euros with a "Buy" rating, saying the capex cuts resolved Galp's funding issues and removed share overhang risks, leaving key growth projects intact.
"Galp, in our view, represents one of the most compelling growth stories amongst the European integrated oils whilst offering significant value creation potential through an extensive exploration programme in Brazil," it said.
