CORRECTED - CORRECTED-Nikkei rises to more than 7-mth high, shippers gain
2009-05-29 06:28:00.0
(Reuters) - The Nikkei stock average rose 0.8 percent to its highest in more than seven months on Friday, buoyed by commodity-linked firms such as oil and gas field developer Inpex (
In a jump just before the close, the benchmark cracked the 9,500 resistance level that it had failed to breach on several previous attempts, rising to close at 9,522.50, the day's high.
gained 71.11 points, having broken above its 200-day moving average, which had been acting as resistance, earlier this week.
It rose 3.2 percent on the week, its biggest weekly increase in three weeks. For the month, it was up 7.9 percent, logging its third straight month of gains -- the first such stretch since mid-2007.
A surge in commodities, fired by demand from China, buoyed a wide range of shares.
The Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI., which gauges the cost of shipping resources including iron ore, cement, grain, coal and fertiliser, rose on Thursday to an eight-month high, helped by China's demand for goods. [ID:nLS520223]
Mitsui O.S.K. Lines rose 5.1 percent to 676 yen, Kawasaki Kisen (
) gained 6.4 percent to 431 yen, and Nippon Yusen (
The sea transport sub-index .ISHIP.T jumped 5.5 percent, becoming one of the biggest gainers among the sub-indexes.
Inpex rose 6.3 percent to 771,000 yen and Showa Shell Sekiyu (
), a smelter of non-ferrous metals, edged down 0.6 percent to 1,348 yen in the last few minutes of trade, but has gained almost 19 percent over the past two weeks on expectations of a global pick up in demand for industrial and precious metals.
Copper futures HGN9 hit a three-week high on Thursday after strong U.S. manufacturing data, while gold XAU= climbed to a two-month high, supported by a weaker dollar and its appeal as an inflation hedge on rising oil prices. [GOL/]
) fell 1.7 percent to 2,300 yen after media reports that Japan's Fair Trade Commission plans to order the company's convenience store unit Seven-Eleven Japan to stop restricting merchandise markdowns by franchisees.
Citing sources familiar with the matter, Kyodo News said the FTC found that Seven-Eleven had been forcing franchisees not to cut prices even when some stores wanted to clear food items that were near their expiry dates, a practice deemed by the watchdog to be an abuse of the retailer's dominant position.
"We've come this far on expectations, but this is about as high as we can get. Now we need some more good news," said Mitsushige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
Japan's industrial output jumped 5.2 percent in April from the previous month, marking the second straight month of increase as companies continue to restock after a heavy run-down of inventories late last year. [ID:nT293891]
But the jobless rate rose to a 5-? year high of 5.0 percent in April, while household spending fell 1.3 percent from a year earlier and Japan moved deeper into deflation. [ID:nT338777] "There's some thinking that the forecasts are a bit too optimistic, that too much is being expected of possible economic recoveries in India and China," said Nagayuki Yamagishi, a strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
The U.S. government's deadline for any bankruptcy filing is on Monday, and President Barack Obama is expected to discuss the automaker's restructuring at that time. [ID:nN28446818]
"If GM went bankrupt at a time when people said it wouldn't, that would be huge, and of course there's the chance of some reverberations later on," said Tomomi Yamashita, a fund manager at Shinkin Asset Management.
Trade was active on the Tokyo exchange's first section, with 2.6 billion shares traded compared to last week's daily average of 2.1 billion.
Declining shares outnumbered advancing ones 876 to 698. (Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Joseph Radford)
