UPDATE 2-Chartered Semi denies Abu Dhabi takeover bid
2009-05-29 02:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Chartered Semiconductor CSMF.SI, a Singapore-listed contract chip maker, denied a newspaper report that Abu Dhabi's Advance Technology Investment Co (ATIC) had bid for Temasek's majority stake in the firm.
The Singapore Business Times reported on Friday that ATIC, Abu Dhabi's state-owned venture capital firm, made an offer to buy Singapore state investment agency Temasek's [TEM.UL] near 60 percent stake in Chartered -- valuing the microchip maker at $1.7 billion, 21 percent above the firm's market value on Thursday.
The Abu Dhabi investment firm, which analysts say has plans to become a major investor in technology firms, agreed in March to pay $2.1 billion for 55.6 percent of a joint venture with Advanced Micro Devices Inc (
"Chartered wishes to clarify that it has not received such a bid from ATIC," Chartered said in a statement after it briefly suspended shares earlier in the day.
Chartered shares were up 1.4 percent at 0620 GMT, paring some of the early gains when it gained 2.8 percent.
Loss-making Chartered, which ranks alongside China's Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp (SMIC) (
) in the market for custom-built microchips, has been dogged by takeover rumours for months, but no deal has materialised.
In the latest statement, Chartered said it has held talks with various parties to pursue business opportunities as well as on the "strategic direction of the company" -- industry jargon for possible mergers and alliances.
It added, however, there was no assurance of any agreement.
Late last year, Taiwan's Chinese-language Economic Daily News cited unidentified sources as saying Temasek had approached TSMC (
), the world's top contract chip-maker, about TSMC buying its stake in Chartered.
Singapore-based Chartered posted a third straight quarter of losses for January-March, but the chip maker has forecast sales and its capacity utilisation rate is expected to improve in the second quarter on increasing customer orders. [ID:nWNAB7495]
Despite the denial from Chartered, analysts say ATIC still has its eyes on the global chip-making industry.
At the time of the agreement with AMD in March, ATIC had also committed to investing another $3.6 billion to $6.0 billion over 5 years to fund the joint venture's expansion. The venture will hold AMD's two plants in Dresden, Germany, and make all its central processing units, as well as chips for other companies.
"ATIC has expressed a long-term commitment and is building ownership in the global foundry industry," said Bank of America Merrill Lynch analyst Daniel Heyler.
"ATIC's dialogue with Temasek and CSM would be nothing new since it supports (an) IBM alliance," the analyst said citing IBM as a key client of Chartered and AMD.
A possible takeover of Chartered by ATIC could ease the firm's weak balance sheet while dislodging UMC (
) as the world's second-biggest contract chip-maker, Heyler said.
Moody's Investors Service said in March it has a Ba2 rating on Chartered, but with a negative outlook because of the firm's sizeable refinancing needs in the next 18 months.
Chartered's senior notes worth $375 million and $284 million in preferred shares are maturing in August next year, it said. (Reporting by Saeed Azhar and Harry Suhartono; Editing by Dhara Ranasinghe)
