Nikkei hits resistance, surrenders gains
2009-05-28 22:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The Nikkei average edged up 0.1 percent on Friday, handing back early gains after running into technical resistance, but Mitsui O.S.K (
Oil and gas field developer Inpex and other oil-linked shares climbed after U.S. crude oil futures CLc1 rose on Thursday to over $65, a six-month high, on government data showing a steep drop in oil inventories last week.
"From a technical point, the Nikkei faces selling pressure ahead of 9,500 after climbing above the 200-day moving average midway through the week," said Yumi Nishimura, deputy general manager of the investment advisory section of Daiwa Securities SMBC.
"Industrial output was also much better than anticipated, but the market appears to have priced in the good numbers mostly beforehand while looking beyond them to other less than encouraging data," Nishimura said.
Japan's industrial output jumped 5.2 percent in April from the previous month, marking the second straight month of increase as companies continue to restock after a heavy run-down of inventories late last year. [ID:nT293891]
The jobless rate rose to a 5-? year high of 5.0 percent in April, while household spending fell 1.3 percent from a year earlier and Japan moved deeper into deflation. [ID:nT338777]
ended the morning up 5.78 points at 9,457.17 after rising as high as 9,489.66, while the broader Topix
"Corporate confidence will have to improve more for the Nikkei to rise even further. This means corporations will have to begin raising their earnings forecasts for the financial year and see a return to profits," said Junichi Misawa, a senior fund manager at STB Asset Management.
The Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI., which gauges the cost of shipping resources including iron ore, cement, grain, coal and fertiliser, rose on Thursday to an eight-month high, helped by China's demand for goods. [ID:nLS520223]
Mitsui O.S.K. Lines rose 4.5 percent to 672 yen, Kawasaki Kisen (
) gained 4.7 percent to 424 yen, and Nippon Yusen (
The sea transport sub-index .ISHIP.T jumped 4.4 percent, becoming one of the biggest gainers among the sub-indexes.
) rose 6.8 percent to 774,000 yen and Showa Shell Sekiyu (
Japan's largest retailer Seven & I Holdings Co Ltd (
) fell 2.8 percent to 2,275 yen after media reports that Japan's Fair Trade Commission plans to order the company's convenience store unit Seven-Eleven Japan to stop restricting merchandise markdowns by franchisees.
Citing sources familiar with the matter, Kyodo News said the FTC found that Seven-Eleven had been forcing franchisees not to cut prices even when some stores wanted to clear food items that were near their expiry dates, a practice deemed by the watchdog to be an abuse of the retailer's dominant position.
) jumped 19 percent to 307 yen after Goldman Sachs raised its rating to "buy" from "neutral" and put it on its "conviction" list, saying conditions in its three core business segments have bottomed out.
Trade was active, with some 1.1 billion shares traded on the Tokyo exchange's first section compared to last week's morning average of 1 billion.
Declining shares outnumbered advancing ones by nearly 2 to 1. (Reporting by Shinichi Saoshiro; Editing by Michael Watson)
