Confrontation over the South China Sea 'doomed', China tells claimants
2013-06-27 05:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Countries with territorial claims in the South China Sea that look for help from third parties will find their efforts "futile", China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi warned on Thursday, adding that the path of confrontation would be "doomed".
Beijing's assertion of sovereignty over a vast stretch of the South China Sea has set it directly against Vietnam and the Philippines, while Brunei, Taiwan and Malaysia also lay claim to other parts of the sea, making it Asia's biggest potential military troublespot.
Wang didn't name any third countries, but the United States is a close ally of Taiwan and the Philippines, and has good or improving relations with the other nations laying claim to all or part of the South China Sea.
"If certain claimant countries choose confrontation, that path will be doomed," Wang said after a speech at the annual Tsinghua World Peace Forum.
"If such countries try to reinforce their poorly grounded claims through the help of external forces, that will be futile and will eventually prove to be a strategic miscalculation not worth the effort."
The Philippine military said this week it had revived plans to build new air and naval bases at Subic Bay, a former U.S. naval base that American forces could use to counter China's creeping presence in the South China Sea.
Wang's comments came days before the minister is due to attend a meeting of foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations grouping in Brunei from Saturday to Tuesday.
The path to a Code of Conduct will be slow and deliberate, Wang said, adding that the Declaration of Conduct was a commitment made by China and the 10 ASEAN countries and China would continue to abide by it.
"The right way is to fully implement the Declaration, and in this process, move forward with the Code in a gradual way," Wang said.
(Reporting by Michael Martina Writing by Terril Yue Jones; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 27, 20135:22am EDT--
Jun 27, 20135:47am EDT--
To: TPartyNutcases And you think you are beyond the reach of Chinese Nuke?
To: TPartyNutcases And you think you are beyond the reach of Chinese Nuke?
Do you think fighting war is like playing video game that you can shoot at the enemies, but enemies are not able to shoot back at you?
You talk about nuclear attack so casually, as if you are talking about a movie, a book.
Have you ever seen ¡°Planet of the Apes¡±? You need to watch this movie to get a sense of the calamity and destruction from an all-out nuclear war. War is hell.
Jun 27, 20138:26am EDT--
