INTERVIEW-UPDATE 1-Japan's Renesas says orders inching up
2009-05-29 06:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Renesas Technology Corp, the world's sixth-biggest semiconductor maker, said on Friday that orders had begun to inch up but it was too early to call the increase a sustainable recovery.
Unlisted Renesas, which is in talks to merge with peer NEC Electronics (
), also said it may discuss further fund-raising options with parent companies Hitachi Ltd (
"Last financial year, our finances were extremely weak and we received funds. This year, we will continue report to our parent companies our financial situation and discuss what's best," President Yasushi Akao told Reuters in an interview.
The world's largest supplier of microcontrollers, battered by a long slide in prices and demand, was forced to seek a 54 billion yen ($560 million) capital boost from its parent firms two months ago.
But Japanese companies have recently seen a tentative upturn in demand, and industrial output jumped in April at the fastest rate in more than half a century. [nT20910]
Renesas now expects its factory usage rate to hit 60 percent or more in the April-June quarter, up from below 40 percent in the previous three months, thanks to orders from makers of flat TVs in China, as well as makers of netbook computer hard drives and digital cameras.
But Akao also said much of the recent demand was from one-off orders, such as chips for toll collection systems in demand due to government discounts on highway travel, and for cellphones which sold well during the back-to-school shopping season.
"We're waiting for industrial demand to come back. Only then will we start to see a true upswing in sales, probably in October-March."
A merger with NEC Electronics would create the world's third-biggest chipmaker in terms of sales after Intel Corp (
"We would never stop supplying a product for any reason, merger or no merger," Akao said.
A merger would bring together two former arch-rivals that use very different technologies, which could make it difficult to save costs.
Renesas is expected to log a net loss of a little less than 90 billion yen in the year to March 2010, while NEC Electronics
The two firms, which specialise in microcontrollers and system semiconductors, aim to finalise details of the merger by the end of July. NEC Electronics will likely remain the listed entity.
Microcontroller chips are used in car engine control systems and power tools, while system chips control multiple functions in electronics and cars.
(Reporting by Mayumi Negishi; Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
((mayumi.negishi@thomsonreuters.com; +81-3-6441-1812; Reuters Messaging: mayumi.negishi.reuters.com@reuters.net))
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com))
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nT29831
