FACTBOX: Sanctions against Iran
2009-05-28 13:40:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
On May 20, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said multilateral sanctions might be better if diplomacy eventually fails, rather than additional U.S. measures now.
Following are some proposed new sanctions and those already imposed by the United States, European Union and United Nations:
Congress is considering bills that would ban any company involved in supplying petrol to Iran from doing business with the United States. Tehran says it could bypass any such measure, given the size and relatively opaque nature of the oil market.
Iran is the world's fifth largest oil exporter but lacks the refining capacity to keep its heavily subsidized domestic market supplied with petrol. It imports some 40 percent of consumption.
Obama has set a rough timetable for his outreach to Iran, saying he wants to see progress by the end of the year. Both the House and Senate are thought likely to defer to his timeline.
France, Germany and Britain have worked on extra EU sanctions, which are believed to still be under discussion.
A confidential document seen by London's Financial Times and Italian newspaper Il Riformista in February listed 34 Iranian entities and 10 individuals believed to be linked to covert nuclear or biological weapons programs, the FT said.
The individuals listed included the commander and deputy head of the paramilitary Basij force. Among the entities named were Sharif University of Technology, Iran Insurance Company, Iran Air Cargo, Iran Space Agency and Razi Institute for Serum and Vaccine Production. Six banks were mentioned, including Bank Tejarat, one of Iran's largest commercial banks.
French daily Le Monde said in January Britain and France were pushing for EU sanctions on Iran's oil and banking sectors.
The Security Council has imposed three sets of sanctions on Iran, in December 2006, March 2007 and March 2008.
The second included new arms and financial sanctions. It extended an asset freeze to 28 more groups, companies and individuals engaged in or supporting sensitive nuclear work or development of ballistic missiles, including state-run Bank Sepah and firms controlled by the Revolutionary Guards.
The resolution invoked Chapter 7, Article 41, of the U.N. Charter, making most of its provisions mandatory but excluding military action. Iran again ignored an order to halt enrichment.
The third measure increased travel and financial curbs on individuals and companies and made some of them mandatory. It expanded a partial ban on trade in items with both civilian and military uses to cover sales of all such technology to Iran, and added 13 individuals and 12 companies to the list of those suspected of aiding Iran's nuclear and missile programs. In September 2008, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution again ordering Iran to halt enrichment, but imposed no more sanctions, due to opposition from Russia and China.
Also in 1995, Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act requiring the U.S. government to impose sanctions on foreign firms investing more than $20 million a year in Iran's energy sector. It was extended for five years in September 2006. No foreign firms have been penalized.
In October 2007 Washington imposed sanctions on Bank Melli, Bank Mellat and Bank Saderat and branded the Revolutionary Guards a proliferator of weapons of mass destruction.
The EU has imposed visa bans on senior officials such as Revolutionary Guards head Mohammad Ali Jafari, Defense Minister Mostafa Mohammad Najjar and atomic energy chief Gholamreza Aghazadeh, and on top nuclear and ballistic experts.
It has frozen assets of Iran's biggest bank, Bank Melli, and has urged member states to be vigilant about Iranian financial institutions, especially Bank Saderat.
(Reporting by David Sheppard, editing by Alistair Lyon)
