UPDATE 1-China unlikely to get better iron deal - Fortescue
2009-05-27 23:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese steel mills are unlikely to get a better deal for iron ore purchases than the 33 percent reduction agreed by Japanese and South Korean rivals, Australian miner Fortescue Metals Group (
Fortescue, Australia's third-largest iron ore miner, said the only real choice for Chinese mills was to either accept the 33 percent cut in price or take their chances on the volatile spot market, Fortescue Chief Executive Andrew Forrest said.
"We've never heard of any steel mill in China who has said they wouldn't prefer a benchmark, as the spot price is dangerously volatile," he said on the sidelines of a conference.
"Those that choose not to follow it, then they have to choose the alternative, that's the spot price," he told reporters.
Japan's Nippon Steel and South Korea's POSCO (
), the world's second-largest iron ore miner, at 97 U.S. cents per dry metric tonne unit, down a third from 144.66 cents last year.
Chinese mills are holding out for a 40-50 percent cut, though the spot iron ore price is only slightly lower than the price agreed by their main Asian rivals and Rio Tinto.
Fortescue's Forrest also highlighted strong Chinese demand for imported iron ore and said his firm might upgrade its production target of 26 million tonnes for 2008/09.
"I think we will probably be upgrading that, but let me get back to you," said Forrest said.
He played down suggestions that the strong Chinese demand reflected a build-up of inventories, not real demand.
"I don't think it is to do with restocking, it is to do with real underlying demand," said Forrest.
He added that Fortescue was achieving slightly weaker iron ore prices than it did on average last quarter. He said the weaker prices were the result of aggressive marketing of spot iron ore by competitors, and added that the prices Fortescue had achieved were higher than the spot rates.
Fortescue also aimed to become the first foreign company to list on the Shanghai stock exchange, Forrest said, though the timing of a listing was still uncertain.
Fortescue's listing plan comes after China's Hunan Valin Iron and Steel Group Company bought a 17 percent stake in Fortescue for about $770 million this year. (Reporting by Bruce Hextall and Denny Thomas; editing by Mark Bendeich)
