Q+A-What next in Germany's efforts to save Opel?
2009-05-28 13:25:00.0
Q+A-What next in Germany's efforts to save Opel? | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Q+A-What next in Germany's efforts to save Opel?
Thu  EDT
WHAT HAPPENS ON FRIDAY?
Berlin has demanded the contracts contain a commitment to the creation of a temporary trustee for Opel and for bridge financing to protect Opel's assets from U.S. creditors if GM files for bankruptcy. [ID:nLR973806].
The financing, to allow Opel to continue operations until a partner is found, would amount to about 1.5 billion euros.
Time is pressing as the German government wants its trustee vehicle to be agreed before GM files for bankruptcy, which is likely to take place in coming days.
If there are contracts on the table, negotiations between the German government and officials from GM and the U.S. government will resume at 1400 GMT. Berlin does not know if it will receive one, two or none of these contracts.
WHAT IS THE STICKING POINT?
In addition, while Germany has set up a consortium of banks to provide 1.5 billion euros ($2.1 billion) in bridge financing, GM Europe shocked participants at a marathon meeting lasting from Wednesday to Thursday by demanding 300 million euros of that immediately to stay operational. Who provides this money and who guarantees it is a key question.
WHAT IS THE RISK OF AN OPEL INSOLVENCY?
If the U.S. government refuses to agree to the trustee model, the talks could collapse again, resulting in insolvency for Opel.
The trustee arrangement can only go ahead if there is an assurance of a long-term partner, so if neither Magna nor Fiat commit to a deal, the risk also increases for Opel.
Some members of German Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservative party are pushing her to go down the insolvency route. However, it could cost her party votes in September's election and her Social Democrat coalition partners oppose this path.
WHICH BIDDER IS BEST PLACED?
There are signs that Magna's offer, backed by Russian bank Sberbank Rossii SBER03.MM and carmaker GAZ (
), is gaining favour. Magna helped its cause by agreeing to fill the 300 million euro GM hole, although a failure to win U.S. guarantees for the funding means it may not happen. A number of German politicians, including an increasing share of conservatives who were previously neutral, say they back Magna.
However, Fiat is still in contention. China's Beijing Automotive Industry Corp (BAIC) is not viewed as a serious candidate as it has so far only provided a two-page proposal, but the German government has not officially ruled it out.
(Reporting by Madeline Chambers; Editing by David Holmes)
