UPDATE 1-FACTBOX-Japanese firms' exposure to GM
2009-05-28 02:32:00.0
UPDATE 1-FACTBOX-Japanese firms' exposure to GM | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
UPDATE 1-FACTBOX-Japanese firms' exposure to GM
Thu  EDT
Either way, the U.S. automaker will still build cars, but it remains to be seen what further restructuring steps will follow. Its core European division, Opel, is on the block. [ID:nN27540145]
Following are joint projects that Japanese car makers have with GM, and other Japanese companies' exposure.
- Has a jv assembly plant with GM in California since 1984. The New United Motor Manufacturing Inc (NUMMI) builds Toyota's Corolla and Tacoma models and GM's Pontiac Vibe, but most output now is of Toyota cars. GM has said the Pontiac brand will cease to exist in 2010. [ID:nN27210243]
Toyota President Katsuaki Watanabe said this month GM has not approached it specifically about NUMMI, adding Toyota, for its part, planned to continue the joint venture.
- Has a jv factory with GM in Ontario, Canada, called CAMI Automotive, which builds the Suzuki XL7 sport utility vehicle, Chevrolet Equinox and Pontiac Torrent. Production last year was mostly for GM's vehicles.
- Sells OEM products from GM Daewoo Auto & Technology Co, GM's South Korean arm, in Suzuki's North American network.
Suzuki CEO Osamu Suzuki noted this month that CAMI produces a model that will be discontinued so "various scenarios were possible". But he added: "It's 120 percent impossible that CAMI itself will be shuttered." Suzuki would continue all projects with GM unless told otherwise by its former top shareholder, he said. GM's financial difficulties forced it to sell its entire 20 percent stake in Suzuki back to the company in stages, from 2006.
- Operates diesel engine jv plants with GM in the United States and Poland, and supplies commercial vehicles to GM in South America and Africa
According to Teikoku Databank, 133 Japanese companies, including industrial machinery makers and marketing firms, serve GM. Of those, 102 firms are at risk of not being able to recover some of their accounts receivables.
Many of the direct suppliers have applied for the U.S. government's $5 billion aid programme, but not all may qualify.
In China, GM's profitable and successful operations through jvs with local carmakers are unlikely to be affected even in the event of a bankruptcy filing. (Reporting by Chang-Ran Kim and Nobuhiro Kubo, Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
