U.S. housing market up; worries over U.S. debt
2009-05-27 17:14:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. home sales picked up in April, a positive sign for a sector at the root of the global economic meltdown, but investors worried that U.S. government bailouts were incurring too much debt.
Treasury bond prices fell and, unusually, dragged stocks with them on concerns the rising cost of borrowing could smother an economic recovery. General Motors Corp (
), one of the biggest victims of the slump, moved closer to bankruptcy.
In a more positive sign, Japan reported higher exports in April and Saudi Arabia said a recovering global economy could support higher oil prices.
A U.S. Treasury auction of five-year notes drew solid demand, but prices of longer-dated bonds started to fall afterward on concerns Washington may have trouble cheaply financing its ballooning debt.
Investors fear that if bond yields, which move in the opposite direction to prices, rise substantially, the cost of borrowing for consumers and corporations will increase, hurting economic activity. Unusually, a slide in U.S. shares accompanied the decline in bonds, which normally rise when bonds slip.
"I am stunned by this selloff. Now yields are rising to levels that are becoming very worrisome for the economic outlook," said William Sullivan, chief economist at JVB Financial Group in Boca Raton, Florida.
Amid concerns that a rising debt burden could threaten the country's creditworthiness, Moody's Investors Service affirmed the Aaa credit rating of the United States, but warned the credit grade could come under pressure if Washington fails to reduce current debt levels.
In the wake of a report on Tuesday that U.S. consumer confidence grew in March, the U.S. National Association of Realtors said the pace of sales of existing homes in the United States rose 2.9 percent in April.
But the report also showed the inventory of unsold homes in the United States rose, while prices slipped.
"The national economy is showing some initial signs of stability. Confidence has improved, the financial system is starting to heal. Credit is starting to ease a bit," U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said in Boston. "This is just the beginning, however. We have a long way to go."
The U.S. Mortgage Bankers Association said higher loan rates had affected refinancing, sending mortgage applications to their lowest level since early March.
GM's board was to meet to consider its dwindling options after an attempt to restructure $27 billion of bond debt failed overnight, and Germany's government neared a decision on the sale of the company's Opel unit.
Investors were also watching Chrysler's bid -- another victim of the recession and a test case for GM's reorganization -- to sell its operations to a "New Chrysler" owned by Fiat (
), labor unions and the U.S. and Canadian governments.
Japan, the world's second-largest economy, posted a month-on-month rise in exports due largely to third-ranked China, one of the few major economies seen growing in 2009.
Analysts said it was evidence Beijing's $585 billion stimulus package was helping, although China's central bank offered cautious words on a recovery and urged lenders to extend more credit to help its own exporters.
"Exports are likely to recover gradually from now on and the Japanese economy is expected to follow suit," said Yoshiki Shinke, a senior economist at Dai-ichi Life Research.
) has suffered in the downturn, and Moody's downgraded the electronics giant, citing slowed economies, price declines and a strong yen.
In the latest Reuters economist poll, Japan's outlook improved, with its economy seen shrinking 4.0 percent this year from a previous estimate of 4.5 percent.
France posted a small rise in consumer confidence for May, with its index inching to minus 40 from minus 41 for April. Sweden's index jumped to negative 11 from negative 21, beating estimates.
"We are in a period of slowing growth, even if the pace of the decline is easing, and therefore hopes of stabilization exist," European Central Bank Governing Council member Christian Noyer told the French Senate's Finance Committee.
Asian stocks rose on Wednesday, and European equities finished higher for a third straight session, boosted by financial and retail shares.
But U.S. stock indexes closed down 1 percent to 2 percent, losing much of Tuesday's gains, on the debt yield concern. <MKTS/GLOB> .N
Oil neared $64 a barrel, its highest level since mid-November, after Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest member, said the global economy had strengthened enough to cope with oil at $75 to $80 a barrel. OPEC ministers are expected to leave the cartel's output unchanged at a meeting in Vienna on Thursday.
The United Nations revised its 2009 global economic growth forecast down sharply, accounting for a deeper financial crisis that threatens to push unemployment past the 50 million mark.
(Additional reporting by Reuters correspondents around the world; Editing by Brian Moss and Steve Orlofsky)
