South African Markets - Factors to watch on May 28
2009-05-28 01:49:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Thursday.
Asian shares retreated from seven-month highs on Thursday as concerns grew that rising yields on U.S. government debt could push up borrowing costs and choke off a potential recovery in the world's largest economy.
U.S. home sales picked up in April, but the positive sign was outweighed by worries that the U.S. government was incurring too much debt as it tries to spend its way out of recession, sending Treasury prices falling along with stocks. [US/] [.N]
For a story, please double click on [ID:nSP399057]
South Africa's central bank started a two-day meeting on interest rates on Wednesday, with trade unions demanding a sharp cut to help rescue an economy now officially in its first recession in 17 years.
Sixteen of 25 economists polled by Reuters last Friday predicted a 100 basis point reduction in the key repo rate, with the rest expecting just a 50 basis point move, as the central bank eyes still-high inflation. [ID:nLM945163]
For a story, double click on [ID:nLR939966]
South Africa's Producer Price Inflation data will be released at 0700 GMT on Thursday.
South Africa's rand firmed sharply to an 8-month high against the dollar on Wednesday as investors favoured local assets on a proposed deal between telecoms operator MTN and its Indian counterpart Bharti Airtel.
) have restarted talks aimed at creating the world's third-biggest cell phone group with more than 200 million subscribers and combined revenue of $20 billion. [ID:nLP34850]
The JSE Top-40 index of blue-chip stocks inched 0.25 percent higher to 20,370.40 points while the All-share index
pushed 0.36 percent higher to 22,521.68 points.
For Wednesday's South African financial markets closing report, double click on [ID:nLR952063]
Four of MTN's (
) top 25 shareholders would reject a tie-up with India's Bharti Airtel (
For a story, double click on [ID:nLR161291]
For more stories on the merger talks, double click on [ID:nLR511040]
Africa's biggest bank by assets, Standard Bank (
), holds its annual general meeting and is expected to issue a trading update. 0730 GMT
), a unit of the world's biggest steel maker, said on Wednesday a steel-making section of its Saldanha mill would remain closed for 10 to 15 days after it suffered explosions.
For a story, double click on [ID:nWEA4522]
Gold inched down on Thursday, posting its third straight day of losses, as a steady dollar dulled some of bullion's sheen, but it remained within the previous session's range on weaker equities.
Market participants said gold was moving inversely to the U.S. dollar, and that any bounce in the currency was likely to weigh on the precious metal, as investors view gold as a currency hedge.
For the latest precious metals report, double click on [GOL/]
U.S. stocks dropped on Wednesday as rising yields on U.S. government debt fueled concern that businesses and consumers could face higher borrowing costs, which could hamper an economic recovery.
The decline was broad-based, with manufacturer 3M Co (
For the New York stock market report, double click on [.N]
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- Watch what you say, Standard & Poor's tells state: risky policy could hit rating
- "My son didn't have to die" -suspected meningitis blamed for death and mom wants answers
