Q+A: Suu Kyi trial heads to inevitable verdict
2009-05-28 11:08:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu  EDT
Here are questions and answers about the Nobel laureate's trial, which entered its ninth day on Thursday:
WHAT ARE THE CHARGES?
It says "any person against whom action is taken, who opposes, resists, or disobeys any order passed under this Law shall be liable to imprisonment for a period of three years to five years, or a fine of up to 5,000 kyats, or both."
Suu Kyi's lawyers say Section 22 is no longer valid because it is based on a 1974 constitution abolished years ago.
Her two housemates, Khin Khin Win and Win Ma Ma, are charged under the same law, and Section 109 of the Penal Code for abetting, or helping others commit a crime.
John Yettaw, the American who swam to her home, faces three charges. He is accused of violating Section 22, the Immigration Act, and a municipal law that bans swimming in Inya Lake.
CAN SHE GET A FAIR TRIAL?
The regime says the closed prison trial is going "according to the law" and is not "political." But Myanmar's justice system has a history of stretching laws to suit the generals after nearly a half century of army rule.
In Suu Kyi's case, the judges agreed to hear only one defense witness, but heard 14 from the prosecution. Before the trial began, the license of a prominent lawyer on her defense team was revoked. Her lawyers say access to their client is restricted.
Critics say the "spurious" charges are aimed at jailing Suu Kyi before the junta's promised election next year. Her party won an election in 1990 only to be denied power by the military.
Her lawyers are hopeful for an acquittal, but the court is widely expected to deliver a guilty verdict.
WHY ARE THE GENERALS AFRAID OF SUU KYI?
The Nobel laureate and daughter of independence hero Aung San is Myanmar's most charismatic political figure, despite spending more than 13 of the past 19 years in detention.
The generals have not forgotten that during those brief periods when she was free, Suu Kyi resumed her pro-democracy campaigning, drawing huge crowds on tours outside Yangon.
"They clearly decided some time ago that it was not possible to do business with her," Derek Tonkin, a former British ambassador to neighboring Thailand, wrote recently.
Junta leader Than Shwe's personal dislike for Suu Kyi is said to be so intense he once walked out of a meeting with a foreign ambassador simply because the envoy uttered her name.
WOULD JAILING HER TRIGGER PROTESTS?
Suu Kyi's supporters gather daily outside the police-ringed Insein prison, but there have been no major protests.
People remember when serious demonstrations happened before, such as the bloody crackdown on monk-led pro-democracy marches in 2007 in which at least 31 people were killed. There was no unrest last year when the paranoid regime initially resisted badly-needed foreign aid for the cyclone-hit Irrawaddy delta.
"People will be angry at the verdict, but they won't go into the streets," said an exiled Burmese analyst.
However, "if something happened to her during this process, or in Insein prison, then I think all bets are off," said Sean Turnell, a Myanmar expert at Australia's Macquarie University.
WHAT CAN THE WEST DO?
Not much. Despite daily denunciations, renewed sanctions and threats of more punitive measures, the generals are unmoved.
The trial has reignited a debate over sanctions, with calls for better coordinated and targeted "smart" measures against the junta brass and their cronies.
Opponents of sanctions argue they are largely symbolic, sometimes hit the wrong targets, and ineffective without buy-in from regional heavyweights China and India.
Activists say the West should push Beijing to exert its influence on Myanmar, which gets Chinese military hardware and loans in exchange for energy concessions to Chinese firms.
Others say China will never get tough with its "client state" and a new approach is needed. But there's no agreement on how.
....AND MYANMAR'S NEIGHBOURS?
Myanmar's partners in the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) have tried to coax reforms from the generals for the past decade and failed. Repeated calls for Suu Kyi's release are ignored, as are efforts to "engage" the junta.
ASEAN admits the trial has hurt its image, and fears its stubborn member will damage their relations with the West, but the group is far from expelling the generals as some wish.
However, the trial is a major test of the new ASEAN Charter and its commitment to rule of law, human rights and freedoms.
Analyst Thitinan Pongsudhirak said it would be a "travesty" if the group failed to take "concrete punitive steps to redress the junta's blatant violation of the ASEAN Charter's provisions."
