UPDATE 1-Brazil may need $60 oil to tap subsalt finds-CERA
2009-05-27 16:52:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) may need benchmark oil prices near $60 a barrel to profitably tap Brazil's massive subsalt offshore finds, Cambridge Energy Research Associates (CERA) said.
"We've evaluated the economics and believe that (Brazil's subsalt oil) can be developed with WTI or Brent at $60," said Enrique Sira, CERA's director for Latin America and co-author of an upcoming report on Brazil's subsalt oil.
"If all goes well, Petrobras and partners could reach a significant production level after 2019."
Petrobras and partners have found up to 14 billion recoverable barrels of subsalt oil since 2007. Brazilian officials believe the reservoirs contain 30 billion to 100 billion barrels, rivaling Europe's huge North Sea finds of the 1970s.
But estimates vary on oil price levels needed to economically exploit Brazil's new oil, which is located beneath 3 to 5 miles (5 to 8 km) of water, sand, stone and a Jurassic-era salt layer.
Chief Executive Officer Jose Sergio Gabrielli said last week that state-controlled Petrobras could tap Brazil's subsalt oil even with oil at $45 a barrel. Petrobras plans to spend $29 billion on the subsalt areas by 2013.
Cera said its $60-a-barrel estimate is preliminary, and added Petrobras may be able to tap subsalt blocks with oil in the $45 to $60 range, but $40 oil would likely make them unattractive. U.S. benchmark oil traded above $63 a barrel CLc1 on Wednesday.
Petrobras, BG Group (
) and Portugal's Galp Energia (
) began a 15-month, long-duration flow test this month at their Tupi offshore block, which contains 5 billion to 8 billion barrels of oil.
"This type of reservoir is irregular," Sira said. "You need long-term tests for reservoir characterization."
That hasn't kept Petrobras from drawing up ambitious plans to pump 1.8 million barrels per day (bpd), with partners, in its Brazilian subsalt blocks by 2020.
Higher world oil prices and lower drilling costs could help Petrobras secure the funding it needs. Since 1980, benchmark oil prices, adjusted for inflation, have averaged around $44 a barrel. Crude dipped as low as $32.40 last December.
Subsalt profits also hinge on potential changes in Brazil's fiscal regime to shift more oil revenue to the government.
"The two largest uncertainties are fiscal regime and viability of technology," Sira said.
Technical challenges include bringing large volumes of associated gas in the subsalt reservoirs to market. Petrobras is considering using offshore gas liquefaction plants, which have never been employed commercially, Sira said.
"The size of the challenge, the amount of resources and the complexity of the plans suggest this isn't a job for a single company," Sira said. "Whatever scheme is adopted will very likely involve private oil majors."
Last week, Petrobras received a $10 billion loan from China's state-run Sinopec Corp (
), the largest publicly traded oil major, said Wednesday it seeks to invest more in Brazil's subsalt oil, where it already operates one promising block, and was encouraged that Brazil didn't offer China preferential access to its reserves as part of the Sinopec deal.
"I did take note that there was no equity participation in the resources in Brazil and there were no apparent concessions, in terms of resource concessions, given as part of that (loan) deal," CEO Rex Tillerson told reporters after the company's annual meeting in Dallas. (Additional reporting by Anna Driver in Dallas; editing by Jim Marshall)
