GM bankruptcy, Opel decision seen near
2009-05-27 19:43:00.0
(Reuters) - General Motors Corp moved closer to filing the largest bankruptcy ever for a U.S. industrial company after a crucial bond exchange proposal failed and as officials in Germany neared a decision on which company would take over GM's European brand Opel.
At the same time, bankrupt U.S. automaker Chrysler faced a key court hearing expected to clear the way for Fiat SpA to take control of its best assets on the fast-track schedule set by President Barack Obama's administration.
Less than a month after it filed Chapter 11, Chrysler is seeking approval to sell its stronger operations to a "New Chrysler" owned by Fiat, labor unions and the U.S. and Canadian governments, in exchange for $2 billion paid to lenders.
With the Chrysler case nearing conclusion, attention was shifting to the complications expected from GM's bankruptcy -- expected within the next few days -- and the sale of Opel.
In the wake of the rejection, GM's board was expected to meet this week to consider the dwindling options available to the embattled automaker after a controversial attempt to restructure $27 billion in bond debt failed overnight.
In Europe, Fiat was also in the race to win control of Opel, part of Chief Executive Sergio Marchionne's ambitious attempt to cobble together an automotive alliance that could rank as the world's second-largest by sales.
The German government was considering offers for Opel from Fiat, Canadian auto parts company Magna International Inc, Belgium-listed holding RHJ International SA and China's Beijing Automotive Industry Corp.
Germany aims to close in on a deal to provide Opel with temporary financing if, as expected, GM is forced to file for bankruptcy in the United States.
While a final winner is not expected to be selected on Wednesday, the German government is expected to narrow the field of bidders.
The exchange had been seen as GM's last hope to cut debt outside the kind of bankruptcy that has been under way for Chrysler since the end of April.
"Even with a ... favorable reaction from the bondholders, they were going to end up in bankruptcy," said George Magliano, forecasting director at auto industry tracking firm IHS Global Insight.
Under its pending restructuring, GM will be majority-owned by the U.S. government, an effective nationalization intended to save jobs and prevent a more costly liquidation.
But Maryann Keller, an independent industry analyst, said action by the Obama administration, coupled with similar support for Opel in Europe, would prevent the global auto industry from undergoing a much needed shakeout of capacity.
"The major problem in this is that because of the action of government we're not going to see the strong survive and the weak dying," she said.
That could add to U.S. taxpayers' bill as the Chrysler and GM turnaround efforts play out.
"There is not going to be an end in sight," Keller added.
GM shares, which could be worthless if the automaker files for bankruptcy, fell 29 cents, or 20.14 percent, to $1.15 on Wednesday. The shares have traded in a 52-week range of $18.18 to $1.00.
Over the past decade, GM's collapse has taken down an icon of American industry, burned billions in paper profits for stock investors in a formerly safe blue-chip name and cost tens of thousands of jobs.
In 2000, shortly after former CEO Rick Wagoner took over, GM shares peaked at $75. At that time, the automaker employed more than 146,000 factory workers.
Under a concessionary UAW contract workers are voting on through Thursday, GM's factory payroll could drop to near 33,000 workers.
(Reporting by Madeline Chambers and Kevin Krolicki; Additional reporting by Jui Chakravorty, Tom Hals, Christiaan Hetzner, John Crawley, Walden Siew, David Lawder, Emily Chasan and Nick Carey; Editing by Matthew Lewis and Andre Grenon)
