UPDATE 5-Bank of America, PNC, Regions Fin'l raise equity
2009-05-27 16:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of America Corp (
), PNC Financial Services Group Inc (
The companies are among 10 large U.S. banks told to raise $74.6 billion of capital following government "stress tests" of their ability to handle a deep recession. Regulators ordered Bank of America to raise $33.9 billion, PNC $600 million and Regions $2.5 billion.
Banks raising common equity are hoping to benefit from growing investor confidence in the sector's survival prospects. Major U.S. financial stock indexes have roughly doubled from their early March lows.
Bank of America, the nation's largest bank, said on Wednesday it had raised $5.9 billion by swapping 436 million common shares for preferred stock. It said it might issue another 564 million common shares from such swaps.
The Charlotte, North Carolina-based bank said it has raised close to $26 billion of equity capital this month, including sales of $13.47 billion of common stock and part of its stake in China Construction Bank Corp (
It may also sell its First Republic Bank and Columbia asset management units, or pursue joint ventures. The amount raised from common stock sales and conversions exceeds Bank of America's original $17 billion target.
PNC, the seventh-largest bank, said it plugged its capital shortfall by raising more than $600 million through a sale of 15 million common shares in an "at-the-market" offering.
The Pittsburgh-based lender said it planned "as soon as appropriate" to pay back the $7.6 billion it took from the Treasury Department's Troubled Asset Relief Program.
Regions, which is based in Birmingham, Alabama, said it increased to $2.09 billion from $1.85 billion a previously announced sale of common and preferred shares.
Meanwhile, KeyCorp (
), a Cleveland bank found to have a $1.8 billion shortfall, on Wednesday said it may swap common shares for up to $1.74 billion of preferred securities. It earlier announced plans to sell $750 million of common stock.
Bank of America took $45 billion from TARP, Regions $3.5 billion and KeyCorp $2.5 billion. Many banks have maligned TARP for its restrictions, including executive pay rules, and because investors view participation as a sign of weakness.
Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan Chase & Co's (
) chief executive, said reasons to block healthy banks from repaying TARP "have virtually disappeared," given the "enormous" federal stimuli to markets, and banks' ability to raise capital on their own.
"We're hoping that the banks who can are allowed to repay TARP as soon as possible, which we would like to do," Dimon said at a Sanford C. Bernstein & Co conference.
JPMorgan took $25 billion from TARP, and was one of nine stress-tested banks found to have no capital shortfalls. The 10 other banks have until June 8 to develop capital plans.
Bank of America shares closed down 0.6 percent at $10.91, PNC fell 5 percent to $41.11, Regions rose 3.4 percent to $3.96, KeyCorp fell 8.5 percent to $4.76, and JPMorgan fell 5.2 percent to $34.66. (Reporting by Jonathan Stempel; Editing by Derek Caney, Lisa Von Ahn, Tim Dobbyn)
