UN revises global economic growth lower for 2009
2009-05-27 00:12:00.0
(Reuters) - The United Nations revised its 2009 global economic growth forecast down sharply on Wednesday, accounting for a deeper financial crisis that threatens to push unemployment past the 50 million mark.
In a mid-year update to its World Economic Situation and Prospects 2009 report issued in January, the United Nations now expects a global economic contraction of 2.6 percent this year, compared to its prior worst case scenario of a drop of 0.5 percent.
"The global credit crunch has continued straining the real economy worldwide," the report said.
A mild recovery in the World Gross Product (WPG) is possible for 2010, but the U.N. Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) warned that risks of slow recovery remained.
"If financial markets do not unclog soon and if the fiscal stimuli do not gain sufficient traction, the recession would prolong in most countries with the global economy stagnating at lower welfare levels well into 2010," the report said.
DESA is forecasting 50 million unemployed over the next two years, a figure that "could easily double if the situation continues to deteriorate."
World trade volumes are expected to drop 11 percent this year, the largest annual decline since the Great Depression, DESA said. The report also suggests that if there was a more coordinated response to the crisis, the recovery would be stronger and swifter.
"At present the stimulus is very unbalanced. Eighty percent of the stimulus is concentrated in developed countries, while most developing countries lack the fiscal space to provide social protection and counteract the consequences of the crisis," the report said.
Just seven countries are expected to have gross domestic product per capita growth of 3 percent or more in 2009. They are: Bangladesh, China, Democratic Republic of Congo, Cuba, India, Iraq, and Uzbekistan.
The financial collapse caused investors to pull capital out of emerging markets to shore up their balance sheets, increased business borrowing costs, drove world trade levels down sharply, and cut commodity prices and worker remittances.
Developing nations also are feeling the impact because their economies depend on the exports of raw materials and energy products, two things industrialized nations do not need as much of at the moment.
World income per capita is expected to decline 3.7 percent in 2009, the United Nation's updated report says, adding that unemployment is expected to worsen in 2009-2010.
Hardest hit will be east and south east Asia, with between 56 and 80 million people affected, about half from India.
Another 12 to 16 million people will remain in poverty in Africa and another 4 million in Latin America and the Caribbean, the report says.
