Germany scrambles to shield Opel from GM bankruptcy
2009-05-27 19:15:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, May 27 2009
Wed, May 27 2009
Wed, May 27 2009
Wed, May 27 2009
Tue, May 26 2009
Tue, May 26 2009
Wed, May 27 2009
German Chancellor Angela Merkel (R) welcomes Magna International Inc. Chairman Frank Stronach (C) as North-Rhine Westphalia's State Prime Minister Juergen Ruettgers (L) stands beside during a meeting at the Chancellery in Berlin, May 27, 2009. A government meeting on Wednesday over competing bids for carmaker Opel is not expected to yield a decision in favour of only one investor, a government spokesman said on Wednesday. Credit: Reuters/Fabrizio Bensch
Wed  EDT
Members of German Chancellor Angela Merkel's government were meeting with Opel suitors in Berlin in the hope of narrowing the field of bidders and clinching a deal to separate Opel assets from GM and provide the European firm with financing until a deal can be closed.
Italy's Fiat (
), Canadian auto parts company Magna MGa.TO, Belgium-listed holding company RHJ (
) and China's Beijing Automotive Industry Corp (BAIC) are vying for Opel, and Germany has been pushing all four to improve their offers.
The German newspaper Die Welt, citing sources in the Berlin talks, reported that the government planned to give Fiat and Magna preferred bidder status, granting them access to Opel's books for due diligence.
A government official, who requested anonymity, said the report was not fully accurate but declined to elaborate.
In addition to examining the bidders, Germany must also win approval from the U.S. government and GM for its plan to temporarily place Opel assets with a trustee, a step to protect its patents and technology from GM creditors who could swoop when the U.S. parent files for bankruptcy.
"We need to see significant movement, both from the potential investors and from the U.S. government and General Motors," Economy Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg said.
He said it was unlikely the government would settle on one single bidder at the Wednesday meeting, which was expected to continue until at least 11 p.m. (5 p.m. EDT).
GM is expected to have the final word on who buys Opel, but Berlin will play a crucial role in the decision because it is being asked to cough up billions of euros worth of loan guarantees as part of any deal.
Opel traces its roots in Germany back to the 19th century and employs about 25,000 staff here in four plants. Its future has become the focus of a furious politically charged debate in Berlin ahead of a federal election in September.
Like its parent GM, Opel has suffered acutely from the worldwide economic slowdown.
Heading into the talks, these two offers appeared to have an edge over those of RHJ and BAIC, the Chinese group which submitted a late offer on Tuesday that the German government has said lacks the required detail.
Excluding Saab, GM Europe employs some 50,000 workers. It has car manufacturing plants in Spain, Poland, Belgium and Britain, where Opel cars are sold under the Vauxhall brand, as well as engine and parts sites such as Aspern near Vienna.
The parent company's board could meet as soon as Wednesday to review options for GM, which has been kept in operation since the start of the year with $19.4 billion in emergency federal loans.
(Reporting by Christiaan Heztner, Philipp Halstrick and Angelika Gruber in Frankfurt, Philip Blenkinsop in Brussels and Boris Groendahl in Vienna; Writing by Noah Barkin; Editing by Ted Kerr)
