RPT-TIMELINE-Recent events in the Opel sale story
2009-05-27 00:26:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) unit Opel at a meeting on Wednesday evening, and reach a deal to provide bridge financing should its U.S. parent file for bankruptcy. [ID:nLR259691]
Chancellor Angela Merkel's government has been considering offers from Italy's Fiat (
), Canadian-Austrian supplier Magna International MGa.TO and Belgium-listed industrial holding RHJ International (
China's BAIC submitted a late bid on Tuesday.
GM is facing a June 1 restructuring deadline set by the U.S. government, which could lead to a Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. [ID:nN25529202]
Nov. 2008 - As a global financial crisis sends worldwide car sales plummeting and top auto manufacturers into crisis, Opel asks Germany for state loan guarantees.
Feb. 2009 - GM presents a restructuring plan to the U.S. government, puts its Swedish unit Saab up for sale and says it will need to cut $1.2 billion of costs in Europe.
March 4 - GM Europe head Carl-Peter Forster says Opel could slash 3,500 jobs and relaunch as an independent company, including UK-based unit Vauxhall Motors.
March 16 - Opel's hopes of getting state aid are dealt a blow when a government enquiry finds it is not possible to completely separate it from its U.S. parent.
April 23 - An Opel supervisory board member says GM is moving nearer to a deal to offload its Opel unit, having found a prospective buyer in Fiat.
May 1 - Fresh from a partnership deal with Chrysler, Fiat CEO Sergio Marchionne says he wants a deal with Opel too.
May 4 - Marchionne visits Berlin to try to win over Germany's political leaders to his vision for a new European car giant by letting him take over Opel.
May 16 - Opel could go bankrupt if competing business plans from Fiat and Magna are both unsuitable, Germany's Economy Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg says.
May 20 - GM Europe says three bids have been made; Fiat confirms it made a bid and a source says private equity investor RHJ International also made a bid.
-- Guttenberg says he expects a preliminary decision on bidders on Wednesday, but that there is "no favourite"
-- The German cabinet could agree to grant bridge financing for Opel, Finance Minister Peer Steinbrueck says. (Compiled by Maria Sheahan; Additional writing by Jijo Jacob and Helen Massy-Beresford; Additional writing and editing by David Cutler and Rupert Winchester)
