UPDATE 2-China Sunergy posts wider-than-expected Q1 loss
2009-05-27 10:29:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
* Shares fall as much as 8 percent (Recasts; adds details, conference call comments)
) posted a wider-than-expected quarterly loss, hurt by a fall in average selling prices and high-cost inventory, sending its shares down as much as 8 percent.
In a conference call with analysts, Chief Executive Allen Wang said he expects second-quarter average selling prices (ASPs) to be 15 percent to 20 percent lower than the first quarter.
"Our existing inventory of high-cost wafers prevented us from taking full advantage of reduced upstream costs while our ASPs fell, leading to severe gross margin pressure and a net loss for the quarter," Wang said in a statement.
However, Wang said in the call the company has consumed the entire high-cost inventory so far in the second quarter.
The company has begun to purchase lower-cost polysilicon wafers at spot market prices, which would bring down the inventory cost in the coming quarters, the CEO added.
China Sunergy, along with Solarfun Power Holdings Co Ltd SOLF.O, Canadian Solar Inc (
) got squeezed by a drop in inventory value in the fourth quarter, forcing these companies to take write-downs.
However, Wang expects the company to generate positive gross margins in the second quarter.
For the first quarter, the company posted a loss of $15.9 million, or 40 cents per American Depository Share (ADS), compared with a profit of $545,000, or 1 cent per ADS, a year ago.
Excluding items, the company posted a loss of 33 cents per ADS. Total sales fell 52 percent to $37.0 million.
Analysts on average were expecting a loss of 26 cents a share, excluding items, on revenue of $37.5 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
Blended average selling price (ASP) fell about 50 percent to $1.64 per watt. Quarterly shipments were about 23.9 megawatt, compared with 24 megawatt, in the year-ago period. (Reporting by Sakthi Prasad in Bangalore; Editing by Ratul Ray Chaudhuri)
