PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - May 27
2009-05-26 22:58:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue  EDT
) Chief Executive Fritz Henderson and GM Europe Chief Executive Carl-Peter Forster to state the British Government's financial support for the spin-off of Opel/Vauxhall is conditional on the preservation of domestic jobs at Vauxhall's plants in the UK. Lord Mandelson has also met competitors for a GM Europe stake, Fiat of Italy and Magna of Canada. Another contender for Opel is China's Beijing Automotive Industry Corp, which has reportedly pledged to preserve jobs and keep plants open in Germany for two years.
If Britain's "stamp duty reserve tax" (SDRT) regime is found to be in breach of European Union anti-discrimination law, the Treasury could face losing "several billion pounds in tax refunds" to multinationals, according to Craig Leslie of PwC. The challenge to this regime was brought by HSBC (
) which had been refused a repayment of 27 million pounds of SDRT by Revenue & Customs, incurred during a takeover bid in 2000 for French bank CCF.
The Treasury has blocked an avoidance scheme that could have exploited a loophole in business tax relief and cost the exchequer up to a billion pounds. The scheme used rules giving failed companies back some of the taxes they had paid when they were profitable, letting companies that were still trading gain access to the relief fund by "artificially engineering a deemed cessation of trading". The budget had previously reinforced anti-avoidance rules, compelling the Treasury to close down and discourage the use of similar schemes.
Classic British clothing brand Aquascutum could be sold to YGM Trading, the Hong Kong clothier that distributes the label in China and southeast Asia. YGM said on Monday that it had signed a letter of intent to acquire Aquascutum from Renown, the Japanese firm that bought the 58-year old brand in 1990 for around 20 billion yen ($211.2 million). Former Aquascutum chief executive Kim Winser had been in talks with Renown for over a year to lead a management buy-out of the fashion house, but the negotiations collapsed following the rejection of an offer last week.
) has raised its profit forecast following an increase in jewellery revenue from customers who have defaulted on their loans. The firm said that results for the year to June 30 would be significantly ahead of the market view, which had projected pre-tax profits of 12 million pounds. Albemarle's loans on jewellery have increased in popularity during the financial crisis as banks and credit card companies curb their lending. The proportion of customers unable to pay back their loans has also risen by 20 percent, allowing the firm to seize more of the pledged items - including a high percentage of gold rings, which have soared in value.
), Britain's biggest spread-betting company, fell on Tuesday following reports that regulators may be seeking to limit the amount of leverage that can be used by retail foreign exchange speculators in Japan. IG entered the Japanese market last year with the acquisition of a majority stake in online foreign exchange company FXOnline. Chief executive Tim Howkins said that the proposed leverage cap would affect 40 per cent of its trading volumes in Japan.
Uskmouth, the coal-fired plant owned by Welsh Power, could be owned by its creditors for the second time in its history. The company and its shareholders have decided to hand over the plant to its creditors instead of meeting the repayment deadline in March for the 120 million pounds of debt raised to fund its acquisition in 2006. Alex Lambie, chief executive of Welsh Power, said that "the collapse in power prices means that in the long-term, Uskmouth Power Company would not be able to service its current debt".
) has purchased SFG, a French appliance warranty provider at a cost of 24 million pounds. The price includes SFG's cash balances of 6.9 million pounds. Homeserve chief executive Richard Harpin said that SFG's fit with his company's existing French businesses gave it strategic importance, and signalled what "could be the start of developing a pan-European warranty business". SFG has gross assets of 26 million pounds and made pre-tax profits of 3.3 million pounds last year.
Holiday operator Holidaybreak HBR.L has seen losses grow from 18.2 million pounds to 36.6 million pounds for the six months to March 31, with turnover down from 156 million pounds to 153 million pounds. Whilst the company usually experiences an operating loss in the first half due to a seasonal lull in its camping and education divisions, it also saw a six percent fall in sales in its hotel breaks division. Chief executive Carl Michel described the business as "recession-proof", citing "strong trading" at the group's educational division, with like-for-like sales up seven percent.
CARLUCCIO'S TAKEOVER TALKS OFF THE TABLE
Talks between Italian restaurant chain Carluccio's CARL.L and a mystery bidder have been terminated. The bidder is thought to be Hutton Collins, financial backer of restaurant chains Pizza Express and Wagamama. Carluccio's shares, up 18 percent when the approach was announced, fell 14 percent, or 14 pence, to 83.5 pence. Turnover at the company for the six months to March 29 rose from 30.4 million pounds to 34.5 million pounds, although pre-tax profits for the same period fell 11 percent to 2.5 million pounds due to higher import and utility costs, and reduced consumer spending.
