TREASURIES-Bonds dive despite good auction as stocks rally
2009-05-26 16:43:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. government debt prices fell sharply on Tuesday after data showing a sharp rebound in consumer confidence sent stocks on a tear, overwhelming positive sentiment from a solid auction of two-year notes.
Part of the selling was due to ongoing supply concerns. The week's first, $40 billion sale, found very strong interest, easing fears about a possible pullback in demand amid record budget deficits.
Still, traders worried longer maturities might not receive as strong a welcome. Total issuance for the week is slated to total $101 billion, matching a record set earlier this year. The next two offerings would be of five- and seven-year debt.
"It is still in the back of everyone's mind that we've got years of these kind of auctions down the road," said Kim Rupert, head of global fixed-income analysis at Action Economics.
Supply issues aside, it was hard to make a case for buying government bonds with the U.S. stock market rallying so steeply. The Dow Jones industrial average closed the day nearly 200 points, or 2.37 percent higher.
Against that backdrop, benchmark 10-year notes US10YT=RR lost 27/32 and were offering a yield of 3.55 percent, up 10 basis points from Friday's close. The 30-year bond US30YT=RR was down 1-28/32 and yielding 4.50 percent.
The move away from bonds and into equities was driven in part by a sharp jump in The Conference Board's consumer confidence measure. The index surged to 54.9 from 40.8, the biggest one-month rise in six years and the best reading in eight months.
Selling by mortgage investors, who are forced to sell Treasuries to sell their positions after yields breach certain key levels, may have exacerbated the downturn in Treasury prices in the afternoon, traders said.
The day's auction itself went off without a hitch. It was met with bids for 2.94 times the amount on offer, the strongest showing for a two-year note since September 2007, just a month after the start of a credit crisis.
Indirect bidders, often viewed as a proxy for foreign buying, took 54 percent of the sale, the most since late 2006.
"Great auction, massive indirects" said Andrew Brenner, a senior vice president at MF global, citing talk of a "huge Asian bid."
Despite such demand, the selling trend was firmly in place. Not even the Federal Reserve, which through one of its emergency programs has become a buyer of last resort for Treasuries, managed to stem the selling. The Fed purchased $1.55 billion in inflation-protected notes on Tuesday.
Traders sold Treasuries in earnest last week after a Standard & Poor's warning on Britain's AAA rating sparked concern that the U.S. credit profile might eventually suffer a similar fate.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner heads for China this weekend, and many expect him to try to assuage a growing anxiety among Chinese officials about their large Treasury holdings.
(Additional reporting by Burton Frierson; Editing by Diane Craft)
