China's private sector leads switch into services
2009-05-27 09:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Hard hit by a slump in global demand for their manufactured goods, nimble Chinese entrepreneurs are wasting no time seeking shelter from the storm by switching into domestic-driven services such as transport and tourism.
The response of private business is music to the ears of policymakers, who need to fuel domestic demand to compensate for the loss of export growth that might not revive any time soon.
"It's time for China to adopt a different model to maintain its long-term economic growth," Yang Weimin, deputy secretary-general of the National Development and Reform Commission, the top economic planning agency, said recently.
To that end, Beijing is accelerating investment, giving subsidies to buyers of cars and household appliances and pledging to stimulate a service sector that has been stunted by the policy emphasis up to now on industrialization.
Services make up only 40 percent of Chinese GDP. That is up from less than 25 percent when China embarked on economic reforms 30 years ago, but falls short of India (53 percent) and South Korea (60 percent). Services in developed countries typically make up more than 70 percent of output.
"While there is still significant potential for Chinese households to increase their spending on non-food consumer goods, we believe the potential is even larger for service consumption growth, as household income increases," said Mingchun Sun, chief China economist with Nomura in Hong Kong.
At a time when an estimated 23 million migrants have lost their jobs due to the downturn, services hold an extra appeal to planners because they generate much more employment than capital-intensive manufacturing.
"It is good to see that more private companies are turning to the service industry, which is conducive to the overall restructuring of the economy," said Li Jianwei, head of macroeconomic research at the Development Research Center, a think-tank under the State Council, China's cabinet.
For a related graphic, click
WHERE WENZHOU LEADS, CHINA FOLLOWS
The trend is apparent in Wenzhou, a bastion of free enterprise south of Shanghai where businessmen have a knack of capitalizing on new opportunities before rivals elsewhere have even spotted them.
Zhou Dewen, head of a business association in the city, said companies that used to make textiles and shoes for export are now looking to sell both goods and services to consumers in their home market.
"Around 20 percent of Wenzhou's enterprises have moved from traditional manufacturing to service industries since the second half of 2008 when the financial crisis broke out," Zhou said.
The city's businessmen, who can never be faulted for lacking ambition, plan to fund and build as many as 1,000 shopping malls across China in the coming years, Zhou said.
"Increasing penetration of the retail sector will help manufacturers shift to the domestic market, which is vast," he said.
Official figures show that capital spending on wholesaling and retailing in the first quarter jumped 44 percent from a year earlier, outstripping the 28.6 percent increase in total urban fixed-asset investment.
"The collapse in exports is forcing coastal manufacturers to move into other sectors, initially retailing and then into logistics and other service industries," said Hua Shan, an economist with a textile trade association in Beijing.
"It has become a clearer trend now," she said.
In their quest for profit, China's new breed of service providers happens to be supporting another government goal: they are heading inland, where consumer spending is growing faster than on the coast but living standards remain much lower. Beijing wants to close the development gap.
"Our company is gradually moving businesses to the central and western provinces. There's a huge rural consumer market there and that means more opportunities for services," said Zhang Guanghui, chairman of Wenzhou Olis Exports Co.
Zhang's firm used to focus on export-related services such as organizing trade exhibitions. It now plans to start a handful of tourism and transport businesses in central Anhui province.
China will not return to the days of export-driven growth, so it is good to get into the service sector as quick as possible, he explained.
Sang Minglei works for a firm in Suzhou, another industrial hub near Shanghai, that used to make only silk quilts for export.
When the company saw early this year that global demand was drying up, it diversified into express delivery services and plans to expand into inland provinces such as Hubei and Jiangxi where the logistics market is underdeveloped.
"We prefer to invest in service industries because they need much less initial capital than manufacturing," Sang said.
Although Beijing is putting increasing emphasis on services, the challenges for businessmen remain daunting.
An executive at a private biotechnology company in Wenzhou, who would give only his family name, Ke, said greater transparency in regulations and policies was needed to give entrepreneurs confidence to invest in the services sector.
Moreover, profitable sectors such as telecommunications and finance are monopolized or dominated by the state, while the barriers to entry in health and education remain high despite huge demand in both fields.
"The government needs to launch more supportive policies to expand the role private firms play in the development of the service industry," said Bao Yujun, head of the China Private Enterprises Association.
(Reporting by Aileen Wang and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Neil Fullick)
