TREASURIES-Strong auction fails to rouse bond bulls
2009-05-26 13:57:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. government debt prices eased on Tuesday after data showing a sharp rebound in consumer confidence sent stocks on a tear, though firm interest in $40 billion in new two-year notes cushioned the drop in bonds.
Such fears seemed misplaced for now, as the Treasury's latest auction was met with bids for 2.94 times the amount on offer, the strongest showing since September 2007, just a month after the start of a credit crisis.
Indirect bidders, often viewed as a proxy for foreign buying, took 54 percent of the sale, the most since late 2006.
"Great auction, massive indirects" said Andrew Brenner, a senior vice president at MF global, citing talk of a "huge Asian bid."
Foreign central bank, especially in Asia, have been huge buyers of U.S. bonds in recent years, and currently own over a quarter of the market.
Still, with equity markets in full swing, it was difficult for government debt to stage any sort of recovery. Benchmark 10-year notes US10YT=RR were down 5/32 and yielding 3.47 percent, up two basis points from Friday's close.
Traders sold Treasuries in earnest last week after a Standard & Poor's warning on Britain's AAA rating sparked concern that the U.S. credit profile might eventually suffer a similar fate.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner heads for China this weekend, and many expect him to try to assuage a growing anxiety among Chinese officials about their large Treasury holdings.
"It looks like the scare that we had over the demand for Treasury supply maybe was a little bit premature, but nevertheless I think it is still in the back of everyone's mind that we've got years of these kind of auctions down the road," said Kim Rupert, head of global fixed-income analysis at Action Economics.
The Dow Jones industrial average was up nearly 200 points, or 2.4 percent. Stocks were propelled in part by a huge jump in The Conference Board's consumer confidence indicator. It climbed to 54.9 in May from 40.8 in April, the highest level in eight months and the largest one-month jump in six years.
Not even the Federal Reserve, which through one of its emergency purchase programs has become a buyer of last resort for Treasuries, managed to stem the selling. The Fed bought $1.55 billion in inflation-protected notes on Tuesday.
Existing two-year notes US2YT=RR were steady and yielding 0.90 percent. Bonds started the session on a firmer note on news of North Korean missile tests, but that safe-haven bid quickly gave way as equity markets took off.
(Reporting by Pedro Nicolaci da Costa; Editing by Diane Craft)
