PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - May 27
2009-05-26 17:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue  EDT
) yesterday entered a trading halt, announcing it would undertake a A$358 million equity raising. The raising will consist of A$180 million from a new investor, China's Guangdong Rising Assets Management, a A$28 million institutional placement, and a rights issue that could raise up to A$114 million. The deal with Guandong, which would give the Chinese company a 19.9 percent stake in PanAust, requires approval from both Australian regulators and PanAust shareholders. Page 16.
) is to argue against supermarket chain Woolworths' (
Laboratory testing group Campbell Brothers CPB.AX yesterday reported its full-year results, with net profit rising 49 percent to A$106.2 million, in line with the company's previous forecast in February, and analyst expectations. However, managing director Greg Kilmister warned that business conditions had weakened during the three months to the end of March, and the company did not provide guidance due to uncertainty in the mining sector affecting its mineral testing services. Page 16.
) yesterday raised its guidance for earnings per share (EPS) growth to 20 percent, up from the company's previous guidance in February of between 10 percent and 12 percent growth. Chief executive Chris Rex said 'the underlying business is going well but the reason for the upgrade is obviously that we are paying less interest on the debt than we originally budgeted for.' The company reported EPS growth of 11.8 percent to A60.7 cents for the 2008 financial year. Page 16.
The assets of collapsed forestry and horticulture investment group Great Southern have already attracted attention from rival agribusiness companies including ITC, Rewards Group and Gunns. Gunns says it has already been in contact with Great Southern's administrators, Ferrier Hodgson, with a spokesperson saying 'Gunns is always looking for opportunities to expand.' Ferrier Hodgson will hold a creditors' meeting in Melbourne this morning, following Great Southern's collapse last week. Page 29.
Mining company Citic Pacific Mining's Sino Iron magnetite project in Western Australia's Pilbara region has been delayed but is expected to reach first production next year. The A$3.85 billion project is the first Chinese mine development in Australia, and Citic will become the country's fourth-largest iron ore producer when the project reaches its full production capacity of 27.6 million tonnes a year. Chief executive Barry Fitzgerald says the delays are the result of the project's approval process. Page 29.
Low-cost carrier Jetstar yesterday cancelled almost a third of its flights to Japan next month, as passenger numbers have slumped due to fears about swine flu. A spokesperson for the airline said the impact of the flu had led to the Japanese Education Ministry recommending that schools cancel or delay overseas trips, which has led to cancellations from 'Japanese nationals of any background or persuasion.' The airline said it would be ready to reintroduce flights when demand levels return to normal. Page 31.
) has appointed Tourism and Transport Forum executive director Olivia Wirth as head of Qantas corporate affairs. Analysts say the appointment is part of an acknowledgement within Qantas that the airline's internal and external communications require improvement following damage to the brand's reputation in recent years. Ms Wirth has previously worked for Tourism Australia and the Tourism Council Australia, and has been an adviser to former tourism minister Joe Hockey. Page 31.
) will need to undertake a A$1 billion-plus capital raising in the near future if it is to acquire some of Royal Bank of Scotland's assets in Asia, according to analysts. ANZ chief executive Mike Smith may have been unprepared for the Australian Securities and Investments Commission's decision to lift the ban on short-selling financial stocks this week, however, the lifting of the ban has removed uncertainty over its effect on ANZ's share price. Page 18.
Investment fund Prime Retirement PTN.AX and Aged Care Property Trust has announced that it intends to sell 10 residential aged-care facilities and retirement villages, which currently have a book value of around A$63 million. The A$57 million trust is chaired by the former federal health minister Michael Wooldridge. Analysts say the assets are likely to go to one of two bidders, developer Lend Lease (
), which outbid Prime to acquire Babcock & Brown Communities last year, or rival developer Stockland. Page 18.
Gold mining company Dioro Exploration yesterday said it has been in confidential talks with a potential bidder for the company. Dioro said the talks had started before it received a A$49 million hostile scrip bid from Avoca Resources, which already has a 15 percent stake in Dioro. Analysts say the most likely third-party bidder is Canadian company La Mancha Resources, which already owns 51 percent of a joint venture with Dioro, the high-grade Frogs Leg goldmine near Kalgoorlie. Page 18.
St George STGKF.PK Bank has lost an appeal in the Federal Court, which upheld an April 2008 ruling that the bank could not claim A$253 million in deductions from its assessable income between 1999 and 2003. The decision means the bank will not be able to reverse a A$117 million tax expense it booked last year. St George, which merged with Westpac Banking Corporation in November last year, has yet to decide whether it will ask for leave to appeal the decision to the High Court. Page 19.
) indicates that the company is considering selling parts of its telephony assets to the Federal Government's national broadband network (NBN) company. The submission, to the Government's regional broadband black spot initiative, says 'Telstra has indicated that it will consider vending in assets, which may include regional transmission, in exchange for equity in NBNCo.' Page B1.
Allco Finance Group's AFG.AX newly appointed liquidators, McGrathNicol, say they will focus on three areas as part of efforts to recover funds for the collapsed finance company's creditors. The three areas to be examined are Allco's A$330 million acquisition of the Rubicon (
) real estate business, a A$52 million loan to a private company owned by Allco executives, and A$1.1 billion in loans to a number of company offshoots which McGrathNicols says are 'potentially uncommercial transactions.' Page B1.
) released its annual letter to shareholders yesterday, which included an announcement that earnings would be at least A$65 million below last year's result. Chairman Robert Savage said that although the A$25.3 billion investment fund had cut costs as it sought to limit losses, 'the direction of the stock market is out of our control.' Analysts said the reduction should not be categorised as a downgrade, noting that 'if the market goes up tomorrow, their profit goes back up again.' Page B3.
The Insurance Council of Australia (ICA) yesterday estimated that the total cost to insurers of the latest floods in south-eastern Queensland and northen New South Wales could be around A$39 million, with at least 9500 insurance claims lodged in the past week. Suncorp Group, which has received 4500 claims due to damage from the storms, says its exposure is limited to A$10 million, with any additional costs to be covered by its reinsurer. The ICA last year said premiums are likely to rise due to increased weather-related claims. Page B3.
