U.N. rights chief calls for Sri Lanka investigation
2009-05-26 13:35:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue  EDT
Ensuring accountability for abuses committed in the recent fighting should help the island nation's reconciliation after decades of violence, U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay said.
"Establishing the facts is crucial to set the record straight regarding the conduct of all parties in the conflict," Pillay told a special session of the U.N. Human Rights Council.
"Victims and the survivors have a right to justice and remedies," added the former U.N. war crimes judge.
She said that Sri Lanka should not grant amnesty to lower and mid-level LTTE officers, as it indicated it would do.
"I would like to underscore that amnesties preventing accountability of individuals who may be responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity or gross violations of human rights are impermissible," Pillay said.
Specifically, allegations that LTTE fighters kept civilians from leaving the conflict zone, "effectively using them as human shields," and fired on some as they sought to flee, should be fully investigated, she said.
Reports that government forces used heavy artillery on the densely populated conflict zone also deserved scrutiny, she said. "This and the reported shelling of a hospital clinic on several occasions in the last weeks of fighting, if verified, would be of great concern," she told the 47 member-state forum.
'DISTURBING REPORTS'
U.N. human rights investigators said that they continued to receive "disturbing reports of torture, extra-judicial killings and enforced disappearances" in Sri Lanka.
Activists are still being arrested and detained without charges, and attempts to portray them as traitors endanger their lives, they said in a statement read out to the Council.
The government is detaining in temporary camps more than 300,000 people who fled the fighting, giving rise to "concerns of arbitrary detention," they said. Some had "already died from starvation or malnutrition."
Mahinda Samarasinghe, Sri Lanka's minister of disaster management and human rights, defended his government's handling of what he called "this difficult phase of liberating our people from terrorism." He also denied there was starvation.
"Over 250,000 of our citizens who were held hostage by the LTTE in the north have been rescued by our forces are being looked after and cared for as we speak," he told the talks.
Sri Lanka was "sick and tired" of foreign pressure, but would ensure that its people were able to return to their homes once demining and reconstruction were carried out, he said.
"We are not going to take short-cuts," he told the talks.
Sri Lankan government officials were working side-by-side with U.N. aid agencies and more than 50 non-governmental organizations to help the displaced, according to Samarasinghe.
The special session, which continues on Wednesday, is to consider separate draft resolutions submitted by Sri Lanka and its allies, and a Western text presented by European countries.
Czech envoy Tomas Husak, representing the European Union, called for an independent investigation into all violations of human rights and "full accountability of those responsible."
China, India and Russia -- Sri Lanka's major regional allies which are struggling with long-running conflicts of their own in Tibet, Kashmir and Chechnya -- used the forum to congratulate Colombo on its military success.
