Russia eyes global alliances on nuclear market
2009-05-26 10:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia will seek global alliances to build a dominant position on the nuclear market as the world economic crisis dents the appeal of renewable energy, senior Russian officials said on Tuesday.
Russia, one of the world's biggest nuclear players, this year signed deals to cooperate with Japan's Toshiba (
) and Germany's Siemens (
), putting Russia at the centre of a nuclear alliance stretching from Western Europe to East Asia.
Moscow is seeking to increase its clout by expanding into developed markets such as the United States, European Union and Japan while adding sales in India, Turkey and China.
"The financial crisis is a unique window of opportunity," Sergei Kiriyenko, the head of Russia's state atomic energy monopoly, Rosatom, told reporters.
"The demand is still there... The challenge now is to make use of this demand. That means building the capacity that has not been built, mainly with the help of global alliances."
Russia's cooperation deals with Siemens and Toshiba provoked speculation that Moscow would seek to work with them to form a powerful global alliance.
Competitors of such an alliance would include Areva NP, a unit of Areva S.A. CEPFi.PA; and GE Hitachi, the nuclear venture of U.S. conglomerate General Electric (
) and Japan's Hitachi (
"The global community previously took a decision to develop renewable energy, but now they are saying that it is too expensive," Shmatko said. "Investment in renewable energy in 2009 will decline by 40 percent."
Russian officials say uranium prices UX-U3O8-SPT, which have fallen to about $50 per lb from a record of $136 in June 2007, will stabilise and that demand remains robust.
"The world is undergoing a crisis, but the world was in crisis in the 1970s, and that was exactly when we saw a wave of demand for nuclear materials," said Alexei Gregoryev, general director of Russia's state nuclear trader, Tenex.
"And that was also when we were able to take the second spot on the global uranium and nuclear materials market, breaking the monopoly of the United States," Gregoryev said.
Australia has the world's largest known recoverable resources of uranium, controlling about 23 percent, according to the World Nuclear Association (www.world-nuclear.org), followed by Kazakhstan with 15 percent and Russia with 10 percent.
Russia's civilian nuclear assets are grouped into a state company, known as Atomenergoprom which has operations ranging from uranium mines and fuel enrichment to atomic power stations.
Russia's state uranium trader said on Tuesday it would sign a landmark deal to supply uranium directly to U.S. utilities, including PG&E Corp (
), from 2014. [ID:nLQ630414]
