Pelosi says climate change could change U.S.-China game
2009-05-26 04:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Ties between the United States and China could be transformed by cooperation on climate change, U.S. House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi said, linking environmental concerns to human rights and the rule of law.
Pelosi told an audience in the Chinese capital on Tuesday that the two nations -- the world's top emitters of greenhouse gases -- must work together to fight global warming.
"China and the United States can and must confront the challenge of climate change together," she said at a meeting organised by the American Chamber of Commerce in Beijing.
But Pelosi, a Democrat well known as a critic of China over human rights and its rule in Tibet, also obliquely linked that concern to rights concerns, calling it a matter of "environmental justice".
Fighting global warming would require political transparency, rule of law and accountability, Pelosi told the audience, which included former Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and its current ambassador to Washington, Zhou Wenzhong.
Pelosi, however, did not mention specific human rights issues in her speech.
While the two sides have struck up-beat notes since President Barack Obama took office, much still divides them. Many U.S. lawmakers want China to make firm commitments to contain its growing greenhouse gas output before they back any deal.
Pelosi's visit comes on the heels of the House Energy and Commerce Committee approving a climate change bill on Thursday that would cut U.S. emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas from human activity, by 17 percent from 2005 levels by the year 2020.
As the world's biggest emitter of these gases, China also faces pressure to begin cutting them soon. But it says developing nations should not accept mandatory emissions caps to solve a problem caused over the centuries by wealthy countries, which still have much higher per capita emissions. (Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
