FACTBOX-Criminal, business cases pending for top court pick
2009-05-26 09:40:00.0
(Reuters) - Juvenile justice, releasing Guantanamo prisoners into the United States and a copyright dispute over online databases are among the pending cases that Judge Sonia Sotomayor would confront if approved by the Senate for a position on the U.S. Supreme Court.
President Barack Obama is due to announce Sotomayor on Tuesday as his first appointment to the nation's highest court, replacing retiring liberal Justice David Souter.
Souter's retirement takes effect when the court term ends in late June. Obama has said he would like his choice to be approved by the Democratic-controlled Senate before the court returns to the bench in October after its summer recess.
The Supreme Court decides contentious social issues, like abortion and use of race as a factor in hiring and promotions, criminal law cases on the death penalty and high-stakes disputes involving corporations.
For its coming term that begins in October, the court already has agreed to decide several major cases and also has pending appeals in a number of important cases. They include:
The ruling could affect more than 2,500 individuals in the United States serving sentences of life imprisonment for crimes done before they turned 18 years old, human rights groups said.
The U.S. Justice Department defended the 1999 law that Congress adopted in an effort to crack down on videos like those depicting dog fights. It compared animal cruelty to child pornography, which the Supreme Court has said does not qualify for free-speech protection.
The writers sued the publishers and electronic database services, saying their contracts did not give the publishers the right to electronically reproduce their work or license it for others to do so.
The case involved a challenge to a 2006 New Hampshire law that banned using information about a doctor's prescribing history for the purpose of increasing drug sales. (Reporting by James Vicini, Editing by Vicki Allen)
