Regulation war: Business in crosshairs
2009-05-26 00:10:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue  EDT
Judging from the talk of add-ons from Congress and even the White House, some business lobbyists figure the package might as well come with Santa wrapping, tinsel and lights.
"It's pretty clear that this is not about regulatory reform, though that cloak might be used for some of it. This is about an activist agenda," said Tom Quaadman, executive director of the U.S. Chamber Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness.
The showdown comes after a string of legislative defeats for the corporate community, from clawed-back bonuses in the financial houses to bankruptcies in the auto sector to passage of the first-ever credit card reform law.
In those cases, isolated industries fought hard against the changes, to no avail. The financial community seems to be headed for the same fate on regulatory reform.
The economic implosion last summer exposed a host of weaknesses ！ including gaps in oversight, or lax application of it ！ that prevented early detection of the financial threats, a full understanding of the scale of the problems and an inadequacy of tools to respond to them.
Confronted with those facts, even financial industry officials concede that new regulations are in order. Their worry is overreach ！ that Congress will impose a draconian system that stifles innovation and handicaps U.S. markets globally.
Now, he's expected to propose legislation giving the government broader authority to seize failing financial conglomerates such as insurance giant American International Group and oversee their dismantling.
The government can already do that with banks through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., but the current crisis has demonstrated that other large institutions can also pose great risks to the system when they default.
Expansion of the Fed's power is already stirring controversy, as it has since the nation's founding.
Even so, Jefferson maintained it was unconstitutional and that service on it was treasonous. "I believe that banking institutions are more dangerous to our liberties than standing armies," he wrote in a letter to James Monroe.
When Jefferson became president, he abolished it.
Over the ensuing decades, a central bank was re-established and abolished and re-established again in 1913 after the 1907 panic.
Today, similar arguments about the Fed's role are popping up in blogs and in Capitol Hill discussions.
Geithner appears adamant that the Fed should take the role of "systemic supervisor." And in order to get its way, the White House is "prepared to break China," he recently warned industry representatives.
But the treasury secretary does seem open to the idea of creating a council representing the existing regulators to advise the Fed, although it's unknown if he will ultimately propose it.
But the reform add-ons are likely to spark even more intense debate, and the financial industry is already mobilizing a cavalry of lobbyists to assist ！ if not rescue ！ it from congressional overreach.
The Business Roundtable, an organization of major CEOs, unsuccessfully tried to quash Schumer's shareholder legislation before it was introduced, and, last week, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce put a target on it.
The legislation would dictate changes in the way corporate boards are composed, ban board chairmen from also serving as chief executive officers and give shareholders some say in executive pay packages.
"There are over 15,000 public companies in the U.S., and the vast majority had nothing to do with the financial crisis. They are trying to create a one-size-fits-all," said Quaadman, noting that Bill Gates served as chairman and CEO of Microsoft for years.
Meanwhile, a flotilla of corporate advocates will join the Business Roundtable and the Chamber to push back against government dictates about private pay packages.
"Not only is the financial industry terrified," said one lobbyist. "The nonfinancial industries are, too."
(c) Capitol News Company, LLC 2009
