US STOCKS-Futures flat to lower on North Korea worry
2009-05-26 09:29:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. stock index futures pointed to a flat to lower open on Tuesday after a long weekend as tensions surrounding North Korea unsettled investors and hopes for a quick economic recovery in the near-term ebbed.
North Korea, despite international condemnation of its latest nuclear test, fired two more short-range missiles off its east coast on Tuesday and accused the U.S. of plotting against its government. For details, see [ID:nSEO205060]
"There's not much more the U.S. can do without China taking za proactive role. That's always been the case with North Korea, it continues to be the case, nothing has changed," said Marc Pado, U.S. market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. in San Francisco.
"We should expect to see further consolidation through the month of June simply because the market has run so far and the market is looking to consolidate these gains over time," Pado said.
S&P 500 futures SPc1 fell 5.30 points and were below fair value, a formula that evaluates pricing by taking into account interest rates, dividends and time to expiration on the contract. Dow Jones Industrial Average futures DJc1 shed 42 points, while Nasdaq 100 NDc1 futures were off 8.25 points.
U.S. oil prices for July delivery CLc1 fell $2 to $59.67 a barrel, pressured by a firmer U.S. dollar and expectations that an OPEC meeting later this week could keep the producer group's output unchanged. Chevron Corp (
) shares rose 2 percent to $124.91 in premarket trade after Morgan Stanley upgraded the iPhone maker to "overweight," saying the company is emerging as the clear leader in the battle over mobile Internet and will see iPhone-driven earnings growth over the next two years. [IDnBNG62341]
) shares dipped 0.6 percent to $13.02 in premarket trade after Chief Executive Jeff Immelt said the company's growth will be "harder to come by" in coming years given the prospect the global economy may grow at a slower pace once it emerges from the recession. [ID:nT234910]
On the economic front, prices of single-family homes in March fell 18.7 percent from a year earlier, while prices in the first quarter dropped at a record pace, according to the Standard & Poor's/Case-Shiller Home Price Indicies released on Tuesday. [ID:nNYS005087]
Investors will also keep a close eye on the fixed income front. The benchmark U.S. Treasury debt price rose in Asian trade on Tuesday, with the yield edging away from last week's six-month peak, while the market braced for $101 billion worth of government debt sales this week.
The U.S. Treasury sells $40 billion of two-year notes on Tuesday, $35 billion of five-year debt on Wednesday and $26 billion of seven-year paper on Thursday, matching a record for weekly bond sales set in April.
U.S. stocks retreated for a fourth session on Friday on persistent concerns over the U.S. budget deficit, with U.S. Treasuries and the dollar losing ground.
Despite the declines for the broad S&P 500, U.S. stocks finished moderately higher for the week with the blue-chip Dow average up 0.1 percent, the S&P 500 up 0.5 percent and the Nasdaq up 0.7 percent.
Since reaching a low in early March, the Dow has gained 28 percent and the S&P 500 has risen 33 percent. (Reporting by Chuck Mikolajczak; Editing by Padraic Cassidy)
