Two China Olympics goods factories accused of rights abuses
2012-07-24 14:57:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Jul 24 2012
Tue, Jul 24 2012
Sun, Jul 1 2012
Thu, Jun 28 2012
Tue  EDT
In the latest investigation into outsourced manufacturing in China, SACOM (Scholars and Students against Corporate Misbehaviour) probed two Olympics suppliers and said it found patchy workplace safety, minimum wages and excessive overtime.
"The rampant rights violations reveal that the LOCOG codes are really no more than lip service with no commitment to the enforcement of labor rights standards," SACOM, an active labor rights advocacy group in China, said in a report on its investigation in May and June.
In response, LOCOG said British toy company Golden Bear, which supplies licensed products including Olympic mascots, was reviewing all the factories in its supply chain.
The two factories named in the report are Xinda, a production facility of Zindart Manufacturing Limited, and Shiwei Toys, a Hong Kong-owned toy supplier for brands such as Hasbro, both based in the southern "world factory" of the Pearl River Delta.
In both factories, the report said, workers had 11-to-12-hour shifts six days a week with overtime work up to 120 hours a month. At Xinda, workers who dozed off during work lost two-four hours' wages. At Shiwei, being five minutes late for work led to a half-day salary deduction.
"Workers are exposed to hazardous working environments without adequate protective equipment," the report said. "At Xinda, some workers have to bring their own masks to work."
Zindart CEO Chris Franklin said the company complied with industry labor standards including those set by the International Council of Toy Industries (ICTI), and dismissed accusations that it failed to supply adequate safety equipment.
"I know without doubt we provide all necessary clothing and protection. The spray departments are properly ventilated and extracted," Franklin said in emailed comments to Reuters.
He said most workers were only paid minimum basic wages of around 1,100 yuan ($170) per month as manufacturers across China faced pressure from rising costs and shrinking demand in core markets like debt-stricken Europe.
"We pay minimum wages but that is all we can pay based on the price paid for the products by our customers. They already think we are high priced," he added.
China has long relied on cheap and intensive labor, though in recent years, there have been signs of rising wages and a more assertive generation of workers launching successful strikes at multinational plants.
"An independent audit of the Xinda factory was conducted and no such issues were found," they said in a statement.
Regarding conditions at Shiwei, LOCOG said it had undertaken a full review of Golden Bear's ethical trade management systems.
(Reporting by James Pomfret and Twinnie Siu in Hong Kong, additional reporting by Keith Weir in London; Editing by Nick Macfie and Ken Ferris)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Well, I believe I read that the
Well, I believe I read that the
over the original estimate?
Jul 24, 20123:37pm EDT--
