Q+A: How does China view North Korea's nuclear test?
2009-05-26 12:36:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea's second nuclear test explosion has already drawn calls from Washington for China to intensify pressure on Pyongyang to set aside nuclear brinkmanship and return to disarmament talks.
Following are some questions and answers about China's relations with its prickly Communist neighbor:
HOW MUCH INFLUENCE DOES CHINA HAVE OVER NORTH KOREA?
China is the closest thing North Korea has to an ally. China's new Communist government came to the aid of North Korean Communist forces in the war of the 1950s, and in 1961 the two countries signed a pact that calls for either to aid the other if attacked. It remains in force.
China also supplies North Korea with much-needed oil, food and other essentials. Trade between the two countries reached $2.79 billion, last year, up 41.3 percent on 2007. Of that, China's exports to the North were worth $2.0 billion.
In theory then, China wields more influence over North Korea than any other power.
SO WHY DOESN'T CHINA USE MORE OF THAT POTENTIAL SWAY?
Chinese analysts and officials say that their country's relationship with the North is more tense and brittle than outsiders, especially Washington, can see. They argue that if China applies harsh pressure on the North, that could backfire for both efforts at nuclear disarmament and for China's bilateral ties with Pyongyang.
In October 2006, North Korea held its first nuclear test explosion, defying pleas from Chinese leaders. This year, China's criticism of North Korea's rocket launch in a United Nations statement and its calls for fresh six-party disarmament talks failed to deter North Korea from another nuclear test.
China has hosted those sporadic six-party talks since August 2003, bringing together North and South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia.
WHAT DOES CHINA WORRY COULD HAPPEN?
China does not want North Korea to possess a nuclear arsenal that could destabilize the region, nor does it want to risk domestic upheaval in the North or rupturing bilateral ties.
China's 1,416-km (880-mile) border with North Korea includes stretches of rivers that freeze over in winter, and in recent years many North Korean refugees have crossed over. If the North falls into turmoil, Beijing fears that flow could become a torrent into an already poor part of China.
Additionally, Kim Jong-il, the North's supreme leader, has been sick and apparently setting in place plans for his eventual succession. Chinese analysts say their government wants to ensure that it has ties to emerging leaders, and confrontation would make that difficult.
SO WHAT COULD CHINA DO?
The most likely course appears that Beijing will back harsh words against Pyongyang's nuclear test, but resist any demands for sanctions that would threaten substantial economic and political ties with the North.
