Chinese-French masters lift art sale amid downturn
2009-05-25 22:11:00.0
Track China's Leaders
An undated handout photo shows the 1950s minimalist painting ''Cat and Birds'' by renowned Chinese artist Sanyu which fetched a record $5.4 million at Christie's Hong Kong auction May 24, 2009, a positive sign for the Asian art market which has been battered by the global financial crisis. Credit: Reuters/Christie's Handout
Mon  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - A minimalist painting by renowned Chinese artist Sanyu fetched a record $5.4 million at Christie's Hong Kong auction, a positive sign for the Asian art market which has been battered by the global financial crisis.
The 1950s oil on masonite "Cat and Birds" by Sanyu, a China-born artist who spent many years in France, was sold for HK$42.1 million to an anonymous buyer at the Sunday evening sale, setting a world auction record for the artist.
Three other works by Zao Wou-ki, another Chinese artist who developed his career in France, also went for several times their pre-sale estimates, suggesting valuations for established artists have strengthened as those of once-feted emergent Chinese contemporary artists waned amid the downturn.
"We saw great activity not only from clients in the room, but also on the telephone, resulting in a truly international set of buyers and underbidders," Eric Chang, Christie's head of Asian contemporary art, said in a statement.
Christie's spring sales of Asian art in Hong Kong is considered a key indicator of Asian art market sentiment, and this year, the number of works on offer was less than in the past, while valuations have been trimmed to lure more buyers.
Overall, $23.4 million of Asian contemporary and Chinese 20th century art went under the hammer. While 11 percent of lots went unsold, the tally nearly doubled pre-sale estimates, hinting at improved buyer sentiment in the ailing market.
Sanyu's stark black-and-white themed work of a cat, bird and bonsai miniature, with a poetic inscription hinting at a yin-yang duality, is considered one of his masterpieces.
Zao's abstract "Nous Deux" (We Two) of swirling browns and reds with broken black lines, inspired by oracle bone inscriptions, was sold to a private Asian collector for $HK35.4 million ($4.5 million), almost three times its estimate.
The rich, melancholy work was held by the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University for nearly half a century.
Two other Zao works, "Bateaux au Claire de la Lune" (Boats in the Moonlight) and "Vent et Poussiere" (Wind and Dust), fetched $1.8 million and $1.2 million respectively, underscoring the reputation of Zao, who now largely resides in France.
Last autumn, even as financial markets tanked, a Zao masterwork "Hommage a Tou-Fou" sold for a record $5.9 million.
The top priced work by a Chinese contemporary artist was "Rebuilding the Berlin Wall: Project for Extraterrestrials No. 7," a series of wooden panels by Cai Guo-qiang. The gunpowder streaked and painted panels sold for $1.08 million.
