MONEY MARKETS-China IRS eases after IPO-linked spike
2009-05-26 01:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China's interest rate swaps (IRS) market cooled on Tuesday after surging the previous day on news it would lift a moratorium on new share listings shortly, while New Zealand IRS rates fell slightly ahead of its budget.
The New Zealand government is expected to unveil forecasts on Thursday for low growth, burgeoning budget deficits and higher borrowing, which have been spooking the rates market recently.
Dollar borrowing costs have slid dramatically this month in Asia, tracking record lows in the London interbank offered rates.
On Tuesday, three-month dollar funding rates in Singapore SIUSDD=ABSG rose to 0.66429 percent from Monday's 0.66167. It is still substantially below the level of 1.01167 percent prevailing at the start of the month.
In China, the spike in IRS on Monday saw a pullback on expectations liquidity pressures will not be severe.
The front end of the IRS curve, which is sensitive to the outlook on money market liquidity, rose sharply on news that China was seeking comments on draft rules to restart IPOs by June 5, after which the authorities may give the green light for IPOs.
On Tuesday, the 3-month IRS CNYQB7R3M= eased to 1.02 percent from Monday's close of 1.10 percent. It had risen as much as 18 basis points on Monday at one point.
"The China IPO news has not affected the local equities market as much as the onshore IRS market," said Frances Cheung, fixed income strategist with Standard Chartered Bank.
China's plan to resume initial public stock offers after an eight-month hiatus is expected to allow corporates to raise about 105 billion yuan from equity markets.
The stock market showed little concern about the potential flood of new equity, with the Shanghai benchmark
closing up 0.5 percent at 2,610 points on Monday.
"We saw smoother repo rates in early-2008 compared to 2007 due to flush liquidity conditions in the system. Liquidity is still flush," said Cheung.
Meanwhile, New Zealand IRS rates and curve steepness eased after recent concerns about increased government borrowing.
"Financial markets are positioned for a sensible, restrained and conservative budget," said Seane Keane, managing director at Triple T Consulting.
"Anything less now will see the currency hard hit, and the longer end of the bond curve steepen substantially," he said. (Reporting by Umesh Desai; Editing by Kim Coghill)
