PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - May 26
2009-05-25 16:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
) and Chinese company Chinalco will be the subject of crucial meetings this week that may decide its fate, according to analysts.
The company was forced to announce Mr Orr's pending departure earlier than it wished after the Australian Stock Exchange issued an unrelated share price query last week.
Chairman Jim Askew will fulfil Mr Orr's responsibilities until a replacement is found, with the company hoping to fill the post before Mr Orr leaves at the end of June. Page 20.
The offer was made in the midst of Viridis' own efforts to reorganise the company and sell-off assets to pay debt, with the company announcing yesterday that it would now return its focus to this plan. Page 20.
High-performance data services provider NextGen Networks has become the first company to bid for a part of the Federal Government's A$250 million regional broadband tender.
The bid has been made under the Regional Backbone Blackspots Initiative, with NextGen proposing to utilise its existing major fibre optic network which extends from Brisbane to Perth.
"We could easily roll it out to Mildura, Mt Gambier, Mt Isa; places the government has identified as broadband blackspots,' Nextgen chief executive Phil Sykes said yesterday. Page 45.
The results were well received by analysts, with Credit Suisse projecting that the airline would achieve a full-year result close to its guidance. Page 19.
A fire earlier this month at BlueScope Steel's (
) Western Port plant near Melbourne will cost the company between A$20 million and A$25 million, according to a statement to the stock exchange yesterday.
Luxury boatbuilder Riviera has made one-third of its 157 permanent full-time staff redundant, with receivers and managers Deloitte saying staff would receive what was owed in wages but not entitlements.
A restructure of the Coomera, Gold Coast production facility was announced on Monday. The move would place Riviera "in much better shape to weather the current economic conditions' and "to meet the ongoing demand for quality Riviera products,' according to Deloitte partner Chris Campbell. Page 19.
Newspaper publishing group Fairfax Media's (
) offer to buy back up to A$200 million in notes which are due to expire in 2011 closed on Friday, however, Fairfax will only announce the outcome of the offer tomorrow.
The result of the offer will depend on the note pricing the company can obtain, which increased from A76 cents on the dollar before the offer, to A88 cents. The number of notes the company acquires will decide how much the company saves on interest payments from the buy back. Page 16.
), which is part-way through an attempt to raise up to A$3 billion in a capital raising, may be forced to undertake a further capital raising within the next two years, according to analysts at Citi.
The analysts say that if the current offer to retail shareholders is taken up by 50 percent of investors and the price of oil remains at US$65 a barrel, such a raising may be required to retain the company's BBB+ credit rating. Page 16.
CSL yesterday said that the US Federal Trade Commission had told the company that it would move to block the takeover. CSL raised A$1.9 billion from investors last year to fund the proposed takeover, and is likely to soon return funds to shareholders, with analysts speculating that the company may undertake a share buyback. Page 17.
Shareholders questioned Mr Joseph and senior management on the company's falling share-price of the last 12 to 18 months, and whether the recent A$1.5 billion capital raising was necessary. Mr Joseph apologised for the group's performance, saying "with the wisdom of hindsight, it is now clear that the Babcock & Brown joint venture has become the wrong deal for these times.' Page B3.
Mike Wilkins, chief executive of general insurance company Insurance Australia Group (IAG) (
), yesterday warned that a combination of extreme weather and the global financial crisis is placing pressure on the sector's earnings.
Although the financial crisis is causing a downturn in areas such as car insurance, as people buy fewer cars, the main effect has been on investment income. IAG has A$10.6 billion in investments, and Mr Wilkins said a reduction in the annual A$400 million it receives could lead to premium increases. Page B3.
) yesterday warned that it may not pay a final dividend this year. Chairman Jennifer Hill-Ling said the company expects to book net charges of between A$10 million and A$12 million following a restructure, and that the company would discontinue its policy of paying 100 percent of profit as dividends to shareholders.
