China, HK shares edge higher; snap 3-day slump
2009-05-25 05:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China and Hong Kong shares edged up on Monday, shrugging off early losses on news China would lift a moratorium on new listings as early as next month, as previous week's three day slump pulled in buyers.
Analysts said the stock was also lifted by long-running market talk about an imminent fuel price increase, with the latest speculation saying it could come as soon as Thursday.
In Hong Kong, PetroChina (
) dropped 0.8 percent with analysts saying the acquisition would add little to PetroChina's reserves or bottomline, and questioning the rationale behind investing in the Singapore market.
"This is somewhat surprising to us because this is PetroChina's first downstream deal in an overseas market and why it has chosen SPC given the relatively small domestic petroleum market in Singapore," said analysts with Goldman Sachs led by Kelvin Koh in a report Monday.
Shanghai-listed shares in PetroChina are over 70 percent more expensive than those traded in Hong Kong, more striking than the average 28.48 percent premium commanded by yuan-denominated A-shares over thier Hong Kong-listed H-shares counterparts.
Gains in Hong Kong were led by property developers, which continued to outperform as investors bet on a turnaround in demand and recovery in property prices in the second half of 2009 amid favourable mortgage terms and low savings rates in the territory.
The benchmark Hang Seng Index ended 0.4 percent or 59.30 points higher at 17,121.82.
), which has found favour with top brokerages including Morgan Stanley and Bank of America-Merrill Lynch in recent days, climbed 5.8 percent to HK$90.90, while Li Ka-shing's property flagship Cheung Kong Holdings (
But turnover shrank to a dismal HK$58.8 billion from Friday's HK$64.4 billion.
"Like with the property stocks, most positive factors have been priced into this market. Momentum has definitely slowed and we can expect a big correction after Wednesday's futures expiration," said Peter Lai, director with DBS Vickers.
The China Enterprises Index of top mainland companies was 0.1 percent higher at 9,799.36.
ended at 2,610.010 points after falling as far 2,538.622 in the morning, its lowest in three weeks.
But losing Shanghai A shares outnumbered gainers by 534 to 372. Turnover in Shanghai A shares rose to 112.3 billion yuan ($16.4 billion) from Friday's light 98.8 billion yuan.
A plan to resume IPOs as early as next month, announced after the market closed on Friday, fuelled worries about heavy supplies of new equity and triggered a slump at the opening. IPOs have effectively been suspended for the past eight months.
The losses were milder than many analysts had expected, however, and the index rose into positive territory in the afternoon, led by PetroChina.
"Economic indicators and listed firms' earnings are still in focus and the IPO news did not trigger panic selling, suggesting that underlying sentiment is not too bad," said analyst Cao Xuefeng at Western Securities.
Analysts said the index could move in a 2,400 to 2,700 point range in coming weeks, capped by a nine-month high reached last week.
Brokerages, whose earnings have been hurt by an eight-month drought in mainland IPOs, were major gainers, with Haitong Securities (
), the most actively traded Shanghai A share, up 6.31 percent at 14.33 yuan.
Non-ferrous metals and property shares were strong, with Jiangxi Copper (
) advancing 5.85 percent to 28.93 yuan, while property sector leader China Vanke (
(Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil in HONG KONG and Claire Zhang in SHANGHAI; Editing by Edmund Klamann and Chris Lewis)
