World leaders condemn N. Korea test, urge action
2009-05-25 10:40:00.0
(Reuters) - World leaders condemned North Korea for carrying out nuclear and missile tests and U.S. President Barack Obama said Pyongyang's actions were a reckless challenge warranting action from the international community.
As nations prepared for emergency U.N. Security Council talks Monday (2000 GMT), European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana branded the test a "flagrant violation" of a Council resolution which required "a firm response."
China, Russia, France and Britain -- which with the United States are the permanent Council members -- expressed alarm at the hermit state's test that Moscow said was as powerful as the U.S. atom bomb dropped on Nagasaki in World War Two.
"By acting in blatant defiance of the United Nations Security Council, North Korea is directly and recklessly challenging the international community," Obama said. "The danger posed by North Korea's threatening activities warrants action by the international community."
Pyongyang, however, is so isolated there are few punishment options open and neither Obama nor Solana made specific recommendations. France spoke of strengthening sanctions.
"North Korea's behavior increases tensions and undermines stability in Northeast Asia. Such provocations will only serve to deepen North Korea's isolation," Obama said. "It will not find international acceptance unless it abandons its pursuit of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery."
"ERRONEOUS, MISGUIDED"
"North Korea's underground nuclear test ... causes deep regret and the most serious concern," said Russian President Dmitry Medvedev's spokeswoman, Natalya Timakova.
Iran, which strongly denies accusations by the West it has a covert nuclear weapons program, took the opportunity to state that the Islamic Republic had no missile or nuclear cooperation with North Korea.
"We don't have any cooperation (with North Korea) in this field," President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said. Asked about North Korea's test, he said: "In principle we oppose the production, expansion and the use of weapons of mass destruction."
Monday's blast was up to 20 times more powerful than the North's first nuclear test, underscoring the advances in its nuclear program. Ratcheting up tensions further, North Korea test-fired three short-range missiles just hours later.
"We consider it a provocation and we strongly condemn them," European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown described the nuclear and missile tests as "erroneous, misguided and a danger to the world," saying the international community would treat North Korea as a partner only if it behaved responsibly.
France said it would be consulting its Security Council partners "on the consequences to draw from this serious act by North Korea, and in particular on strengthening sanctions."
"On the basis that North Korea has conducted a nuclear underground explosion, they deserve and get nothing other than our absolute condemnation, and that condemnation should be echoed around our region and the globe," Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith told parliament.
China, which as a permanent Council member could veto any resolution, called on Pyongyang not to make the situation worse. But political analysts said Beijing was unlikely to back stronger sanctions.
"The Chinese side vehemently demands North Korea abides by its denuclearization promises, stop any actions which may worsen the situation and return to the six-party talks process," China said in a statement. "The Chinese government calls on all sides to calmly and appropriately deal (with the situation)."
China has long seen the North as a strategic buffer against the extension of U.S. forces up to its border. Beijing's policy makers are juggling concerns about potential instability in North Korea, its weakened sway there and fears of a regional confrontation over Pyongyang's nuclear arms program.
(Writing by Peter Millership; Editing by Richard Balmforth)
