FACTBOX: Reaction to North Korea's nuclear test
2009-05-25 06:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Following is reaction from the international community and political analysts to North Korea's nuclear test.
President Barack Obama said North Korea's nuclear and missile tests were a "matter of grave concern to all nations" and warranted action by the international community.
"North Korea is directly and recklessly challenging the international community. North Korea's behavior increases tensions and undermines stability in Northeast Asia," Obama said in a statement.
The U.N. Security Council will meet on Monday to discuss the nuclear test, Russia's U.N. ambassador Vitaly Churkin was quoted as saying by Itar-Tass news agency.
U.N Secretary-General said, if confirmed, the test constituted a clear violation of U.N. Security Council resolution 1718. "I am deeply worried by a report of nuclear test by Democratic Republic of Korea," Ban told Danish TV2.
China, the North's neighbor and long-time benefactor, said it was "resolutely opposed" to the test, said the Xinhua news agency, quoting the Foreign Ministry.
China however is unlikely to back strong sanctions, analysts said, and its leaders will probably be more careful to balance their anger against worries Pyongyang could make six-party nuclear disarmament talks unsalvageable.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown condemned the nuclear and missile tests as "erroneous, misguided and a danger to the world," saying the international community would only treat the North as a partner if it behaved responsibly.
"This act will undermine prospects for peace on the Korean peninsula and will do nothing for North Korea's security," Brown said in a statement.
North Korea's nuclear test threatens regional peace and warrants a firm response, European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana said in a statement which also criticized the North's test launch of short-range missiles.
The test was unacceptable and a violation of U.N. Security Council resolutions, Prime Minister Taro Aso said. He said Japan would seek a new resolution condemning the test at the council meeting called for Monday. Kyodo news agency said Japan was also considering tightening its own sanctions on the communist state.
France condemned the test and said it would consult U.N. Security Council partners "on the consequences to draw from this serious act by North Korea, and in particular on strengthening sanctions," the French Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
Russia's military said the nuclear test had a force of about 20 kilotons, Itar-Tass quoted a source in Russia's defense ministry as saying. A kiloton is equivalent to 1,000 tonnes of TNT. Russia was concerned by the reports of the test, Interfax news agency quoted Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov as saying.
Foreign Minister Stephen Smith said the test was provocative. "On the basis that North Korea has conducted a nuclear underground explosion, they deserve and get nothing other than our absolute condemnation, and that condemnation should be echoed around our region and the globe," Smith told parliament.
JIM WALSH, AN EXPERT IN INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AT THE
"The surprise is the timing, that it happened more quickly, much sooner than people expected.
"People reading about this today are going to be worried that there is going to be a war, that this could lead to a military conflict. The answer to that is no. The primary consequences are going to be political and inside North Korea and in the region.
XU GUANGYU, RESEARCHER, CHINA ARMS CONTROL AND DISARMAMENT
"North Korea's strategic objective hasn't changed. That objective is to win the attention of the Obama administration, to push the North Korea issue up the agenda."
DONG YONG-SUENG, SENIOR FELLOW, SAMSUNG ECONOMIC RESEARCH
SCOTT SNYDER, ASIA FOUNDATION, WASHINGTON
"Given internal events related to North Korea's preparations for succession, the statement very much suggests a desire to "deter" external interference in that process and to consolidate a deterrent capacity. This suggests a heightened feeling of vulnerability in Pyongyang."
KIM SUNG-HAN, KOREA UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR
