China seen wary of strong sanctions against N.Korea
2009-05-25 04:18:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea's nuclear test will anger China, its neighbor and long-time benefactor, but Beijing is unlikely to back stronger sanctions as part of any new U.N. Security Council resolution, Chinese analysts said on Monday.
As a permanent member of the council, China has the power to veto any such resolution. But it is likely to face pressure from Washington and other regional capitals to support measures punishing the North for its test.
Pressure was already building on China to take a firmer stand as host of the now-stalled six-party talks among regional powers that aim to dismantle North Korea's nuclear program.
Beijing condemned North Korea's first nuclear test blast in 2006 as a "brazen" slap in the face for Chinese leaders, who give the North crucial economic and diplomatic protection.
This time, China's leaders will probably be more careful to balance their anger against worries that Pyongyang could make the six-party nuclear disarmament talks unsalvageable, said Xu Guangyu, a nuclear expert at the China Arms Control and Disarmament Association.
"China's goal is to ensure that the six-party talks process does not fall apart. Stricter sanctions are not going to achieve that objective," Xu, a former military officer, said.
"China may have to compromise with the United States in the Security Council, but it won't want to back strong sanctions."
Already, however, pressure is building on Beijing.
"The Chinese must use their influence to help bring North Korea to the table for the six-party talks," U.S. House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who was visiting China, said in a statement issued through the U.S. Embassy in Beijing. Pelosi was in Shanghai.
"Today's announcement makes that need all the more urgent."
North Korea's supreme leader, Kim Jong-il, has shown signs of poor health that could open the way to an unpredictable succession.
Beijing's policy makers are juggling concerns about potential instability in North Korea, its weakened sway there and fears of a regional confrontation over Pyongyang's nuclear arms program.
China has long regarded the North as a strategic buffer against the extension of U.S. and allied forces up to its border, and it also fears a surge of refugees pouring across its 1,416-km (880-mile) frontier with the North.
China and its neighbors may ultimately have to become used to a North Korea with a small nuclear arsenal, said Cai Jian, an expert on the Korea at Fudan University in Shanghai.
"We used to think North Korea's nuclear weapons program was just a negotiating tool," said Cai. "But I think it's become clearer that North Korea's ultimate objective is possessing nuclear weapons, and nothing short of that."
