UPDATE 1-Sime Darby Q3 net slumps on palm oil price fall
2009-05-25 06:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Sime Darby (
), Malaysia's top oil palm grower by market value, said quarterly net profit slumped 85 percent as palm oil prices more than halved from last year's record highs.
Chief Executive Ahmad Zubir Murshid said in a statement on Monday that Sime Darby would use its balance sheet to acquire undervalued assets, but did not elaborate.
The company said its industrial and property divisions were recovering, but its plantation business faltered due to the drop in crude palm prices and lower production as a result of biological tree stress.
The slump in third-quarter net profit was the company's second consecutive fall, while rival Wilmar International (
), less exposed to weaker crude palm oil prices, had posted higher earnings.
Sime Darby, valued at about $11.8 billion, said January-March net profit fell to 165.68 million ringgit from 1.11 billion ringgit a year earlier.
Local analysts do not provide quarterly forecasts, but had expected Sime Darby to earn 2.2 billion ringgit for the year to end-June, down from 3.57 billion ringgit a year earlier. Nine-month net was 1.3 billion ringgit.
Crude palm oil (CPO), a key ingredient in food processing and widely used as a cooking oil, hit a record 4,486 ringgit a tonne in March 2008 before collapsing at the height of the global financial crisis. Prices have rebounded strongly this year, but are still down more than 40 percent from last year's peak.
CPO futures KPOc3 on the Malaysian derivatives exchange are currently traded at around 2,460 ringgit a tonne. Sime Darby's average CPO price from its Malaysian and Indonesian estates as of end-March were pegged at 2,127 ringgit a tonne.
), Malaysia's No.2 palm oil producer, said its January-March net profit slumped 97 percent on the fall in prices, weaker output and foreign currency losses. [ID:nKLR496786]
Singapore-listed Wilmar earlier this month said net profit grew 11 percent as higher refining and trading margins offset lower revenues, and said it was optimistic about sustained demand from China and India. [ID:nSP404727]
Sime Darby shares closed up 0.7 percent ahead of the earnings. The stock has risen by a third this year, beating the wider market's .KLSE 20 percent gain. (Reporting by Julie Goh and Niluksi Koswanage; Writing by Soo Ai Peng; Editing by Lincoln Feast & Ian Geoghegan)
