UPDATE 3-Golden Ocean Q1 tops forecast, sees Q2 improvement
2009-05-25 06:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Norwegian bulk shipper Golden Ocean (
The company announced on Monday a smaller-than-expected 68 percent drop in first-quarter operating profit, helped by a recent upswing in freight rates mainly driven by Chinese demand.
"Based on the trading so far in the second quarter, the board anticipates that the operating results for the second quarter will show an improvement compared to the first quarter of 2009," Golden Ocean said in a statement.
Golden Ocean's operating profit fell to $20 million in the quarter from a comparable $62 million in the year-ago quarter, above the average $14 million forecast in a Reuters survey.
The company saw profits take a hit later in 2008 during the global economic downturn, as freight rates plunged.
However, rates have improved so far this year, with the Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI rising to 2,786 points last week -- the highest since early October 2008 -- driven by renewed Chinese demand for iron ore, coal and grains.
Golden Ocean said the recent strengthening of the dry bulk market -- with Capesize vessel rates approaching $50,000 per day -- was encouraging, but could not be seen as a confirmation that the market has regained long-term profitability.
"I do not think the Capesize market will stay at today's level ... for the rest of 2009, and we think it will be more quiet towards the summer," Billung told Reuters. Capesize vessels are usually above 150,000 tons deadweight (DWT).
Golden Ocean, controlled by shipping tycoon John Fredriksen, announced in April that it had raised $110 million in new equity and delayed or cancelled ship orders to fix its finances. [ID:nL2585280]
"We have been through some very dramatic quarters, but we came through the crisis somehow," Billung said.
One analyst said details of deals with shipyards made public in the report were overall positive for Golden Ocean, removing fear that there would be unpleasant surprises.
The group also said that, except for four vessels, the entire newbuilding programme was financed. Its remaining newbuilding programme consists of 24 ships.
Shares in Golden Ocean, which lost 87 percent last year when the bulk shipping market collapsed, grew as much as 6.5 percent and were still up 2.8 percent at 6.62 crowns by 0932 GMT against a 0.3 percent drop in the Oslo bourse main index .OSEBX.
Golden Ocean said the freight and asset market was dependent on continued strong growth -- in particularly in the Chinese economy -- to regain stability, although fiscal stimulus plans around the world were also positive for demand.
"The stimulus packages put together by governments ... are likely to generate substantial additional demand for bulk products like iron ore," Golden Ocean said.
The company said it was well positioned to meet both a positive or a negative market going forward, and have the flexibility to "take use of opportunities".
The ambitious global fleet orderbook -- built up over five years of booming growth -- is expected to see large cuts due to the downturn, which analysts have said could help rebuild a balance in a market suffering with oversupply.
One analyst, however, said the recent strengthening in freight rates could dampen this development.
"More (companies) will have an incentive to have their ships delivered and fewer will have an incentive to scrap vessels, so it is not very positive for the long-term picture that we have a stronger market right now," analyst Martin Sommerseth Jaer at Arctic Securities said. (Reporting by Aasa Christine Stoltz; Editing by Hans Peters and Simon Jessop)
