PetroChina refinery bid reflects China price ambition
2009-05-25 06:16:00.0
(Reuters) - PetroChina's $2.2 billion bid to buy half a refinery in Singapore may look like yet another China deal for energy security, but really it says far more about Beijing's desire to flex its pricing muscle on world markets.
The clearly established pattern that precedes this weekend's deal isn't the headline-grabbing "go out" strategy that has state oil and metals firms hunting furiously for oilfields and mines abroad, but the more low-key plan for those companies to become more potent and influential traders on global markets.
With its landmark deal to buy Singapore Petroleum Company (SPC), which owns a 30 year-old, 285,000 barrel per day (bpd) refinery, PetroChina adds the final piece of its trading arsenal: a major source of fuel supply in the trading hub where most of Asia's oil prices are determined.
"They already have a fairly big presence in Singapore in terms of trading, and now they have also gained actual fuel production, so it's really further integrating into the value chain," said Victor Shum of Purvin & Gertz in Singapore.
PetroChina's aims have been expressed most clearly by the growth of its trading subsidiary Chinaoil, which since 2005 has nearly trebled its Singapore-based trading team to 14, doubled its fuel trading volumes and is a regular participant in the daily half-hour trading "window" that sets benchmark prices.
It already has two other key ingredients for success: long-term deals to supply fuel to top regional importers Indonesia and Vietnam; and a 35 percent stake in newly built oil storage enterprise Universal Terminal.
All told, it will have enormous leverage to trade in the spot Singapore oil market, where even a small volume of deals can have significant implications for contract prices.
Although it won't change the course of benchmark U.S. crude prices overnight, the deal is the latest manifestation of China's desire to use its leverage as a top consumer of industrial resources to become a price-maker, not a passive price-taker.
Its steel mills are now leading global negotiations for term iron ore contracts, and various government entities have been aggressively stockpiling metals to prop up domestic prices.
For PetroChina, Asia's top oil and gas producer, the deal also realizes a long-held ambition to expand downstream.
It is due to finalize a deal by July 1 to buy a 49 percent stake in Nippon Oil's 115,000-bpd Osaka refinery, building on long-term cooperation, and last year Singapore media said it was looking at building a greenfield refinery in the city-state.
It now trades around 20 million tonnes of fuel a year through its team in the Singapore oil hub, double what it did in 2005, more than half of it residual fuel oil.
Its share of SRC's output, which will include 0.001 percent sulphur diesel when a revamp program is completed by September, will allow Chinaoil to participate in the Europe arbitrage trade, adding a new dimension to its big regional book, traders say.
Chinaoil will also have access to SPC's 220,000 cubic-meter storage terminal at Pulau Sebarok off Singapore's west coast.
SPC owns half of Singapore Refining Company (SRC), with the remainder held by U.S. major Chevron Corp.
The announcement came shortly after PetroChina, whose 2.6 million-bpd in refining capacity lags far behind rival Sinopec's 4.2 million-bpd as at end-2008, said it had secured approval to raise $15 billion in debt to finance expansion.
But with decelerating demand growth and a number of major new domestic refineries still in the pipeline, including two being built by PetroChina this year, China has little need to go overseas to secure more refining capacity, suggesting the SPC deal is more about trading tactics than resource strategy.
In terms of geography, SPC will plug a hole in PetroChina's domestic refining system, which is heavily concentrated in the north, giving it a foothold in the Sinopec-dominated south and helping it close a trading expertise gap with Sinopec's trading arm Unipec, a major player on the Middle East crude market for years.
"The SPC deal... will bring PetroChina equity of refined fuels that it is lagging behind rival Sinopec at home, so that it can leverage both the Singapore trading hub, markets like Indonesia and Vietnam, and China's coastal consumers," said Kang Wu, who covers China oil industry at East-West Center in Hawaii.
The $1.02 billion to buy Keppel Corp's 45.5 percent stake will trigger a mandatory buyout offer for SPC, which also operates small oilfields and pursues exploration activities in Vietnam and Indonesia.
China's growing importance on regional refined fuel markets has been made increasingly clear, as its volatile trading habits whipsaw markets. It exported record volumes of diesel and large amounts of gasoline in April, with the bulk shipped to Singapore, a reversal from record-high imports just a year ago.
Despite its expanded trading arsenal, most traders see little risk that Chinaoil -- kept on a rather short leash by its conservative parent -- will fall into the same risk-addicted trap that nearly felled China Aviation Oil Trading, the high-flying Singapore-based Beijing-backed outfit that secretly racked up $550 million in losses in wrong-way bets five years ago.
"The expansion is totally different from CAO under Chen Jiulin's time, which focused primarily on trading," said East-West Centre's Wu.
"PetroChina, if it's to involve in more trading, will be hedging either its upstream or downstream business."
(Additional reporting by Judy Hua and Felicia Loo in SINGAPORE, Chen Aizhu in BEIJING and Wee Sui Lee in HONG KONG; Editing by Jonathan Leff)
