Nikkei rises 1.1 pct as Shionogi, Komatsu gain
2009-05-24 23:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei share average rose 1.1 percent on Monday as drugmaker Shionogi (
) jumped after a report that it has developed a new flu drug, while construction machinery makers such as Komatsu (
) advanced 4.1 percent after the drugmaker said on Sunday that Malvinder Singh, chairman and chief executive of its Indian unit, Ranbaxy Laboratories (
), had resigned. [ID:nLO383257]
"Investors are betting the New York market will likely rise after today's market holiday as it has fallen four days in a row," said Fumiyuki Nakanishi, a manager at SMBC Friend Securities.
U.S. markets will be closed on Monday for the Memorial Day holiday, and British markets will be closed for a bank holiday.
"The (Japanese) government's monthly economic report will be released later today and if it says the economy has hit bottom, as some expect, the stock market will be in an upward trend for about a year as past experiences suggest. That is prompting some buying as well," Nakanishi continued.
In light trade, the benchmark Nikkei
added 105.42 points to 9,331.23, after falling 0.4 percent on Friday.
U.S. stocks fell for a fourth day on Friday, with the Dow Jones industrial average
Ratings agency Standard & Poor's rattled markets on Thursday when it said it might cut Britain's AAA credit rating because of the danger of soaring public debt, sparking fears of similar action against the United States.
Takahiko Murai, a general manager at Nozomi Securities said index-related buying by newly set up funds appeared to be helping to push the market higher, but that caution remained ahead of U.S. economic data such as housing sales.
Figures for existing home sales in April will be released on Wednesday, and new home sales data for the same month comes out on Thursday.
"U.S. housing data is a focus precisely because the data is important in gauging the outlook for the economy. If it turns out to be poor, the market will likely react negatively," Murai said.
GM faces a June 1 deadline to work out issues with its creditors if it wants to avoid a bankruptcy filing. On Friday, a spokesman for some GM creditors said the company's largest bond holders, with a total of roughly $27 billion in debt, plan to reject GM's current offer for a 10 percent equity stake. [ID:nN22369035]
In Tokyo, shares of Shionogi shot up 5.6 percent to 1,950 yen after Kyodo News cited industry sources as saying the drugmaker is expected to market a new influenza drug in Japan, possibly from next year.
Other drugmakers also gained, with Eisai Co (
) climbing 3 percent to 3,140 yen, while Daiichi Sankyo rose to 1,745 yen.
) climbed after Goldman Sachs upgraded both companies to "buy" from "neutral", citing strong demand for construction machinery in China and the likely recovery of demand in developing economies.
Komatsu, which was also put on Goldman's conviction buy list, rose 2.3 percent to 1,357 yen, while Hitachi Construction added 2 percent to 1,514 yen.
) gained 3.7 percent to 141 yen after the Sunday Times reported it is in talks to sell its upmarket British fashion brand Aquascutum to China's YGM Trading (
) rose 1.3 percent to 3,210 yen, while Honda Motor (
) shed 1.3 percent to 2,675 yen.
Some 968 million shares changed hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, below last week's morning average of 1 billion.
