U.N. Security Council says concerned about Suu Kyi
2009-05-22 18:09:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri  EDT
It stopped short of explicitly calling for the immediate release of the Nobel Peace laureate, who has been in prison or under house arrest off and on since 1989.
"The members of the Security Council express their concern about the political impact of recent developments relating to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi," a statement by the 15-member Security Council read.
The military junta that has ruled Myanmar since 1962 put Suu Kyi on trial on Monday, accusing her of breaking the terms of her house arrest because an American man swam to her lakeside home.
If found guilty, she could be jailed for up to five years.
British Ambassador John Sawers, who read the statement to reporters, said it was an "important step forward."
He said Suu Kyi's trial and imprisonment "has once again put a spotlight on the inhumanity of the regime there"
Asked why the statement did not call for Suu Kyi's immediate release, Sawers said while Britain backs such a demand, all negotiations in the Security Council "involve a degree of to-and-fro."
"This represents the unanimous view of all members of the Security Council, not just of a few," Sawers said of the statement.
"The reiteration of our call for the release for all political prisoners is very pointed, when the most prominent of those political prisoners is standing in the dock on, frankly, charges which stand no credibility," Sawers said.
The Security Council's statement said it reaffirmed previous comments it made in May 2008 and October 2007. The 2007 statement called for the Myanmar government to create necessary conditions for a "genuine dialogue" with Suu Kyi and all concerned parties.
"We've called again ... for the release of all political prisoners and made very clear that the Burmese regime needs to create the right conditions for a genuine dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and with other concerned parties," Deputy U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Rosemary DiCarlo said after the Security Council's meeting on Friday.
The statement also said members of the Security Council "affirm their commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Myanmar and, in that context, reiterate that the future of Myanmar lies in the hands of all of its people."
Russian Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, who currently holds the monthly rotating Security Council presidency, did not give a speech after the meeting.
The Security Council's statement comes after comments on Tuesday from the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) which voiced "grave concern" over Suu Kyi. However, at the time, China said it would not interfere in the regime's affairs.
(Reporting by Megan Davies; editing by Mohammad Zargham and Bill Trott)
