GLOBAL MARKETS-US dollar at 2009 low, bonds down on credit scare
2009-05-22 13:16:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar dropped to its lowest level this year and government bonds fell further on Friday as concerns mounted about rising U.S. debt levels after investors questioned the strength of its AAA credit rating.
The dollar, on track for its biggest weekly fall in two months, took the brunt of growing worries about the U.S. fiscal outlook after Standard & Poor's on Thursday said it might cut Britain's AAA credit rating because of soaring public debt.
Oil slipped below $61 a barrel on credit worries related to the United States, the world's top energy consumer, but losses were limited by data suggesting Chinese oil demand jumped 3.9 percent in April. For details: [ID:nPEK35187]
Yet U.S. stocks rose as investors snapped up shares of multinationals, including McDonald's Corp, in anticipation a weaker dollar would underpin profitability from abroad.
A leading index of European shares ended lower for a second day in a row even as benchmark indexes in Britain, Germany and France ended higher.
Gold prices climbed to a fresh two-month high, breaching $960 an ounce for the first time since late March, as the dollar's slide boosted buying of bullion as a currency hedge.
"The general theme today is clearly broad-based U.S. dollar weakness, largely triggered by mounting concerns over the U.S. government debt triple-A rating," said Omer Esiner, senior market analyst at Travelex Global Business Payments in Washington.
Shares of energy companies on both sides of the Atlantic rose, helping boost the broader U.S. and UK equity markets on bets that overseas demand would support energy prices.
A weaker dollar can make U.S. assets more appealing to some investors, and multinationals benefit when they convert overseas earnings into dollars.
Shares of Sears Holdings Corp <SHLD.O were up almost 16 percent and a top boost on Nasdaq one day after the owner of the Sears and Kmart chains posted a surprise quarterly profit. For details, see [ID:nN21308663])
"Investors are coming to a realization that interest rates are heading higher and the dollar is going to be under pressure," said Alan Lancz, president of Alan B. Lancz & Associates Inc, an investment advisory firm based in Toledo, Ohio.
"Energy is moving as China continues to stockpile and buy all the commodities they can," Lancz said. "I think you have that play of a weaker dollar and stronger commodities right now. Multinationals are going to be big plays, anybody doing anything overseas."
At 1 p.m., the Dow Jones industrial average
was up 56.71 points, or 0.68 percent, at 8,348.84. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 5.41 points, or 0.61 percent, at 893.74. The Nasdaq Composite Index
was up 10.65 points, or 0.63 percent, at 1,705.90.
Yields on benchmark U.S. and European government debt rose, with U.S. Treasuries rising to six-month highs as bunds and UK gilts sold off. At the height of selling, yields of U.S. 10-year notes US10YT=RR hit 3.45 percent, their highest since November.
The price on the U.S. 10-year note was down 19/32 in price. The 2-year U.S. Treasury note US2YT=RR was down 1/32, with the yield at 0.89 percent.
The S&P warning about Britain's AAA credit rating sparked worries of possible similar rumblings for the U.S. Treasury.
"The question is, is this a warning shot or is it the start of a trend? This is very dangerous territory," said Axel Merk, president and chief investment officer at Merk Mutual Funds.
June Bund futures FGBLM9 fell for a third week in a row and were 95 ticks lower from Thursday's settlement close at 120.23, although almost flat at the official after-hours close.
The dollar fell against major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY off 0.68 percent at 79.919. Against the yen, the dollar
U.S. light sweet crude oil CLc1 fell 7 cents percent, to $60.98 a barrel.
Asian shares lost ground after gaining initially. The MSCI index for Asian stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS fell 0.8 percent, but were on track to finish the week about 3.3 percent higher. The Nikkei average
fell 0.4 percent on Friday. (By Ellis Mnyandu, Wanfeng Zhou, Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in New York; Sitaraman Shankar, Kirsten Donovan, Ikuko Kao, David Sheppard and Jan Harvey in London; writing by Herbert Lash)
