Tiger's old nemesis Howell laments alarming dip in form
2009-05-24 10:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Three years ago Britain's David Howell seemed to have the golfing world at his feet. Now his head is in a spin over constant battles at the wrong end of the leaderboard.
The 2006 season was Howell's finest on tour, starting with victory in the Champions Tournament in China where he outscored playing partner Tiger Woods.
That performance prompted Woods to nickname his rival 'Cool Dude', a tag the Englishman lived up to when he won the 2006 PGA Championship at Wentworth.
"I've not been playing well for a while," the 33-year-old Englishman told Reuters after a closing six-over 78 gave him an eight-over total of 296 at the European Tour's flagship event.
"It's a host of different things. It seemed very different three years ago.
"The game seemed pretty easy then and everything was going well. Golf is a fickle game, there's no doubt about it."
Howell's career started to go wrong in 2007 when he was handicapped by injuries to his shoulder and back.
"Last year wasn't an absolute disaster, 45th is not what I wanted at that stage of my career but I hoped it was a step on the ladder," said Howell, a member of the triumphant European Ryder Cup teams of 2004 and 2006. "But so far this year hasn't gone well at all."
Howell has missed four cuts out of nine tournaments he has completed this season, with his best result a tie for 37th at the Qatar Masters in January.
"It seems like the hardest game in the world at the moment," said the winner of four European Tour events. "What do you do ? ...you get up the next day, keep trying to stay patient and upbeat and hopefully it turns around.
"It's very difficult though when you build a career like I did over a number of years and win some big tournaments and get up there in the world rankings, to suddenly have such a lull.
"This week I struggled really badly all week off the tee. My iron play isn't brilliant but my tee-ball game is appalling at the moment and Wentworth is a tough course to play when you can't hit the ball straight.
"These are tough times mentally but I'm still playing. All I can do is keep trying my best.
