Darfur fighters attack Sudan army base - peacekeepers
2009-05-24 13:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Armed raiders using mortars and heavy guns attacked a Sudanese army base close to the Chadian border in Darfur on Sunday, international peacekeepers said.
"The attack started at around 1600 hours (1300 GMT)," said UNAMID information director Kemal Saiki. "Our own base just a few kilometres away heard the heavy gunfire. It is still going on."
Any JEM involvement would heighten already deeply troubled relations between Sudan and Chad, as Khartoum accuses the N'Djamena government of backing the insurgent force.
There was no one immediately available to comment on the fighting from JEM or Sudan's armed forces.
Tensions have been building along Sudan's remote border with Chad for weeks.
The two oil producers have long accused each other of supporting each other's rebels. Chad earlier this month admitted bombing rebels inside Sudanese territory, while Khartoum says N'Djamena backs JEM, whose leaders have ethnic links with Chadian President Idriss Deby.
JEM said earlier this month it had seized a Sudanese army base at Kornoi, a settlement just 50 km (31 miles) west of Umm Baru, along a key road that runs towards a crossing point into Chad. The governor of North Darfur later accused Chad of sending troops to fight alongside JEM during the battle, which he said the Sudanese government forces won.
JEM commander Suleiman Sandal told Reuters earlier on Sunday that Sudanese government planes had been bombing around Kornoi and Umm Baru every day since his force's attack on Kornoi.
Air attacks in Darfur are banned under U.N. Security Council resolutions and a series of failed ceasefires, but Khartoum has in the past reserved the right to attack JEM and other rebels who did not sign a 2006 Darfur peace deal.
Sunday's fighting is the latest in a festering six-year conflict that started when mostly non-Arab rebels in Darfur took up arms against Sudan's government, accusing it of neglecting the development of the region.
Estimates of the resulting death toll range from 300,000 according to the U.N.'s Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs John Holmes, to 10,000 according to Khartoum.
In many places, fighting has descended into a free-for-all of tribal clashes and banditry.
Armed men stopped a vehicle carrying Nigerian peacekeepers near El Geneina, capital of west Darfur, on Saturday night, and stole their weapons, phones, radio and transport, the joint U.N./African Union force said. No one was injured in the attack.
The U.N.'s World Food Programme said a contract driver was shot dead by suspected robbers in Al Deain in South Darfur on Tuesday.
In the latest of a series of diplomatic efforts in the region, Qatar's state minister of foreign affairs, Ahmed Ben Abdallah Al Mohmoud, held talks with Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir on Sunday.
Qatar is already hosting faltering negotiations between JEM and Sudan's government, due to restart on May 27. Sudanese state media said Al Mohmoud was also planning to visit Chad in a bid "to solve the problems between the two countries".
The U.S. special envoy to Sudan Scott Gration set off on visits to China, Qatar, the United Kingdom and France on Saturday, to build up support for peace efforts inside Africa's largest country, according to a statement from the U.S. embassy in Khartoum. (Editing by Charles Dick)
