Rio to retain borates business, talc still for sale
2009-05-22 00:35:00.0
Rio to retain borates business, talc still for sale | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Rio to retain borates business, talc still for sale
Fri  EDT
), which is selling assets to cut its heavy debt, has taken its borates business off the market after bids came in too low but the talc unit is still for sale, the company said on Friday.
"The sales process did not achieve values acceptable to the company in the prevailing economic conditions," Rio Tinto said in a statement. "The sales process is continuing for other businesses slated for divestment, including talc."
Rio put its market-leading industrial minerals businesses, comprising the borates and talc units, on the block late last year. Some analysts had valued the combined business at $1.2 billion.
Sources close to the matter had said the units attracted interest from trade rivals in China and the West, as well as from private equity firms such as Bain Capital.
A source familiar to the situation told Reuters last month that Rio had received a small number of detailed proposals for the businesses, but the group had rejected some as undervaluing the units.
Analysts said Rio's controversial $19.5 billion tie-up with China's state-owned metals firm Chinalco eased the pressure on the group to sell assets at low prices.
If the Chinalco deal is finalized, Rio will receive enough cash to cut its debt load in half.
The borates business, U.S.-based Rio Tinto Borax, is the bigger of the two and supplies nearly half the world's refined borates, minerals used in fiberglass, detergents and ceramics.
Sister company Luzenac produces more than a quarter of the world's talc, which is used in paper, paints, plastics, ceramics, rubber, personal care and roofing.
Rio has agreed divestments totaling $2.5 billion so far this year, including $850 million for undeveloped potash assets in Argentina and Canada, $750 million for the Corumba iron ore operation in Brazil and $761 million for the Jacobs Ranch coal mine in the United States.
