Singapore, Malaysia seek to build new bridges
2009-05-22 07:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Singapore and Malaysia will consider literally building new bridges to improve an often uneasy relationship, their leaders said on Friday.
Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said options to improve the relationship included better rail links, broadening a congested causeway between the two, or possibly building a new bridge to link eastern Singapore to Malaysian border state Johor.
Lee said his government could also support the Iskandar Malaysia project, a planned economic zone in Johor that would be Southeast Asia's rival to China's Pearl River manufacturing heartland to give both nations a boost in the global downturn.
"We stress the necessity to facilitate people and traffic flow on both sides, because the volume is growing and will grow further," Lee said at a joint news conference with Malaysian counterpart Najib Razak.
Johor supplies at least half of Singapore's water. Thousands of Malaysians commute from Johor to Singapore to work, while many Singaporeans travel to Johor for cheap shopping. Malaysia and Singapore have had an uneasy history since the island-state split from Malaysia 44 years ago. Issues including water supplies, land reclamation, transport links and use of airspace still mar relations.
The Iskandar project has already attracted 42.6 billion ringgit ($12.2 billion) in investment and the plan is to turn it into an investment and logistics centre, duty free zone and tourist destination.
So far Singapore investors have given it a lukewarm response and analysts say it needs firms such as Southeast Asia's largest property firm CapitaLand to develop Johor's cheap land.
Singapore developers are wary after being burned by frequent and unexpected policy changes during the reign of former Malaysian leader Mahathir Mohamad, who feuded with Singapore's first prime minister and Lee's father, Lee Kuan Yew.
"Singapore investment is a key to success of this Iskandar project and for the Najib administration. Because of the economic crisis, there is a need to continue to have investment in Malaysia, especially from Singapore," said Lee Hock Guan, researcher at Singapore's Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.
