DEALTALK-UK investors demand Rio concedes more on Chinalco
2009-05-22 08:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Major UK shareholders in Rio Tinto (
) said more changes are needed to the miner's planned $19.5 billion tie-up with Chinalco and rumoured concessions may not go far enough to allay investor concerns.
Newspapers have said the Chinese aluminium company might scale back its equity stake in Rio and open up a bond issue to other shareholders, but investors -- already angry that they were not given first refusal on the capital raising -- are pressing for more radical changes.
"They are heading in the right direction, but I just don't know whether this will be enough," said one top 10 investor in Rio who declined to be identified.
Another top 20 shareholder, who also did want to be named, added: "I still don't think the deal is sufficiently palatable. I think they have further to go to allay shareholder concerns. Those that are opposed to the deal are still not going to be satisfied (with these suggested changes)."
The Financial Times, citing two people close to the situation, said Chinalco [ALUMI.UL] was prepared to limit its stake in Rio to 15 percent instead of the 18 percent originally agreed.
The Sydney Morning Herald, citing sources to Chinalco, also said Chinalco was prepared to scrap a claim to 30 percent of Rio's iron ore output, but would not concede on planned stakes in Rio assets or on its right to board seats.
The continued rumblings from UK shareholders indicate they remain unimpressed by last week's charm offensive from new chairman Jan Du Plessis. [ID:nLF435202]
Du Plessis told investors he was still in "listening mode" and was concerned about the level of shareholder discontent over the deal, according to one investor who met him last week.
The top 10 shareholder said "full respect" of shareholders' pre-emption rights would be a good starting point for the miner.
The lack of such rights, which give existing investors first refusal to buy into a capital raising, has deeply angered some shareholders.
"UK investors are unhappy at the disrespect for pre-emption, but Australian shareholders seem to have even more deep-seated concerns; they just think it is strategically not the right thing to do," he said.
He said Rio had struggled to explain the deal to shareholders and may have missed a window to tap equity markets instead. "Rio is in a terrible position ... They have got themselves into an awful muddle," he said.
The top 20 investor said investors would like to see Chinalco board representation down to one seat and a better price on Rio's assets.
"I reckon Rio may have one more trick up their sleeve, and we could see board representation down to one seat. But I don't think the Chinese would want to budge much further," he said.
However, not all UK investors are calling for changes.
Tim Rees, a director of UK equities at Insight Investment, which is ranked the 10th largest shareholder according to Thomson Reuters data, said the Chinalco deal helped to pull the miner out of its current difficulties very effectively.
"As an investor, you can either look backwards and complain about what should happen and what might have happened or you can look forward to resolve the issue, and I think the board is doing that quite effectively," said Rees.
He added: "The deal does move Rio forward in a very significant manner from a position that most institutions may wish they didn't have to move from, but they do, and I think that shouldn't be forgotten. There is a difference between being pragmatic and being dogmatic."
A spokesman for Rio said: "Shareholders are entitled to their views, but our chairman has listened to investors whose views range from strong support to those who are worried about pre-emption, and in Australia, where investors are worried over the influence they imagine Chinalco might have.
Rio shares were up 4.18 percent at 2,769 pence at 1127 GMT. (Editing by Will Waterman) (For the Hedge Hub blog:
