South Korea-EU trade deal eyed for 2nd half of '09
2009-05-23 04:32:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korea and the European Union expect to reach a $100 billion trade deal soon but differences over sensitive areas including autos would likely push the signing into the second half of 2009, leaders said on Saturday.
The two major trading partners had hoped to reach agreement on lowering barriers to trade and investment at their summit in Seoul, but the EU's first major trade pact in Asia has been stalled by wrangling within the bloc over how a deal would affect its struggling car industry.
"We are at the last and final stages," South Korean President Lee Myung-bak said at a joint news conference with Czech President Vaclav Klaus and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso.
"There are some pending issues to be resolved. It is not going to be easy to resolve all of these but I am confident that we will be able to come to a conclusion as soon as possible in the near future," Lee said.
With discussions on finalising a similar free trade deal with the United States slated to restart next month, EU negotiators are concerned Seoul will lose patience with Brussels and put talks on its agreement on ice while it engages with Washington.
"It will not be signed before the end of the Czech presidency (of the EU) in June," said Klaus, adding the leaders have called for accelerated negotiations so that the deal would be reached before the end of this year.
Diplomats say the majority of EU countries support the deal "in principle" but remain stuck on a so-called "duty drawback" safeguard clause to protect European industry, notably influential carmakers.
Under duty drawback, South Korean carmakers can import cheap components from China and have all import duties paid on those parts reimbursed if they are in cars destined for the EU market.
The EU's auto industry -- employing 2.3 million people directly and a further 10 million in related sectors -- and some governments are unhappy over South Korean manufacturers having this advantage.
Under the latest plan tabled by the Commission, the amount of foreign components used in South Korean products would be limited to a maximum of 45 percent, otherwise known as the "country of origin rule". (Additional reporting by Darren Ennis in Brussels; Editing by Jonathan Thatcher and Paul Tait)
