WHO says Asia vulnerable to spread of new flu virus
2009-05-22 07:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian nations with a young population and endemic chronic illnesses are particularly vulnerable to the spread of the H1N1 flu virus that has killed 85 people and infected more than 11,000 worldwide, the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Friday.
But the region's experience in dealing with past epidemics, including SARS and avian flu, since 2003 have raised Asia's preparedness to prevent the spread of the virus, Julie Hall, a WHO expert on infectious diseases told reporters in Manila.
Still, some states in the region continue to have inadequate health services, Hall said. She declined to identify them.
"Are some (Asian) countries more vulnerable to the virus? I think the answer, unfortunately, will be yes," Hall said.
She said those vulnerable were Asian countries with a young population and chronic underlying illnesses, such as diabetes and obesity, and those with a high number of pregnant women. These people usually have low immunity for viruses.
"The biggest concern really is a lot of people becoming infected at around the same time, and putting that strain on society that could not continue to function and health services not able to provide care," Hall said, noting the virus has hit more people aged between 15 and 44.
Hall was, however, confident the entire region was better prepared than it was a few years ago due to experiences in dealing with SARS and Avian influenza.
"The systems are a lot stronger than they were before and we got some evidence of that because we're getting fairly rapid reporting from countries of suspected cases, probable cases and of confirmed cases," she said.
New Zealand has 9 confirmed cases of the virus, Australia 8, China 5, and South Korea 4 among nations covered by the WHO's Western Pacific operations based in Manila.
On Thursday, the Philippines reported its first case of the virus after a 10 year-old girl got sick after returning from a trip to the United States and Canada on May 18.
(Reporting by Manny Mogato; Editing by Rosemarie Francisco)
