Under BofA, Merrill faces uncertain future in Asia
2009-05-22 04:55:00.0
(Reuters) - A revolving door of senior executives, an exodus of top talent, and a sluggish integration with Bank of America are taking their toll on the Merrill Lynch franchise in Asia.
Merrill bankers are worried about the future of the Asia franchise and know that the longer it takes to pull all the parts under the BofA umbrella, the more clout and clients they will lose in the process.
The struggles of a once powerful investment banking unit in Asia is a boon to rivals picking off veteran staff, and a bane for Merrill's new parent, which is trying to figure out its role in a region where it has had little presence.
"Bank of America years ago pulled out of the international side, so as a result, we don't have a company that's as comfortable on the international side as Merrill Lynch was," said Brad Hintz, an analyst at Sanford C Bernstein in New York. "But the jury is still out on this one."
Since the BofA deal closed early this year, Merrill's overall business in Asia has remained in relatively good shape. Its new management team is in place, and sources say they are impressed with what they see so far. Few in the industry are counting Merrill out for now.
The last regional head, Merrill veteran James Forbes, left a few months after he arrived. His exit was attributed to the poor health of his father, but Merrill sources say it was also an unpopular stint.
Merrill recently lost an India equities team to JPMorgan and a power industry team to Barclays. Barclays nearly snagged a natural resources banking team led by Shamus Hassan, Merrill sources say, but he decided to stay.
Deutsche Bank hired three Asia managing directors from Merrill this year alone, and Reuters reported last week that longtime Asia-Pacific M&A chief Kalpana Desai is leaving.
And in an embarrassment for Merrill's equity capital markets team, BofA this month sold a $7.3 billion chunk of shares it owned in China Construction Bank and didn't use its own bankers.
"Part of that may have to do with the command and control culture of the old North Carolina National Bank," he said. "Which means that to run a global trading operation or to run an investment banking operation what you really need to do is delegate authority out to the staff."
Bank of America rescued Merrill last fall after the New York brokerage's shares collapsed in the financial panic. Since the September deal, BofA has taken $45 billion in U.S. government loans as its own finances have come under pressure.
But as long as the bank owes money to U.S. taxpayers, the likelihood of BofA signing off on even marginally risky deals in Asia remains slim.
The concern in Asia is that the impact of the banker exodus will be felt in future quarters, leaving its new owner to weigh how much money and resources to spend on a division thousands of miles away from its headquarters in Charlotte, North Carolina.
"They face huge cultural issues," said one legacy Merrill banker who left recently. "In the U.S., there is value to the BofA name. In Asia, it's just not seen as a positive."
The main reason for bankers leaving BofA is fear of not getting a bonus, sources within the bank say. But there are other factors at play, including concerns about how committed BofA is to Asia.
BofA's first-quarter Asia debt capital markets ranking was in-line with the year-ago period, but its M&A status fell to 10th place from 6th, according to Thomson Reuters. BofA's equity market ranking was boosted by using its own bankers in the January sale of CCB shares.
BofA is not alone in the issues it faces in Asia, and several other banks too have seen layoffs, defections, bailouts and takeovers.
Citigroup, also bailed out with $45 billion in U.S. government loans, is merging its commercial and investment banking units in Asia. Nomura Holdings is in the process of integrating Lehman Brothers in Asia and elsewhere. And Royal Bank of Scotland is selling its retail and commercial banking assets in Asia, but keeping its investment bank.
All three banks have had their share of difficulties, including the defections of investment bankers.
And there is hope that after the upheavals, the banks can get back to business. One legacy Asia Merrill banker said that the combination of a commercial and investment bank does have its appeal.
"The Chinese, for example, do want to work with a full service bank. If the right management decisions are made, we can get there," he said. The problem, he said, is dealing with the current situation.
"Morale is low, but it's probably low at a lot of banks," he said. "I will say, though, that people are not immensely bullish on the BofA platform right now."
(Additional reporting by Elinor Comlay in New York; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
