FACTBOX-Mongolian mining in focus ahead of election
2009-05-22 02:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Foreign investors will be watching Mongolia's presidential elections on Sunday for signs of whether the outcome will serve to further postpone the parliament's ratification of a landmark mining investment agreement.
Following are some of the projects at stake and other facts about foreign investment in Mongolia, a vast country landlocked between Russia and China whose empire under Genghis Khan once extended west as far as Hungary.
The Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold project, which would be Mongolia's largest foreign investment, has become a symbol of the difficulties of investing in the country.
Negotiations over the $3 billion project, a joint effort between Ivanhoe Mines IVN.TO and Rio Tinto (
), have dragged on for years as the government has sought the revenues that eluded it with previous mining deals.
Ivanhoe initially struck a deal to develop the mine in 2006, but that pact was withdrawn last year when Mongolia sought more favourable terms as copper and gold prices soared.
The proposal has been endorsed by Mongolia's cabinet and National Security Council and is now with the parliament.
The country's contentious 2006 mining law allows the state a share of up to 34 percent of deposits found with private funds and up to 50 percent of those discovered with state funds.
Tavan Tolgoi, known as the world's biggest untapped coking coal deposit and located in the Gobi Desert, has also been on the agenda for years.
Investors from a range of countries, including China, Russia and the United States, have expressed an interest in the project.
Analysts say Mongolia's current need for financing to help it get through a fiscal shortfall brought about by falling commodity prices could potentially give leverage in bidding for the project to those countries that help it with financing now.
Progress on the project has been held up by the lack of an agreement on Oyu Tolgoi, expected to serve as a model for deals on other projects.
URANIUM, TRANSPORT
Mongolia is also looking to develop its uranium reserves. Prime Minister Sanj Bayar earlier this month proposed a partnership with Russia to extract uranium, offering Russia access to its deposits of the metal.
Russia's state rail monopoly also signed a deal potentially totalling $7 billion to upgrade Mongolia's rail network and improve access to untapped deposits of uranium, coal and other minerals in the Gobi. (Compiled by Jason Subler; Editing by Jerry Norton)
