China eyes RMB funds, but market develops slowly
2009-05-22 05:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese firms and government entities are scrambling to form private equity yuan funds to meet state goals of developing the sector, but murky rules and restrictions on foreigners are stunting market development.
The promise of a revamp in China's investment laws two years ago has proved a disappointment to foreigners, who view the reforms as mostly helping local private equity and yuan -- or renminbi (RMB) -- funds, said participants at a private equity conference that ended on Friday.
Instead, key issues such as comprehensive tax regulations and clear rules governing how foreigners could raise cash and eventually transfer any capital gains out of China are lacking.
"The future is bright, but the short term is very hazy," said Skee Zhang, managing director of Sequoia Capital China.
While China is keen to develop domestic capital markets, there are still plenty of restrictions on investments by Chinese state-owned banks and government entities, which are eager to invest their cash.
"We're looking at about 1,000 groups looking to raise RMB funds," said Amir Gal-Or, managing partner of Infinity Equity, which formed China's first onshore joint venture yuan fund in 2004.
Regulators approved about a dozen Chinese brokerages to set up private equity units this year, as Beijing has pledged to develop yuan-denominated funds run by domestic managers, to reduce dependence on bank loans amid the global credit crunch.
Gal-Or said provinces, counties, cities, even towns were getting involved in setting up yuan funds, but many are inexperienced general partners -- GPs or managers of the fund -- that would have great difficulty in attracting investors.
"The number of GPs is doubling every 3-4 months, naturally the failure to raise money will increase," said Gal-Or.
China's market is still dominated by foreign firms that have raised funds outside the mainland and then found local partners, while the emerging domestic private equity sector is populated mostly with inexperienced state-run entities looking to turn a quick profit.
"They all want to make quick money. They have no patience," said Margaret Shao, managing partner of Shenzhen Fortune Venture Capital. "In time, they will be more rational."
The trend towards localisation -- using the yuan to raise funds, make acquisitions and finally to sell the companies -- has picked up momentum as the international status of China's currency has increased in the wake of the global recession.
SAIF Partners, backed by Japan's Softbank (
), raised 1.6 billion yuan ($234 million) for its first yuan-denominated private equity fund, sources told Reuters earlier this year.
The opportunity for local funds is also enhanced as Beijing is sensitive to foreign acquisitions of high profile Chinese companies, a nod to nationalistic and protectionist sentiments.
), the country's top juice maker. [ID:nPEK374595]
"We're a local RMB fund, so we think the government's policies are favourable" to us, said Shao. "Maybe the government thinks we are a weak player ... so they protect us."
While the trend to setting up local yuan funds is unmistakable, it may not be the best choice for all foreign private equity funds.
"If your focus is entirely on China, it's a good strategy," said Infinity's Gal-Or. "But if your China strategy is part of a global plan, it may only alienate your LPs," he said, referring to a conflict of interest between onshore and offshore limited partners in the fund. ($1=6.83 yuan) (Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
