S.Korea to tackle EU on trade pact, climate talks
2009-05-22 13:42:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korea is expected to ramp up pressure on the European Union to initial a $100 billion trade pact before the end of June at a summit on Saturday before Seoul turns its attentions to a deal with the United States.
The two major trading partners hoped to reach agreement on lowering barriers to trade and investment at the summit in Seoul, but the EU's first major trade pact in Asia has been stalled by wrangling within the bloc over how a deal would affect its struggling car industry.
But with talks on finalising a similar deal with Washington slated to restart next month, EU negotiators are concerned Seoul will lose patience with Brussels and put talks on its free trade agreement on ice while it engages with the United States.
"There is a chance Seoul could drop the ball on us," one EU diplomat with knowledge of the negotiations told Reuters.
"The reference to the state of negotiations on the FTA ... should reflect ambition and realism, i.e. contribute as positively as possible towards maintaining momentum for both negotiations to be satisfactorily concluded."
"Summit Leaders welcomed in particular the considerable progress in negotiations ... they looked forward to an early conclusion of negotiations on both agreements," the conclusions said.
CLIMATE, PROTECTIONISM
Once initialled, the full trade agreement could take up to seven years to be fully implemented.
Diplomats say the majority of EU countries support the deal "in principle" but remain stuck on a so-called "duty drawback" safeguard clause to protect European industry, notably influential carmakers.
Under duty drawback, South Korean carmakers can import cheap components from China and have all import duties paid on those parts reimbursed if they are in cars destined for the EU market.
The EU's auto industry -- employing 2.3 million people directly and a further 10 million in related sectors -- and some governments are unhappy over Korean manufacturers having this advantage.
But under the latest plan tabled by the Commission the amount of foreign components used in South Korean products would be limited to a maximum of 45 percent, otherwise known as the "country of origin rule".
In the absence of a bilateral trade pact, the EU and Korea -- a major exporter of electronics to Europe -- are expected to reinforce a pledge made by the Group of 20 (G20) industrialised and developing countries to avoid protectionist measures to fight the worst economic slump since World War Two.
"Summit Leaders share the view that a successful conclusion of the WTO Doha Development Agenda would be strongly beneficial for the world economy as a whole, including for developing countries," the draft conclusions said.
The two sides are also expected to discuss their preparations for talks later this year in Copenhagen aimed at reaching a global climate deal to succeed the U.N.'s Kyoto protocol from 2012.
"The Summit Leaders also agreed on the necessity to adopt a shared vision ... they supported the objective of reducing global emissions by at least 50 percent by 2050," the draft said.
However, just like the EU's summit with China on Wednesday, both sides are expected to differ on how these goals can be achieved.
Seoul, like Beijing, is expected to place more of the responsibility on developed nations, such as the EU, while Brussels will seek more binding commitments from Korea and other developing countries. (Editing by Richard Balmforth)
