Asia currency rally may pause as stock boom fizzles
2009-05-22 01:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Several emerging market currencies in Asia hit 2009 highs on Friday, but the rally on the back of surging stocks may soon hit a roadblock made up by doubts about the stamina of any global economic recovery.
Foreign investors have flocked to put money into regional equities and bonds, encouraged by signs the global downturn may be bottoming out following the most severe crisis in decades.
The outcome is critical for Asia because it relies heavily on trade earnings, which can drive up currencies over the longer-term.
"Economic expectations are stabilizing, although we may still have many more months of volatility," said Callum Henderson, chief global currency strategist at Standard Chartered Bank in Singapore.
On Friday, the Indonesian rupiah hit its highest level since October. Thai baht, India rupee and Taiwan dollar are trading at 2009 highs and the Singapore dollar and the Malaysian ringgit are their strongest since January. But analysts suspect the rally will fade.
"While the region's balance of payments have begun to right themselves, they are not yet strong enough to generate a sustainable rally for the Asia ex-Japan currency bloc," said Stewart Newnham, a strategist at Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong, said in a client note.
The currencies tracked the rise in regional stocks, making them vulnerable if fickle investors start to doubt the strength of the global recovery and sell off equities again.
RUPIAH, WON, PESO
After dumping a net $14 billion in stocks across South Korea, Taiwan, Indonesia, India and Thailand, and the Philippines in the last three months of 2008, investors have bought back $16.8 billion since early March, Nomura figures show.
A positive daily correlation with the index over the past year of between 0.88 and 0.95 percent suggest the Korea won, rupiah and to a lesser extent the Philippines peso are the most exposed currencies in emerging Asia to a stocks sell off.
Newnham picked out both the Singapore dollar and rupiah as having limited scope to advance since they are now trading well above their 1990-2008 averages, suggesting their values are stretched.
The Singapore dollar is the most dependent economy in Asia on exports, which generate the equivalent of 190 percent of its GDP, so it's outlook relies on the direction of global trade.
The rupiah has long been one of Asia's most volatile currencies. High interest rates attract a wave of investment when risk appetite grows, but equally the currency is hit hard when risk concerns rise.
Underlining its volatility, the rupiah was the second-worst hit Asian currency during the crisis after the won but has rebounded 16 percent since March 2.
"As one of the high-yielding currencies in Asia, the rupiah certainly benefits relatively more when risk appetite is improving, but that also means that it will underperform when this risk is taken back," said Daniel Hui, a strategist at HSBC in Hong Kong.
Most forecasters predict a slow global recovery, rather than a sharp one. The International Monetary Fund said Asia growth would hit 4.3 percent in 2010 from 1.3 percent in 2009, but that recovery would be slow.
But even a rapid rebound could present problems that would ultimately hurt the currencies, suggested Frederic Neumann, an economist at HSBC in Hong Kong.
He believes Asian economies, led by China, will emerge swiftly in the second half of 2009 fueled by unprecedented monetary and fiscal stimulus rather than a sustainable pick up in global demand.
"Once the policy stimulus both in Asia and the West fades, Asia may slip once more and experience a slowdown in economic activity," he said.
Asia's history of managing exchange rate levels is another factor keeping analysts wary following the currency rally.
Content to let their currencies fall in unison when the financial crisis blew up, policy makers will more interventionist now to protect exports, which were decimated by the global downturn, they say.
Indeed, the Philippine central bank was seen buying dollars to curb the peso's gains on Friday, following similar action by authorities in India, Thailand and South Korea.
Philip Wee, strategist at DBS Bank, said central banks may intervene to rebuild depleted foreign reserves but their main focus will be exchange rate levels.
"As we move from crisis to recovery, I think we hear more policy makers in Asia advocating stable currencies," he added.
