PRESS DIGEST - British business - May 22
2009-05-21 23:23:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
) and Channel 4 are discussing a merger of their advertising sales teams to deliver multi-million pound savings. Although Channel 4 is rumoured to be cooling on the issue, the broadcaster hopes the agreement will form part of its cost-cutting measures if a tie-up with the BBC [BBC.UL] fails, while Sky is keen on the deal as it would help it compete with ITV (
). Competition watchdogs would be unlikely to block the deal as the combined group would hold a smaller advertising market share than ITV's 41 percent.
Tony Rice, chief executive of Cable & Wireless International CW.L, has sold 3.5 million shares in the company for around 5.5 million pounds. Shares in the group fell by almost ten percent on the news, which followed the reporting of worse-than-expected sales. Rice sold the shares under a long-standing performance-related scheme, but stills holds 3.5 million shares. Cable & Wireless reported a 36 percent increase in annual profits, boosted by favourable exchange rates, but analysts expressed concerns over growth forecasts.
The Times has learned the billionaire Reuben brothers have placed a 40 million pound bid for Premium Bars & Restaurants, the operator of the Living Room and Prohibition chains. The brothers currently hold a 32.5 percent stake in PBR and have offered to buy out all but five of the group's 48 outlets, in a deal that would see the chain enter into a pre-pack administration. The Rueben brothers' offer would see shareholders lose all of their investment and the company's lenders would write off up to ten million pounds of debt.
), Sir Sandy Crombie, is expected to become the senior independent director of Royal Bank of Scotland (
) in July, with his duties being to lead a dialogue between the bank and its largest shareholders, the main one being the Treasury body UK Financial Investments. UKFI and other major investors have approved the appointment of Crombie, who oversaw the demutualisation of Standard Life. He will also play a role in finalising the details of the bank's participation in the Treasury's asset protection scheme.
) has scrapped its dividend and called a rights issue in an attempt to relieve its crippling debts. The business is offering two shares for three at a discount to the previous closing share price of 50.8 pence and hopes to raise 71.4 million pounds from the cash call. A refinancing agreement has also been made with Shanks' creditors that increased the size of its banking facility from 250 million pounds to 316 million pounds. This gives the company more leverage to make new investments in recycling, organic processing and UK private finance initiatives.
) has sold a 44 percent stake in the business to the Qatar investment bank QInvest for 23 million pounds. QInvest topped bids by the hedge fund SPQR Capital and the private equity group BlueGem Capital to bring Panmure's lengthy search for a major new investor to a close. Under the terms of the deal, Qinvest will pay 34 pence a share, less than the 40 pence the shares were worth on Wednesday but far more than the 24 pence and 28 pence offered by BlueGem and SPQR.
) announced a 239 million pound first-half pre-tax loss due to the "unprecedented" collapse of the advertising market and heavy impairment charges. The Daily Mail's parent company has responded by cutting an additional 500 jobs and increasing its cost-cutting drive. DMGT was forced to write down the value of its regional, business and radio divisions' assets, but pre-tax profits almost halved to 77 million pounds when exceptional charges were stripped away. DMGT remains positive over its outlook for the rest of the year, benefiting from the sale of the London Evening Standard and growth from its business-to-business division.
), the dual-listed miner, have called for changes to its proposed tie-up with Chinalco. Chinalco is understood to be considering revisions to the 19.5 billion dollar deal's structure to placate the Australian foreign investment regulator. The Australian press has reported Chinalco may limit its stake to 15 percent rather than the originally agreed 18 percent. Chinalco and Rio declined to comment but reaffirmed their commitment to the deal.
3.2 BILLION POUNDS WIPED OFF BRITISH LAND'S PROPERTY VALUES
) reported on Thursday 3.2 billion pounds had been written off in its annual property values. Net asset value fell by 64 percent to 398 pence per share over the past year, with the value of its property portfolio falling by 28.2 percent. Chris Gibson-Smith, chairman of British Land, said: "Against a backdrop of difficult market conditions British Land's operational performance has shown resilience." British Land's writes issue closed in March, attracting a 97 percent take-up and raising 740 million pounds.
Results released by JJB Sports JJB.L on Thursday show a 26 percent decline in profits for the year leading up to January 2009, with the company making a loss of 189 million pounds. The executive chairman, Sir David Jones, who took over in January, blamed the dramatic decline of the once successful sports retailer over the past two years on "a series of bad business decisions taken by former members of the executive management team". Jones warned that recovery would be slow, but the company had managed to obtain a company voluntary arrangement and had agreed 50 million pounds of new funding with its creditors. Shares in the business rose by two pence to close at 30 pence.
About 2,200 employees of the greeting-cards chain Birthdays could lose their jobs after the firm's owner, Clinton Cards CLCA.L, said it could no longer provide funding and put it into administration. Despite a recent improvement in sales, Clinton said it was unlikely Birthdays would turn a profit in the near future. "Although this has been an extremely difficult decision, it is my genuine belief that there is a significant element of the Birthdays business that will have a profitable and sustainable future," said Clinton chairman Don Lewin. "And there are still opportunities to make it a success."
M&B CHIEF QUITS AFTER PUB GROUP'S PROFITS HALVE
), the largest pub operator in the UK, has had its interim profits almost halved to 44 million pounds, due both to the recession and a disastrous interest rate hedging deal that cost the company 96 million pounds. M&B hoped to gain the best terms for a planned 4.5 billion pound property sale and leaseback with the deal, but the credit crunch put paid to the idea. Chief executive Tim Clarke has stepped down "as a matter of principle" due to the misjudged move.
