FACTBOX: OPEC comments in run-up to end-May meeting
2009-05-22 06:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri  EDT
Some estimates of OPEC production, including the group's own monthly report, show slightly higher output in April, suggesting rising prices could have prompted members to relax adherence to supply curbs.
A senior Gulf delegate told Reuters OPEC was likely to keep its supply targets steady, but insist on the need for compliance.
"It's unlikely that OPEC will change its production ceiling. They will keep it as it is," the delegate said.
"At the meeting on the 28th, nothing's going to change," Khelil told reporters. "If the price stays at this level ... I don't think there will be any reason to cut."
Libya's top oil official Shokri Ghanem predicted oil prices would continue to rise.
"The economic situation is improving; this is improving the prices and we think they are going to improve even more," Ghanem, chairman of Libya's National Oil Corporation, said.
He said OPEC needed to improve its compliance with agreed production levels, but it was too early to tell whether the group needed to lower output targets.
OPEC's president, who is also Angola's oil minister, said tighter compliance with OPEC's supply targets was crucial to stabilizing the oil market.
"Adherence to production agreements with better compliance remains crucial to our efforts to stabilize the oil market," said Jose Botelho de Vasconcelos in a statement.
He also said supply curbs had reduced the imbalance in the oil market, but it would take time to remove the surplus.
"It should be borne in mind that, since the economic downturn is deeper and more widespread than expected, this is turning out to be a drawn-out process."
"In view of the world's current conditions and the fluctuations in (the value of) international foreign exchange, we regard a suitable price for oil to be around $80-$90 per barrel," Ahmadinejad told reporters.
Kuwait's oil minister said there was no need for further output cuts.
"Of course no reduction. Definitely. It goes without saying," Sheikh Ahmad al-Abdullah al-Sabah said when asked what measures he wanted to see at the next OPEC meeting.
Sheikh Ahmad declined to say what he considered an ideal oil price but asked if Kuwait would consider investing in output capacity at levels of around $70 per barrel he said: "Maybe at that level we'll start investing."
"If the trend continues and prices improve a bit further, then perhaps OPEC will keep ... the current production level," Shahristani told Reuters.
"On the other hand, if they feel there is more crude in the market to absorb, then OPEC will have to look at other options."
Saudi Arabia considers there are factors other than demand behind the oil market's rally to above $60, al-Hayat reported.
"The Saudis said that the recent rise in oil prices does not reflect the reality of demand," the Saudi-owned newspaper said, quoting French sources following a meeting between the Saudi king and oil minister and the French economy minister.
Iran's oil minister said improved demand from China and India could boost prices.
"There are indications that there are changes in oil demand in China and India, which are likely to take the oil price back to its previous condition," Resalat daily quoted Oil Minister Gholamhossein Nozari as saying.
Iran's OPEC governor said the oil price should increase to $70-$80 a barrel to help boost investment.
"We believe that this price level will not lead to an increase in investment in producer countries and that therefore there is a need to raise price levels to $70-$80 per barrel," Mohammad Ali Khatibi was quoted as saying by state broadcaster
Iran's Khatibi said OPEC was expected to lower its output ceiling to help draw down stockpiles, Iran's Mehr News Agency reported.
"The volume of crude stockpiling in the world has risen in comparison to the past five years from an average of 52 days to 61 days," Khatibi was quoted as saying.
"In this connection, it is predicted that OPEC's crude production will be lowered in the organization's next meeting."
Venezuelan Oil Minister Rafael Ramirez said OPEC was committed to ensuring a price recovery. "We are committed to taking all the measures necessary as we have been doing to ensure the price of oil recovers," Ramirez told reporters.
"I think the OPEC cut, given the behavior of the market, has had the initial effect of slowing the abrupt fall in the price of oil. We expect an oil price of $70 per barrel."
