BUY OR SELL-Japan steel firms: metal fatigue or time to shine?
2009-05-21 06:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Renewed interest in Japanese steelmakers' strong edge in super high-end sheet steel has boosted their shares by around 50 percent in two months, but investors are unsure whether to push them up further given the murky outlook for demand.
"Japanese steelmakers demonstrated strong bargaining power over carmakers," said Nomura Securities analyst Yuji Matsumoto.
"That's evidence that strong, long-term demand is there for environmentally friendly cars like hybrids, and carmakers need to obtain stable (Japanese) supplies of light and strong high-grade steel to survive competition."
Many brokers, including Nomura, Macquarie, Mitsubishi UFJ, Nikkociti and Credit Suisse, rushed to raise ratings on Nippon Steel and JFE Holdings (
) to buy or outperform, lifting the target price on Nippon Steel to 400-450 yen and cutting its loss estimate for the year to March 2010.
Analysts are watching to see if steelmakers start increasing volume in July-September as planned, after winding down huge inventory overhangs this quarter. Larger volumes raises the possibility of Nippon Steel staying marginally in profit this year, justifying its high valuation.
"The key is volume growth after July," said Atsushi Osa, a fund manager at Toyota Asset Management. "We don't want to be disappointed by a temporary rebound in output."
One bright sign is Toyota's plans to start raising production from around May, helped by strong sales of the Prius hybrid.
Shinya Yamada, analyst at Credit Suisse, said Nippon Steel should post a profit of more than 100 billion yen ($1 billion) in the second half as capacity utilisation rates rise. He sees a pretax profit of 350 billion yen for the year to March 2011.
"It's just not time yet to consider investments in steel or any other basic materials," said Koichi Takatsuka, a senior fund manager at United Investments. "The economy's prospects are very weak."
Crude steel output in April plunged 44 percent from a year earlier, industry data released on Thursday showed. [ID:nT143098]
CLSA, Goldman Sachs and HSBC think it's time to sell.
They believe valuations are too high, given weak auto demand and huge overcapacity in China that is squeezing prices in Asia. Japan's top two steelmakers export 30-40 percent of their products.
Jeremie Capron, CLSA analyst, expects Nippon Steel and JFE to remain unprofitable through 2009 with a much-expected second-half recovery failing to materialise. He expects Toyota to seek more price cuts once iron ore prices are finalised.
"It's improbable that Toyota and the rest of Japan Inc would stop at a 15 percent cut and agree to take on a competitive disadvantage," he said.
Nippon's price to book ratio (PBR) is 1.4, higher than profitable South Korean rival POSCO's (
) 1.32. Nippon's PBR has risen from a record low to near its 10-year average in just one month, Capron noted, and compares with JFE's 1.33 and Chinese rival Baosteel's (
CLSA sets Nippon Steel's target price at 220 yen, and HSBC sets it at 255 yen.
"We regard the recent rally as unjustified," said HSBC's Daniel Kang. "Nippon Steel is one of the most expensive stocks we cover." ($1=94.46 Yen) (Editing by Lincoln Feast)
