China solar cos offer gloomy outlooks, shares fall
2009-05-21 20:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese solar companies Suntech Power Holdings Inc (
), ReneSola Ltd SOLA.L and LDK Solar (
) gave gloomy outlooks on Thursday as the credit crisis chokes off funding for renewable energy projects, and their shares fell sharply.
Suntech, China's largest solar panel maker, reported a surprise quarterly profit but disappointed investors when it revealed that Global Solar Fund, a customer in which it has a majority stake, accounted for more than 30 percent of first-quarter sales. Its shares fell 15 percent.
Global Solar Fund invests in companies that will own or develop solar projects, Suntech said.
"Suntech selling to a company that in turn sells to related companies can result in channel stuffing/earnings 'massaging,'" Oppenheimer analyst Sam Dubinsky, who has an "underperform" rating on Suntech shares, said in a client note.
Suntech -- based in Wuxi, China -- also cut its shipment forecast for the year and said it will issue 20 million new shares, a move that will dilute its earnings per share. [ID:nBNG24881]
LDK, which makes solar wafers, reported a wider-than-expected first-quarter loss and declined to update its revenue forecast for the year, citing limited visibility. [ID:nN213015061]
LDK shares fell 6.2 percent in extended trade, however, after the company said margins would remain thin as prices on its products continue their fall and remain in line with its polysilicon and other costs.
"They just don't have any margin, and it's hard to see how they are going to get any margin in the next couple of quarters," said Soleil Securities analyst Paul Leming, who has a "sell" rating on LDK shares. "The external environment has to improve dramatically for you to make an argument that LDK is going to start performing substantially better."
Thursday's results from Suntech, Renesola and LDK join the raft of dour announcements from rival solar companies in the last few weeks.
On Tuesday, China's JA Solar Holdings Co Ltd (
) posted a larger-than-expected quarterly loss and said it would miss its 2009 revenue target, while earlier this month Germany's Q-Cells SE QCEG.DE cut its sales outlook for the third time since December.
Analysts, however, were split on whether there were yet any reasons for optimism.
Simmons & Co analyst Burt Chao said prices on the industry's key raw material, polysilicon, were expected to decline further than prices on solar products, allowing companies to expand their profit margins.
"For the bulk of the industry which uses silicon ... it's actually positive that raw material costs are coming down," Chao said. "I don't think you see a return to 30 percent gross margins in these businesses, but I do think you get meaningful accretion."
Soleil's Leming, however, said he saw little to get excited about.
"There is a lot of wishing and hoping out there that the second half of '09 is materially better, but in terms of hard data points saying things are getting better, I dare anybody to show me a management that really has said that," he said. (Reporting by Matt Daily and Nichola Groom; Additional reporting by Sakthi Prasad in Bangalore and Victoria Bryan in London; Editing by Anil D'Silva, Gerald E. McCormick, Gunna Dickson, Gary Hill)
