UPDATE 3-Suntech posts profit, cuts sales forecast
2009-05-21 11:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese solar energy company Suntech Power Holdings Inc (
) on Thursday reported a surprise quarterly profit but said it would issue new shares and cut its sales forecast, sending its shares down 14 percent.
Suntech, like other solar companies, has been hit by the sharp decline in prices for photovoltaic solar products as the credit crisis has choked off funding for new products even as companies have been putting a glut of new supplies on the market.
"The quarter itself was pretty good, and the (sales) guidance reduction was not drastic at all," said Pavel Molchanov, analyst with Raymond James, but the company's plans to issue 20 million new American Depositary Shares would have an 11 percent dillutive affect.
Wuxi, China and San Franciso-based Suntech said it had trimmed its full-year shipment forecast to between 600-700 megawatts from the more than 800 MW its had predicted earlier this year.
Still, revenues would grow modestly in the second quarter from the first, Suntech Chief Executive Zhengrong Shi told a conference call, and the industry has a solid outlook going forward.
"China's recently announced national solar subsidy, Japan's reintroduction of solar subsidies in 2009 and state incentive programs and the federal stimulus package in the U.S. should provide a strong foundation for mid-term growth," he said.
First-quarter net profit was $1.8 million, or 1 cent a share, compared with $46.7 million, or 27 cents a share, a year earlier, while revenue fell 27 percent to $315.7 million.
Analysts were expecting a loss of 6 cents a share, before items, on revenue of $350.4 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
On Tuesday, Suntech's smaller Chinese peer JA Solar Holdings Co Ltd (
Suntech's average selling price (ASP) for its modules fell about 15 percent in the quarter from the fourth quarter.
But its costs for polysilicon, the material used to make the solar cells that turn sunlight into electricity, fell about 25 percent from the fourth quarter, and the company also cut its non-silicon production costs to 66 cents from 70 cents.
Separately, smaller Chinese peer LDK Solar (
), which is set to release quarterly earnings results after the market close on Thursday, said it had adjusted its 2008 financial results to include a new $87.5 million inventory writedown and a provision for doubtful pre-payment recoveries of about $12.3 million.
Suntech's ADS in New York fell 13 percent to $13.64 per share on the New York Stock Exchange, bringing its gain so far this year to about 17 percent.
LDK shares fell 10 percent ot $8.87 per share. (Reporting by Matt Daily in New York, with additional reporting by Sakthi Prasad in Bangalore; Editing by Anil D'Silva, Gerald E. McCormick and Gunna Dickson)
