Fiat, Guangzhou Auto agree on car venture: report
2009-05-21 21:42:00.0
Fiat, Guangzhou Auto agree on car venture: report | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fiat, Guangzhou Auto agree on car venture: report
Two Opel cars are reflected in a Fiat car at a car seller in Darmstadt May 20, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Johannes Eisele
Thu  EDT
) has signed an agreement to set up a car manufacturing venture with China's Guangzhou Automobile Industry Group, the Shanghai Securities News said on Friday, citing the Chinese automaker's general manager.
Zeng Qinghong did not disclose the size of the venture, which is still pending government approval.
The same newspaper said on Thursday the Fiat-Guangzhou Auto project would need an investment of 4.27 billion yuan ($625.7 million), citing a government document.
Guangzhou Auto, a partner of Toyota Motor (
), sealed a deal on Thursday to take a 29 percent stake in Hunan Changfeng Motor Co 600991.SS, the newspaper said, confirming an earlier Reuters report.
It will buy the shares from Changfeng's state parent for around 1.05 billion yuan, becoming the largest shareholder of the sport utility vehicle specialist.
Under the agreement, Guangzhou Auto will invest 10 billion yuan in Hunan province, the home base of Changfeng, in the next 5 years, increasing their joint vehicle production capacity to 500,000 units per year, it said.
Changfeng's current vehicle production capacity is 100,000 units.
Earlier in the week, Guangzhou Auto also acquired one-third of a Fiat transmission plant in the eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou, Zeng was quoted as saying. It did not disclose financial details of the deal.
"Changfeng Auto is a listed company and a very good fund raising platform. But Guangzhou Auto is proceeding with our own plan to go public currently," Zeng was cited as saying.
Zeng told Reuters in April that both Shanghai and Hong Kong were ideal listing venues and the automaker had already submitted its application to China's securities regulator.
(Reporting by Fang Yan and Edmund Klamann; Editing by Jonathan Hopfner)
