GM and UAW reach deal with U.S. government on restructuring
2009-05-21 16:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, May 21 2009
United Auto Worker Jim Harrison prepares to drive a Saturn Aura from the assembly line to its final inspection at the General Motors Fairfax Assembly Plant in Kansas City, Kansas April 1, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Dave Kaup
Thu  EDT
Shares of the U.S. automaker rose 32 percent after the UAW announced the agreement with GM and the U.S. Treasury, prompting Standard & Poor's equity analysts to repeat a "strong sell" on the stock, saying bankruptcy was still likely.
GM's roughly 54,000 UAW-represented U.S. factory workers are expected to vote on the agreement next week.
Details of the agreement are being withheld until workers are briefed on the proposed changes to its 2007 contract, the union said in a statement.
An Obama administration official called the agreement a "positive development in GM's effort to restructure" but would not comment on details.
"It's really positive that they got an agreement. I know it was very tough. I know that they (UAW) are satisfied," Senator Debbie Stabenow of Michigan told Reuters.
While the union deal is a major move forward, the automaker and holders of $27 billion of bonds remain far apart on an agreement on how to restructure that debt.
The new labor deal puts GM in position to take a plan for creditor concessions into a bankruptcy filing even if it fails to win support from bondholders, analysts said.
"I'm convinced that they have no choice but to file bankruptcy," said Scott Peltz, managing director at accounting and consulting firm RSM McGladrey in Chicago.
"To the extent that you have constituencies with whom you've made an agreement prior to filing, it makes the outcome that much easier to achieve," he said.
The UAW had objected to an element of GM's restructuring that would have cut 21,000 U.S. factory jobs even as GM pressed ahead with plans to import small cars from China.
Henderson, Gettelfinger and a cadre of aides reached the proposed deal after a round of intensive talks, people briefed on the closed-door discussions said.
The talks focused in their final stage on how many UAW jobs would be lost to plant closures and how GM would fund its $20 billion obligation to a UAW-aligned trust known as a Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association, according to sources familiar with the talks but were not authorized to discuss them.
"I think the bond exchange that's on the table right now is dead on arrival, so unless the deal is somehow sweetened, then there's no way they're going to get the 90 percent approval that they need," said Pete Hastings, a fixed-income analyst at Morgan Keegan in Memphis.
"All this is just positioning, in my view, for the bankruptcy filing that we expect to happen in the relatively near future," Hastings said.
Representatives of GM bondholders, like the secured debt holders in the Chrysler bankruptcy, have argued that the Obama administration's autos task force is rewriting the rules of corporate reorganization on the fly in a way that favors the union over other creditors.
Bondholders have complained that the union, which was offered 39 percent of a new GM, was getting an unfairly rich payout compared with other unsecured creditors.
GM shares rose 47 cents, or 32.4 percent, to $1.92.
GM's 8.375 percent bonds due in 2033 rose to 5.06 cents on the dollar after the GM-UAW announcement, up from 4.5 cents on Wednesday, according to MarketAxess.
(Additional reporting by Poornima Gupta, Soyoung Kim, Caroline Humer, John Crawley and Dena Aubin; editing by Patrick Fitzgibbons, Matthew Lewis and Ted Kerr)
