BUY OR SELL-Is the storm abating for Asian shipping firms?
2009-05-21 05:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The shipping industry has been sailing through troubled seas as the global recession takes a toll on trade, but Asian shipping stocks have rebounded in 2009 as investors bet on a recovery.
), China's top shipper and operator of the world's biggest dry bulk fleet, hit an eight-month intra-day high on Wednesday on the strengthen of dry bulk shipping rates, and is up about 65 percent this year.
The Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI, which tracks rates to ship resources including iron ore, coal, cement, grain and fertiliser, rose 14 straight days to 2,665 points on Thursday, a fresh year high and four times its December low.
Container ship operators that are now losing money on overcapacity and weak demand have rallied even stronger, with China Shipping Container Lines (
) up 85 and 77 percent this year. Is the worst over?
Goldman Sachs upgraded its container ship stance to attractive from neutral, saying the sector is trading at a deep discount. It raised Taiwan's Evergreen Marine (
) and Korea's Hanjin shipping (
"Japan and Korea shipping stocks have also underperformed China's shipping sector even though the industry drivers are global," it said. Goldman also upgraded Mitsui O.S.K. Lines (
The container shipping company sector currently is trading at an average of 0.7 times to 2009 book value against an historical range of between 0.3 to 3 times. The mid-cycle valuation is around 1.2 times for shipping firms but it should trade at a discount in the current market, analysts said.
Geoffrey Cheng at Daiwa Institute of Research recommended speculative buying of bulk shipping stocks, such as China COSCO and Sinotrans Shipping (
) on China's demand for commodities.
"It seems that traders are continuing to import iron ore, coal and other soft commodities," he said, adding some shipping firms had made huge provisions that brought down their costs.
Dry bulk freight rates should rise further at least in the short term with China's 4 trillion yuan stimulus package, which will lead to increased infrastructure spending.
BULKERS SET TO CORRECT?
China's stocking of cheap imported iron ore ahead of the annual sales agreement between its domestic steel makers and Australian miners has boosted dry bulk freight rates, but prices could drop once the stocking process ends.
BOCI Research's Jimmy Lam estimated more than 100 million tonnes of iron ore are now piled at Chinese ports, enough for several months' production.
"Once the stocking process stops, it will add volatility to the market," Lam said.
Dry bulk shipping firms are still operating at losses, and the current valuations of shipping firms do not offer a meaningful upside, said Maggie Lee, an Invesco director who manages $2.5 billion under the Invesco Asia Infrastructure Fund.
"Perhaps the risk reward is not that favourable," she said.
BOCI's Lam said he believed the trough value of 0.5-0.6 times is fair value for dry bulk shipping stocks in the current business environment.
"We are cautious over the shipping sector and we are more cautious about the container shipping," Lee said.
"We haven't seen any rebound at all in the furniture and the clothing, so perhaps, it's a bit too early (to buy) based on the U.S. retail sales number," Invesco's Lee said.
There were 1,045 container ships of 5.8 million twenty foot equivalent units (TEU) on order at the beginning of the month, equivalent to 46 percent of the current fleet. (Editing by Doug Young and Lincoln Feast)
