Oil facts of life catch up with commods rally
2009-05-21 09:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The commodities rally -- a triumph of macro economic hopes over the harsh realities of poor demand, skeptics say -- may at last be backed up by market realities, in oil at least.
Analysts have said the current rally has shown a disjunction between prices and fundamentals. It reflected optimism, mainly on equity markets, that the world economy could be beyond the worse and also investment techniques to hedge against a weak dollar.
"For most commodities we have run a little bit ahead of ourselves," said Andrey Kryuchenkov, commodities analyst at VTB Capital in London.
Crude inventories in the world's top consumer United States remain close to a 19-year high.
But as speculators switch to net longs for many commodities, prices could rise further, although the global economy is forecast not to recover until late this year or next year.
Investors, however, are finding tentative evidence of a narrowing gap between fundamentals and prices, again from China.
Statistics last week showed China's April commodities imports hit new highs after a strong growth in oil and copper imports in March.
"In our view, China has and will continue to contribute to the fundamental turnaround in commodities," Goldman Sachs said in its metals research note, although the bank also cautioned demand from the rest of the world remained weak.
"We expect Chinese demand to rise by 180,000 barrels per day this year, with some upside risk to that forecast," the bank said in a research note.
"If that looks like happening, then that should help prices to reach their longer-term sustainable levels above $70 per barrel sooner rather than later."
Gasoline futures and swaps have remained in backwardation for about two weeks, a market structure where prompt contracts are at premiums to longer-dated to reflect tight fundamentals.
Lawrence Eagles of JP Morgan said contango, or the opposite of backwardation, had been narrowing on the crude oil markets, discouraging storage. The bank raised its oil price forecasts on Thursday.
"Low oil prices caused many investment delays in especially unconventional crudes, which will eventually constrain oil supplies," an investment banker said, asking not to be named.
(Additional reporting by Veronica Brown, Barbara Lewis and Jane Merriman, editing by William Hardy)
