China Money: Taps open for corp bonds as IPOs frozen out
2009-05-21 04:04:00.0
(Reuters) - China's government has opened the taps for corporate bond issuance to help fill a fund-raising gap left by an eight-month halt in IPOs, reinforcing expectations the authorities will be cautious in resuming equity offers.
Markets have been speculating when an effective ban on mainland IPOs may be lifted, especially since the benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
), Asia's top oil and gas producer, that it would issue 15 billion yuan ($2.20 billion) in five-year bills next week has added to evidence suggesting authorities may wait several months before resuming IPOs.
Analysts and dealers said the slew of corporate debt issues suggest authorities may wait until the latter half of the third quarter or later before resuming IPOs, to see if the economy's fragile recovery and the stock market's uptrend are sustainable.
The China Securities Regulatory Commission said in September it would control the frequency of IPOs, taken at the time as a sign of its concern that a weak stock market would not be able to absorb a heavy supply of equity.
"The authorities may want to avoid resuming big IPOs in the near term to avoid volatility in the stock market so corporations are issuing medium-term bills as well as bonds approved by NDRC," said Zhang Lei, bond analyst at Shenyin and Wanguo Securities, referring the top economic planning body.
Apart from PetroChina, Baoshan Iron and Steel Co (
), China's top steelmaker, was also added to the list of firms raising debt. It plans to sell 5 billion yuan in three-year bills.
In the first four months of 2009, Chinese firms have issued a whopping 384.5 billion yuan in corporate bonds and bills of one year and above, against just 67.7 billion yuan a year earlier.
At the start of this year, market forecasts called for issuance of at least 600 billion yuan in such debt for the whole year, up from 440 billion yuan in 2008 and 183 billion in 2007.
China now looks set to approve 1.6 trillion yuan in corporate bond and medium-term bill issuance this year, Xu Lin, a senior official at the National Development & Reform Commission, the country's top economic planner, said on Monday.
Most of this year's issuance has been in medium-term bills, which require a simple registration process, and corporate bonds approved by the NDRC.
However, the CSRC, which typically approves bonds of five years and above for listed companies, has approved almost no issuance since last September. Traders say that reflects its concern that liquidity could be diverted from the stock market into bonds.
CSRC Vice Chairman Yao Gang said in April that IPOs, while an essential function of a normal stock market, would not resume until reforms have been carried out. [ID:nSHA355554]
A flood of new equity issues was a major factor behind last year's hefty 65 percent drop in the Shanghai index, and volatility in short-term repo rates.
AUTHORITIES' AMBITIONS
Also fuelling the Chinese authorities' eagerness to expand the corporate bond market are ambitious plans to develop Shanghai into a global financial centre over the next decade.
Efforts to promote the market by relaxing rules have met with limited success, suggesting authorities are looking to lure investors by boosting the scale of the market by significantly increasing the volume of bonds issued, analysts say.
Insurers have yet to take advantage of rule changes in April letting them buy corporate bonds without bank guarantees, while only one bank has shown interest in trading exchange-listed corporate bonds after lenders were allowed access to the market in January.
And while foreign banks got the green light in January to trade corporate bonds on the mainland, only Standard Chartered (
"The central bank is eager to expand interest rate and bond products, which are much bigger markets than the stock market in the U.S.," said an analyst at a European bank in Shanghai who declined to be identified because he is not authorised to speak to the media.
Traders said the increased supply of corporate bonds would help put a floor under yields, which have been falling since late April as doubts emerged about the strength of China's economic recovery.
Yan Yi, a trader at Daiwa Securities, foresaw only another 10 bps of potential declines in coming months.
