Aussie Rio shareholders seek new Chinalco deal
2009-05-21 04:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Top Australian shareholders in Rio Tinto called for changes to the miner's planned $19.5 billion tie-up with China's state-owned Chinalco, and a newspaper reported that Chinalco will restructure the deal.
The tie-up, which would give Chinalco stakes in some Rio mining assets as well as convertible notes to double its equity stake to 18 percent, has sparked concern in Australia about China's ability to influence pricing of strategic commodities.
Several of Rio's big UK shareholders have also voiced opposition, saying the convertible note issue favors Chinalco at their expense, and they have pushed alternative plans that include a rights issue and a tie-up with bigger mining rival BHP Billiton.
"They can revise and should revise the whole cocktail of it," said Paul Xiradis, CEO of Ausbil Dexia, the ninth-largest shareholder in Rio Tinto Ltd, according to Thomson Reuters data.
Xiradis said that reflecting shareholders' complaints, the preferred route would be to have a capital raising that allowed all shareholders to take part, and he would like to keep Rio's iron ore assets in Western Australia out of the deal.
Rio shares in London fell 1.8 percent to 2,814 pence by 0830 GMT (4:30 a.m. EDT), outperforming a 3.8 percent fall in the British mining index as copper prices declined. Rio shares ended 2.9 percent higher in Sydney.
For full coverage of Rio-Chinalco, click
Five of the top 12 shareholders in Rio's Australian listed shares have kept their cards closely guarded on whether they would vote for the deal in its current form, but some say it now looks inevitable it would be revised.
"It's becoming more clear that given shareholder and, seemingly, government opposition to parts of the deal, I think some of the deal will be restructured," said Matt Williams, Australian equities manager at Perpetual Investments, the seventh-largest shareholder in Rio Tinto Ltd.
Another top-10 shareholder, who declined to be named, said his main concerns were the dilution from the convertible notes sale to Chinalco, and the Chinese firm's appointment of two directors to the Rio board.
Williams said while shareholders might want to participate in a rights offer, Rio would not be able to raise the full amount from existing shareholders that it needs to pay half its $38 billion in debt, the main reason for the deal.
If another party is brought in to fill the gap, it would have to make a much more attractive offer than Chinalco, as Rio stands to pay a $195 million break fee if it calls off the deal.
"The wild card is: does BHP do something? This could be the last chance before China Inc locks away the potential of some kind of deal between the two companies ever occurring," said Williams.
Rio aggressively fought a 3.4-for-1 takeover offer from BHP last year, which BHP abandoned after the commodities market collapsed and the European Union raised concerns about the two companies merging their iron ore operations.
Citing sources close to Chinalco, the report from Beijing said the Chinese firm is prepared to replace marketing provisions with a clear undertaking it will not play any role in setting prices.
Chinalco is prepared to scrap a claim to 30 percent of Rio's iron ore output, but would not concede on planned stakes in Rio assets or on its right to two board seats, the paper said.
The Herald said Chinalco is open to discussing proposals for Rio to issue new convertible bonds to mollify some shareholders, provided its interest is not diluted below 15 percent.
A Chinalco spokesman had declined to comment late on Wednesday on a previous report that Rio might raise cash with a rights offer underwritten by Chinalco. "We only have one proposal, no other proposals," Chinalco Vice President Lu Youqing told Reuters.
The Australian Financial Review newspaper said on Thursday that Chinalco subsidiary Chalco has told Australia's Queensland state government that a fall in alumina prices has made the building of a new refinery in the state less likely. That could add to the political challenges facing the Chinalco-Rio deal, the paper said.
Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) is expected to make its recommendations on the deal to Treasurer Wayne Swan by June 15. Swan has the final decision.
A source close to the Treasurer's office said there was no change to the timeline. "Whether or not there's any new timeframe, depends on whether or not they put a rejigged deal together," said the source, who declined to be identified due to the sensitivity of the issue.
(Additional reporting by Rob Taylor in CANBERRA, Polly Yam in HONG KONG and Eric Onstad in LONDON; Editing by Ian Geoghegan and Dan Lalor)
