Nets standouts help China find bricks for a new Great Wall
2009-05-21 02:19:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Brook Lopez (R) and Devin Harris (2nd R) of the NBA's New Jersey Nets look on as a Chinese participant shoots a basket during the Adidas training camp in Beijing May 19, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Grace Liang
Thu  EDT
With 7ft (2.13m) Yi as a team mate and 7ft 6in Houston Rocket Yao as a regular opponent, both were aware that China has tall players but they were also impressed by the skill displayed by the 48 teenagers at a training camp in Beijing.
"There's loads of talented kids out here," center Lopez told Reuters at the four-day Adidas Nations event.
"A lot of them are raw but you just look at the way some of them play, the eagerness and just the size on some of them, they kind of make me feel small," added the All-NBA Rookie, a towering seven-footer himself.
All-Star point guard Harris said he could see a difference in style but also plenty of evidence of the influence of the NBA, which is hugely popular in China.
"I've seen some big guys finishing strong, I've seen some point guys making good plays," he said. "They've obviously watched a lot of NBA basketball, you can kind of see it in their character and their swagger."
"In the U.S. it's a bit more athletic whereas over here they focus a lot more on the skill setting, the shooting and the fundamentals," he added.
To date, China's NBA players have mostly won their tickets to the United States on the back of their height, a fact not lost on Harris, a modest 6ft 3in tall but with mesmerizing ball skills.
"Height really isn't everything, it helps in certain situations, but skill setting, learning how to use your strengths and learning how to stay away from your weaknesses, is a lot more useful than height," he said.
Another criticism of Chinese players, from Yao as much as anyone, is that the Chinese game does not prepare them for the sheer physicality of the NBA or the international game.
"It took me a while to get used to the physicality of the NBA and I think a camp like this will definitely help toward that," said Lopez.
"Going against players just as strong as you, if not stronger, is going to help you become much more physical and tougher."
Former Cleveland Cavaliers coach Paul Silas, one of three former NBA coaches putting the Chinese through their paces, admired the discipline of the teenagers but thought they needed to learn how to enjoy their individual skills more.
"The players are very different here and you don't have so much of that discipline in the States," he said.
"But here I think you have too much of a team concept and they don't look to go out on their own so much. It's a fine balance that you must have."
Zhang Junxiang, already 6ft 5in at the age of 15, was clearly delighted just to be among the Chinese teenagers at the Beijing Sports University Gymnasium.
"I think the camp is really a lot of fun," he said. "How we are trained here is different. We are so excited to see foreign coaches."
