Brazil candidate's illness revives succession talk
2009-05-20 17:20:00.0
(Reuters) - A new health scare for Dilma Rousseff, the presidential hopeful for Brazil's ruling party, has raised further uncertainty over next year's election with some coalition partners calling on Wednesday for the president to consider backing other candidates or running himself.
Rousseff, who is President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva's chief of staff, emerged confident on Wednesday from a Sao Paulo hospital a day after she was admitted suddenly with leg pains related to cancer treatment.
"Luckily there was nothing more serious and I'm back in shape," said Rousseff, a leftist who announced in April that doctors had removed a tumor from her armpit and that she would undergo chemotherapy for lymphoma.
Lula hand-picked her to run in the October 2010 election, but doubts over her health have led some Lula supporters to revive the idea that the most popular president in Brazil's recent history could run for a third term.
He said he had no intention of seeking another term, which is not currently allowed under Brazil's constitution.
"I'm not considering that option. First, because there is no third term. Second, because Dilma is fine," Lula said during a state visit to China.
Rousseff's illness is likely to improve the chances of her main challenger, Sao Paulo state Governor Jose Serra of the opposition Brazilian Social Democracy Party. He is also favored by many investors for his vast experience in government and his party's track record of market-friendly policies.
Party leaders in Lula's governing coalition began discussing the possibility of an alternative candidate.
"I like and respect minister Dilma but I think the PMDB should have its own candidate," said Senator Pedro Simon of the centrist PMDB party, the largest in the coalition.
The PMDB, whose support may be decisive in next year's election, requested an emergency meeting with Lula to discuss Rousseff's condition, Henrique Alves, its leader in the lower house of Congress, told Reuters.
Part of the PMDB may now be more inclined to back Serra, who lost to Lula in the 2002 presidential race but leads Rousseff by about 30 percentage points in opinion polls.
Rousseff says she favors reducing Brazil's foreign debt further and streamlining an inefficient public sector but also reining in central bank autonomy on monetary policy.
PLAN B?
"That (possibility) doesn't exist. Dilma will do her chemotherapy. She's totally cured, so there's no problem."
"It's not likely but if the governing party lacks a feasible candidate, it can't be ruled out," said Simon.
Rousseff said the intense leg pains that led to her 36-hour hospitalization were due to a muscle inflammation stemming from chemotherapy. She played down the incident, saying a new dosage of her medication would prevent further setbacks.
She showed the first public signs of fatigue from her illness on Wednesday, admitting she had been in pain and may have to periodically rest due to chemotherapy.
"Yesterday was a bad day, I won't say it wasn't. Pain is always uncomfortable," said the former guerrilla fighter, who was tortured during Brazil's 1964-85 military dictatorship.
"When my hair grows back to the length of men's (hair), I hope to take off the wig. It's tiresome," she said.
"We're all behind her," said Jose Torres da Silva, representative for the Workers' Party in the lower house of Congress. "But naturally we'll soon have to think of a Plan B." (Additional reporting by Natuza Nery in Brasilia and Carmen Munari in Sao Paulo; Editing by Stuart Grudgings and Kieran Murray)
