Reuters Summit-TI says on track for $700 mln annual savings
2009-05-20 16:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Texas Instruments TXN.N is on track for $700 million in annual cost savings by the end of the third quarter, as it forges ahead with global expense cuts this quarter and next, its top executive said on Thursday.
Chief Executive Richard Templeton, speaking at the Reuters Global Technology Summit in New York, said TI's decision to shutter a Japanese research and development center was just one of several similar moves being made.
Earlier this year, Texas Instruments, which is refocusing its business on analog and embedded chips from wireless, had announced it was aiming for $500 million in cost cuts this year on top of its plan to save $200 million by moving away from its traditional baseband chip business.
"Our strategy was to move early, to move aggressively, because the world had changed, but at the same time, to focus on the areas with the best growth going forward," he said. "We still have a little more to go. But those things are under way."
The day before, Templeton told an investor conference that he saw "signs of optimism" for business but stressed that his company remained careful about subscribing to the idea of a quick economic rebound.
Templeton said Texas Instruments was pursuing new or relatively untapped markets for its analog and power-saving chips, including medical applications to even bicycles.
He also said he expects strong growth in emerging markets such as India, China and Eastern Europe.
Shares in Texas Instruments have climbed nearly 20 percent in 2009, outpacing the Dow Jones Industrial Index's
(For more on Reuters Global Technology Summit, see [nLI040240]
(Reporting by Edwin Chan, Gabriel Madway and Sinead Carew; Editing by Gary Hill)
((eddie.chan@thomsonreuters.com; +1 213 955 6750; Reuters Messaging: eddie.chan.reuters.com@reuters.net)) For Reuters MediaFile blog see
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nN20535763
