Verizon CFO says happy with second quarter so far
2009-05-20 00:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
John Killian, executive vice president and chief financial officer for Verizon Communications, speaks at the Reuters Global Technology Summit New York May 20, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Brendan McDermid
Wed  EDT
Speaking at the Reuters Global Technology Summit in New York on Wednesday, Killian also said the economy is stabilizing and may recover this year and into 2010.
"I think we've seen some stabilization in terms of the current situation with the economy. We really don't see it get a lot worse but we haven't seen it pick up at this point," Killian said. "I think we're going to have a good 2009," he added.
Without giving specific revenue, earnings or cash-flow forecasts for this quarter or the year, Killian said he expected continued growth.
"We're satisfied with the trends we're seeing in our growth metrics as we start the quarter," said the executive, who become CFO in March after serving as president of Verizon's enterprise business.
Once the economy recovers, Verizon will see a more noticeable improvement in its enterprise business, which dropped 5 percent in the first quarter, Killian said. The consumer business has held up better in the weak economy.
Killian hopes the enterprise segment, which had about $20 billion in revenue in 2008, could grow 1 or 2 percentage points faster than global gross domestic product (GDP) as economies recover.
"On the consumer side, we won't see as big a benefit as (the economy) comes back. On the business side we will," he said.
), Killian implied strongly that Verizon was not about to embark on such a deal.
"We're very satisfied with the global network that we have. We think we're in a very good position with that network," he said, adding that Verizon is building or working with partners on network expansion in countries such as India and China.
"Based on where we see enterprises and activity moving, we'll add some network capability, but we don't need to do that through an acquisition," he said.
Asked about Apple Inc's (
) iPhone, sold exclusively by rival network AT&T Inc (
) in the United States, Killian declined to comment on Verizon's talks with Apple.
While U.S. wireless industry service revenue has been suffering in recent years from declining mobile phone call prices, carriers including Verizon have been focusing on data services such as Web surfing for growth.
A key part of the data strategy for Verizon, which surpassed AT&T as the biggest U.S. wireless service with its purchase of Alltel earlier this year, will be delivering applications such as games to its consumers via virtual stores where software can be bought and delivered over the air.
"We're looking at this from a number of different angles. Ultimately we'll have our own applications store," he said. "We'll probably offer and have access available to others' (stores) but we see this as a very good growth opportunity as we go through the next several years," he said.
As well as expanding wireless data revenue, Killian said he also hopes to lure away customers for rival providers. These include its biggest rival AT&T and Sprint Nextel Corp (
), which has been losing customers for the last few years.
"For us there's still an opportunity to be a share gainer in the wireless space," Killian said.
(Reporting by Sinead Carew and Ritsuko Ando; Editing by Derek Caney and Matthew Lewis)
