World not standing still on climate pact: U.N.
2009-05-20 08:11:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Yvo de Boer, executive secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, pauses during an interview with Reuters in New Delhi February 5, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Vijay Mathur
By Alister Doyle, Environment Correspondent
By Alister Doyle, Environment Correspondent
Wed  EDT
The 53-page text included suggestions that rich nations set aside up to 2 percent of their gross national product to help the poor cope with global warming, while rich countries called for developing nations to do more to limit greenhouse gas emissions.
"This document marks an important point on our road," Yvo de Boer, head of the U.N. Climate Change Secretariat, said in a statement that will form a basis for negotiations on a new pact to be agreed in Copenhagen in December.
"With only 200 days before Copenhagen, time gets tighter but the world is not standing still on climate change," he said. Economic recession has sapped many governments' willingness to step up actions to confront global warming.
Suggestions in the documents for a long-term global goal for emissions included a 50 percent cut by 2050, limiting temperature rises to 2 Celsius (3.6 Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels, or aiming for a global annual per capita emissions of 2 meric tons of carbon dioxide for everyone.
"Warming of the climate system, as a consequence of human activity, is unequivocal," the draft text begins. It warns that global warming will have adverse effects on food security, health and the fight against poverty.
By contrast, U.S. President Barack Obama wants to cut U.S. emissions back to 1990 levels by 2020, a cut of 14 percent from 2007 levels.
Under the U.N. panel's scenarios, developing nations would also have to at least slow the projected growth of emissions by 2020. The European Union wants a cut of 15-30 percent below the projected rising trajectory by 2020.
(With extra reporting by Gerard Wynn in London, Editing by Farah Master)
