Visa, MC still face hurdles in China after WTO ruling
2012-07-18 07:50:00.0
Visa, MC still face hurdles in China after WTO ruling | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Visa, MC still face hurdles in China after WTO ruling
Mon, Jul 16 2012
Mon, Jul 16 2012
Mon, Jul 16 2012
Fri, Jul 13 2012
Thu, Jul 12 2012
MasterCard and VISA credit cards are seen in this illustrative photograph taken in Hong Kong December 8, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Wed  EDT
), Mastercard Inc (
"It's one more step in a very long process to get greater access for Mastercard and others," said Dave Carini, managing director at China Maverick Research. "But that process is going to take several years, and at the end of it they will still not have full and open access to the market they would like."
The World Trade Organisation dispute panel said on Monday Beijing had broken WTO rules by requiring all yuan-denominated payment cards issued in China to work with UnionPay, forcing the country to change its rules to give foreign companies equal access.
China requires all foreign card companies to piggyback on UnionPay's network when accepting yuan payments. This means Visa and Mastercard must give a cut of every credit or debit card transaction to UnionPay and the card issuing bank. In most other countries, the foreign card issuers pay only the bank because they use their own network.
Many other Asian economies including Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea have all experienced a credit card crisis at some point during the last decade, hit by runaway household spending that eventually threatened the stability of many banks.
"History has repeatedly shown that when there is excessive credit, there will be excessive use," said Chak Wong, a professor of finance at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and a former managing director at Barclays and UBS.
"Competition is always good, but China is still less developed than other Asian countries, and you have to consider whether or not consumers there can safely handle unsecured credit on a big scale."
Mastercard estimates credit card spending in China will reach $2.5 trillion by 2025 from just over $1 trillion now, in a country where it remains common to see wads of cash being handed over for big ticket items such as luxury watches.
Some 55 million new credit cards were issued in 2011, up more than a fifth from 2010. There are now 285 million credit cards in circulation in China, according to the country's central bank.
Set up in 2002, UnionPay is already the world's largest card payment scheme. Its logo appears on 29.2 percent of the 8 billion cards issued worldwide, higher than Visa at 28.6 percent, according to a study by Retail Banking Research in London. It says its cards can be used in more than 100 countries.
Before the ruling, Citibank (
"I would consider China UnionPay not only successful in China but also outside of China," said Jafizwaty Ishahak, a director at consultancy Frost & Sullivan in Singapore. "Their timing was right."
Chinese securities firms took three of the top five slots in Asia's January-June league table of investment banking fees, for example, with domestic names such as Guosen and Citic Securities (
UnionPay's close ties the Chinese government also ensures its privileged position, being partially owned by the so-called "Big Four" state-controlled banks of ICBC, China Construction Bank (
), Agricultural Bank of China (
"In the case of UnionPay, China obviously wants to develop a world-class homegrown player," said Doug Young, a professor at Fudan University.
"Having to share its home market with foreign rivals would obviously hurt UnionPay's profits over the shorter term, potentially making its IPO less attractive if and when it comes."
(Additional reporting by Kazunori Takada in Shanghai, Michael Martina in Beijing and David Henry in New York; Editing by Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I hope they can keep them out for as long as possible. My perception of these companies is they¡¯re dirty and colluding both to merchant and consumers.
Jul 18, 20123:37am EDT--
Although Union Pay & all Chinese banks are really owned by Party members (as with all substantial enterprises in China) I still consider them more secure & trustworthy than our Western Financial institutions which continue with their fraudulent & corrupt ¡®business a usual¡¯ practices to this day.
Although Union Pay & all Chinese banks are really owned by Party members (as with all substantial enterprises in China) I still consider them more secure & trustworthy than our Western Financial institutions which continue with their fraudulent & corrupt ¡®business a usual¡¯ practices to this day.
All financial institutions in China are strictly and directly regulated & controlled by their government, something I believe we could use to put an end to today¡¯s catastrophic financial scandals in the west.
Jul 18, 20125:08am EDT--
Jul 18, 20125:54am EDT--
