PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - May 21
2009-05-20 16:32:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) are expected to finalise iron ore contract prices with Japanese and Korean steel mills within days, with the result likely to significantly decrease Australia's terms of trade. Steel makers from the two countries are believed to be pushing for a 40 percent lower contract price compared to last year's record US$90 a tonne, although analysts say the mills are likely to accept a cut of around 35 percent. Page 14.
) is selling four projects in the Bonaparte Basin region off the coast near Darwin, with expectations the sale could provide the company with several hundred million dollars. Final bids for the gas projects are due in early June, and sales may be finalised within weeks. Analysts say the assets are likely to attract interest from multinational energy companies such as Eni, ConocoPhillips, Royal Dutch Shell and Inpex, as well as a number of Chinese companies. Page 15.
Rob Murray, the chief executive of beer and wine producer Lion Nathan LNN.AX, yesterday indicated that the company is likely to sell its wine business, although a sale is unlikely to occur for at least two or three years, when the market has improved. "There's still an opportunity to sell these businesses for a lot more than you're likely to get for them now, and now is not the time," Mr Murray said. The company has spent around A$400 million buying wine assets since 2001, which have since been written down in value by A$279 million. Page 15.
Queensland toll-road operator BrisConnections yesterday released a revised list of its 20 largest investors, with Macquarie Group holding 35 percent of the trust's units, while Queensland Investment Corporation now holds a 34 percent stake. The new list excludes those investors who have not paid the second instalment on the company's partly-paid units, with BrisConnections still owed around A$280 million. BrisConnections will auction the unpaid units next month. Page 15.
) yesterday announced full-year profits to the end of March. Although net profit reached US$136.3 million, compared to a US$71.6 million loss for the previous year, operating profit fell, and chief executive Louis Gries said the United States housing sector, James Hardie's major market, "is not bottoming and there is worse to come." Mr Gries also announced that a final dividend would not be paid, and future dividends are on hold. Page 17.
) yesterday completed the institutional portion of its A$290 million capital raising, raising A$230 million through a two-for-11 entitlement offer at A$7.50 a share, a 29 percent discount to the stock's last closing price before the raising. The company will now undertake a $60 million raising from retail investors. Billabong will use the funds to reduce its gearing level from 42 percent to less than 30 percent. Page 17.
) yesterday announced that the South Australian (SA) Government has approved the mining and rehabilitation plan for its zircon project in SA. The approval allows the mineral sands miner to commence mining and processing, with Iluka saying it expects production to start in the first quarter of 2010. The A$420 million project will produce at least 300,000 tonnes of zircon annually once operating, accounting for 40 percent of the company's output from 2011. Page 18.
Terry Fern, the chief executive of oil and gas explorer Petsec Energy (
), yesterday told the company's annual general meeting in Sydney that the group is looking to make acquistions to replace declining production. Petsec's exploration drilling during 2007 and 2008 was unsuccessful, contributing to a 90 percent fall in the company's stock price over the period. Mr Fern said the company would look at acquisitions of less than US$100 million by itself, but was talking to potential partners for larger acquisitions up to US$500 million. Page 18.
Chinese aluminium company Chinalco is to restructure its proposed US$19.5 billion investment deal with Australian mining company Rio Tinto, according to industry sources. The changes are believed to be in response to concerns from the Federal Government about the influence the Chinese company would have over Rio. However, analysts say Chinalco will abandon the deal rather than give up a 15 percent joint venture stake in Rio's West Australian iron ore assets, or its right to appoint two directors to the board of Rio. Page 21.
Receivers to collapsed pastoral and timber investment group Great Southern have ruled out a fire sale of the company's three major cattle stations. The three cattle stations, in Western Australian and Queensland, are valued at more than A$200 million on Great Southern's books, and receivers McGrathNicol say the properties will be auctioned next month unless an appropriate private bid is received. Great Southern has outstanding loans of around A$600 million. Page 22.
) has moved to end a method of liquor distribution which the Australian Taxation Office recently announced it would examine. The use of a special-purpose marketing vehicle by the Woolworths-owned Dan Murphy's chain saved A$30 million a year in wine equalisation taxes, according to analysts. Woolworths said the changes were a reflection of similar changes to its supermarkets logistics, and would provide savings that will offset the extra tax. Page 23.
Grain export company AWB AWB.AX yesterday revealed first-half profit results, with net profit falling 61.6 percent to A$8.54 million. Chief executive Gordon Davis said the decrease was due to poor seasonal conditions, weak fertiliser demand and its underperforming business in Brazil. Mr Davis also said the grains industry still requires consolidation, and that the proposed merger between Australian company ABB Grain ABB.AX and Canada's Viterra VT.TO would not exhaust possible consolidation opportunities. Page B3.
Biopharmaceutical company CSL's (
) proposed takeover of United States (US) blood products group Talecris Biotherapeutics may be blocked by US competition regulators, according to analysts. CSL announced the US$3.1 billion acquisition last August, but requires approval from the US Federal Trade Commission. Deutsche Bank analyst David Low says the deal may now be blocked due to a tougher antitrust regulatory environment under the Obama Administration. Page B3.
A takeover bid for Sydney-based drug developer Arana Therapeutics AAH.AX has won majority support from its shareholders. United States pharmaceutical company Cephalon International yesterday said it had acceptances from 50.4 percent of shareholdings for its A$318 million offer. However, a group of shareholders controlling up to 30 percent of the company are believed to have decided not to accept the offer. The A$1.35 a share offer will be increased by A5 cents a share if acceptances reach 90 percent. Page B3.
Paul Twomey, the chief executive of the Internet Corporation of Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), which globally co-ordinates website addresses, has emerged as a front-runner to be chief executive of the Federal Government's national broadband network company. Analysts say Dr Twomey, who has headed ICANN for the past six years, is particularly suited as he has previously served as a public servant for the Government, advising on the information economy and technology. Page B3. --
