UPDATE 2-Israel Chemicals Q1 profit down less than forecast
2009-05-20 07:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Israel Chemicals (ICL) (
), a maker of fertilisers and specialty chemicals, posted a smaller than expected fall in net first-quarter profit and revenue, helping lift its shares.
"Despite the current global economic crisis and the continued relative weakness of short-term market demand ... the fundamentals driving long-term demand for fertilisers have not changed materially," ICL said on Wednesday.
The second largest company on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, ICL produces 9 percent of the world's potash and a third of its bromine.
India was the main potash buyer in the first quarter, as sales to China finished at the end of 2008 and Brazil stayed sidelined, renewing activity in the second quarter.
Investors are waiting to see when new contracts will be signed with China and India, which may not happen before June.
"Rising grain prices should drive a rebound in fertiliser demand in the second half of 2009 and 2010 and increase the probability that high potash prices are maintained," Citigroup analyst Sophie Jourdier said.
"The mid-term outlook for the potash activities is solid. The outlook for the remaining 40 percent of ICL is weak however given poor pricing and demand trends," said Jourdier, who rates ICL "hold".
Excellence Nessuah analyst Gilad Alper said the Chinese contract and the price of oil will determine ICL's share price in 2009. "Given the level of surplus food stocks in China, it seems that only the price of oil can help ICL's share price to continue its positive momentum," he said.
"The generous dividend policy remains a key attraction of the shares," Jourdier said.
PROFIT DOWN, ABOVE ESTIMATE
ICL recorded quarterly net profit of $159 million or 12.6 cents a share, compared with $347 million or 26.9 cents a share a year earlier. [nPnUKW001a]
Revenue fell to $898.5 million from $1.53 billion due to a sharp decline in volumes sold by all of the company's segments.
Potash volumes were the main depressor as ICL sold 330,000 tonnes, down from 1.5 million a year ago. This was partially offset by higher prices for some products, especially potash.
The company was expected to post net profit of $128.5 million or 10 cents a share on revenue of $896.5 million, according to the average of eight analysts in a Reuters poll.
At the end of the first quarter, market demand for potash increased somewhat, reflecting renewed activity in Brazil and other regions, it said.
In Brazil, potash demand began to rise due to reduced fertiliser inventories and increased demand in the wake of higher soy prices and the devaluation of the local currency.
In Southeast Asia, mainly Indonesia and Malaysia, increases in the price of palm oil led to the beginning of an increase in demand for potash.
