UPDATE 4-Mothercare positioned for growth as profit rises
2009-05-20 08:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Mothercare (
), the British mother and baby products retailer, said it was well set for growth as parents around the world continued to spend freely on their children even as they rein in spending on themselves.
The group, which trades from 1,014 stores in 51 countries, posted a 12.4 percent increase in year profit on Wednesday and hiked its dividend by a fifth, sending its shares higher.
International expansion represented a "huge opportunity" for Mothercare, chief executive Ben Gordon told Reuters.
"There's 40 million babies born every year in China and India together, so for a brand like ours that travels so well ... that's a fantastic statistic," he said.
"Only one half of one percent of the world's babies are born in the UK ... So the vast part of our opportunity lies outside of the UK."
The firm plans to open at least 100 overseas franchise stores every year for the foreseeable future, focusing on the Middle East, Russia, Eastern Europe, China and India.
Many British retailers are struggling as cash-strapped consumers think twice before making a purchase amid rising unemployment, falling house prices and fears of a long recession.
But Mothercare has bucked the trend, benefiting from selling essential products for parents, a fast-growing Internet and home shopping business and the successful integration of the Early Learning Centre brand it purchased in 2007.
The stock was up 2.6 percent at 427 pence at 1151 GMT, valuing the business at 381 million pounds, having earlier touched 454 pence.
"The company's defensive product range should continue to stand it in good stead irrespective of the consumer environment, but there are also plenty of positive strategic initiatives under way to drive longer term growth," said analysts at Cazenove in a research note.
In Britain, the group is restructuring its property portfolio and, with 50 percent of its leases coming up for renewal in the next three years, will seek better terms. It also plans to open out-of-town 'Parenting Centres' and new stores in malls and city centres.
Mothercare made an underlying pretax profit of 37.1 million pounds ($57.4 million) for the year ended March 28, in line with analysts' forecasts, and up from 33 million pounds in 2007-08.
Sales increased 6.9 percent to 724 million pounds, with British like-for-like sales up 1.4 percent and international sales up 40.9 percent.
"This has been another strong performance from Mothercare group and as a result we have recommended a 20.8 percent increase in the total dividend (to 14.5 pence)," said Gordon.
Mothercare is debt-free, ending the year with a net cash balance of 24.8 million pounds.
"Given the uncertain consumer environment we are planning cautiously for 2009-10. However, we are well placed as we enter the new financial year," said the CEO.
(Editing by Greg Mahlich, Erica Billingham, John Stonestreet)
