UPDATE 1-EDF says to keep up investments, confims 09 targets
2009-05-20 11:54:00.0
(Reuters) - French power giant EDF (
) will forge ahead with investments to modernize and increase its electricity production capacity despite the difficult economic environment, the company's chief executive said on Wednesday.
"We will steer a course on investments so as not to transform the current economic crisis into a future energy crisis," Pierre Gadonneix told EDF's annual meeting of shareholders.
EDF expects to invest some 8 billion euros ($10.91 billion) in 2009 in its core French market, up from 3 billion euros in 2005, to build and modernize nuclear, thermal and hydraulic plants, he said.
The world's biggest nuclear power producer will also invest outside of France to build up its presence in countries such as Britain, Italy, the United States and China.
EDF has said it would invest 35 billion euros globally between 2008 and 2010, and Chief Finance Officer Daniel Camus told shareholders that the group had "the means to fund its ambitions".
"We need to invest in energy savings, in renewable energies and the nuclear sector... as we remain convinced that in the long run oil prices can only go lastingly upwards," Gadonneix said.
Four of these evolutionary power reactors (EPR) would be built through British Energy, the unit it acquired in January for 12.5 billion euros ($17.04 billion).
Last week, EDF said it would join forces with British Gas owner Centrica (
) to build the reactors. The move is aimed at getting a "Made in Britain" stamp, which industry experts see as key to taking part in the race to modernize Britain's nuclear reactors.
The first reactor should start producing in 2017, Gadonneix said. He confirmed EDF's target to generate more than 200 million euros in annual synergies from British Energy by 2011.
EDF plans to build another four EPRs in the United States with U.S. group Constellation Energy. EDF has agreed to buy half of Constellation's 4.5 billion euros, a deal which Gadonneix said he expected to close by the third quarter of 2009.
For France, where EDF is building an EPR in Flamanville and is planning another one in Penly, Gadonneix did not exclude the eventuality of new partners taking stakes in Penly.
When asked for details on planned divestments, an EDF official said: "We're studying a number of options. But you can understand that at this stage the company cannot give more details given the confidentiality needed on deals that are being examined or prepared,"
Gadonneix said EDF was confident of its financial strength, adding that the fact the company had been able to issue more than 11 billion euros in bonds in the past six months was a sign of confidence from the financial markets.
"We should be in a position to tell you more on this in coming weeks," Gadonneix said.
When asked if the company would consider issuing a convertible bond, Gadonneix ruled out the possibility. (Reporting by Marie Maitre; editing by Karen Foster)
