Europe shares fall by midday; banks slip, oils up
2009-05-20 07:42:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities fell by midday on Wednesday, snapping a four-session rally, as financial stocks retreated after recent hefty gains, overshadowing an increase in energy shares on the back of firmer crude oil prices.
At 1104 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
The index, which slumped 45 percent in 2008, rose to its highest close in more than four months on Tuesday and is about 35 percent higher than a lifetime low on March 9.
Financials slipped after gaining in the previous four sessions. The DJ STOXX banking index .SX7P, which has doubled after hitting a low in early March, fell 1.4 percent.
), HSBC (
), Barclays (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Commerzbank (
"Whilst confidence appears to be coming back into the markets, one can't escape the realities of the poor economic numbers being released," said Chris Hossain, senior sales manager at ODL Securities.
"Japan's economy shrank by a record margin in the first quarter. Some argue that this was actually better than expected, but investors should consider whether or not this is a background where one can expect a consistent rally up."
Japan's economy contracted 4 percent in January-March and analysts said its ability to turn some modest growth ahead into a lasting recovery would hinge on how soon the global economy can heal.[ID:nSP468900] British manufacturing orders also fell slightly more than expected in May.
Mining shares were mixed, with BHP Billiton (
), Anglo American (
) and Xstrata STA.L falling 0.3 to 1.9 percent, but Rio Tinto (
ENERGY GAINS, RISK APPETITE UP
Energy stocks tracked crude oil prices CLc1, which rose 0.7 percent to trade above $60 a barrel. BP (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
), Tullow Oil (
), Repsol (
Analysts said the appetite for risky assets has risen in the recent past on growing optimism among investors, largely fuelled by improving sentiment indicators, that sharp declines in the U.S. and euro zone economies in the past quarter marked the low point in the worst global recession in more than six decades.
"The underlying picture is still strong. Risk appetite is growing," said Bernard McAlinden, investment strategist at NCB Stockbrokers, in Dublin.
The VDAX-NEW volatility index .V1XI, which is based on sell- and buy-options for Frankfurt's top-30 stocks <0#.GDAXI>, fell to its lowest level since Sept. 25, indicating a decline in risk aversion.
On Tuesday, the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility index .VIX, also known as Wall Street's "fear gauge," fell to its lowest since the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September.
) rose 4 percent after it said its core private banking activities would be listed under Julius Baer Group, while GAM, U.S. asset management unit Artio and Asset Management Europe will be combined into GAM Holding. [nLK568689]
) is buying the injectable generic cancer drugs business of Austria's EBEWE Pharma and may pursue other similar deals as it fleshes out a planned diversification away from brand-name treatments. Its shares were up 0.2 percent.
Germany's Schaeffler was mulling a plan to sell big parts of its business to Continental (
), according to sources involved in the talks, a reversal of the daring swoop to buy its far bigger rival. Continental shares were up 11 percent.
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100
fell 0.7 percent, Germany's DAX
rose 0.4 percent and France's CAC 40
was up 0.1 percent. (Additional reporting by Brian Gorman; Editing by Hans Peters)
