Konica Minolta enjoys LCD film recovery
2009-05-20 09:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Konica Minolta Holdings Inc (
) said a recent strong recovery in demand for its high-tech film used in LCD panels is likely to boost its annual earnings, although it has no plans to increase its outlook now.
Brisk TV sales in China, spurred by the government's stimulus package, and the completion of panel inventory adjustments have created fresh LCD panel demand, which has led to robust orders for its LCD film, Konica Minolta Senior Executive Officer Shoei Yamana told the Reuters Global Technology Summit in Tokyo.
Its triacetyl cellulose (TAC) film, which protects the polarisation plate used in LCD panels, had been an engine of growth for Konica Minolta until global LCD TV demand slowed last year due to the economic downturn.
"Adjustment of bloated panel inventory has pretty much run its course and now panel makers are boosting production to meet strong demand from China. We are experiencing a knock-on effect from all this," Yamana said on Wednesday.
), Xerox Corp (
Despite strong Chinese demand and lower panel inventory levels, however, it remains unclear if LCD panel and panel components makers are safely on the growth path, Yamana said.
"We have not really seen any strength in end-user demand for large-screen TVs in Europe and the United States," he said.
"If panel makers turn bullish and start flooding the market again, the industry might have to go right back to the inventory adjustment phase."
Also, it is considering offering organic solar cells, which are bendable and cost less to manufacture than silicon-based solar cells, as there are considerable technological overlaps between developing organic solar cells and OLED lighting.
Sales of solar cells, which convert solar energy into electricity, could grow strongly as concerns about climate change boost demand for renewable energy sources.
But the company aims to defy the global downturn by launching cost-efficient business machines with enhanced data security functions, Yamana said.
Ahead of his comments, shares in Konica Minolta closed up 1.9 percent at 911 yen, outperforming the Nikkei average
, which gained 0.6 percent.
