UPDATE 3-Shaftesbury eyes new Soho retail hub after share sale
2009-05-20 06:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Retail property firm Shaftesbury (
) wants to raise 149.1 million pounds ($230.6 million) via a 2-for-3 rights issue to fund development of a new shopping and leisure hub in London's fashionable Soho district.
The real estate investment trust, which owns large swathes of the capital's Chinatown and Covent Garden theatre district, is planning to transform a cluster of shabby properties in the popular West End neighbourhood into a tourist hotspot to rival its world-famous Carnaby Street near Piccadilly Circus.
It plans to sell about 90.3 million shares at 175 pence each, a discount of 53.1 percent to the closing price on May 19. The issue is fully underwritten by JP Morgan Securities on behalf of JP Morgan Cazenove, and Merrill Lynch.
"This rights issue will allow us to take advantage of excellent opportunities that are emerging to make strategic acquisitions in keeping with our long term investment strategy," Chief Executive Jonathan Lane said in a statement.
"We believe that the acquisitions funded by this rights issue will deliver good returns for our shareholders," he said.
The company said it would earmark the remaining funds to buy discounted properties in its core markets, where real estate is rarely offered for sale in buoyant economic conditions.
Shaftesbury shares rose 4 percent to 388 pence by 0958 GMT, outperforming a 0.3 percent dip in the FTSE 350 Real Estate Index .FTNMX8730.
On Tuesday, London property landlord Great Portland Estates (
Average commercial property values have plunged more than 40 percent since June 2007, when the market boom was derailed by the global crisis in credit markets.
The correction has forced several firms, including Land Securities (
), British Land (
), Hammerson (
) and Liberty International LII.L to seek investors' cash to avoid breach of loan-to-value covenants. [ID:nL1519808] [ID:nLC361047]
In a separate half-year results statement, Shaftesbury said the enduring appeal of London's West End to overseas visitors had mitigated some of the impact of the faltering UK economy on its 1.1 billion pounds portfolio of shops, restaurants and bars.
UK shoppers have become increasingly thrifty since the onset of recession, slashing profits at bellwether retailers such as Marks and Spencer (
) [ID:nLI426587], but the weaker pound is attracting more than 2 million tourists to London each month, Visit London data showed.
Moreover, a valuation conducted last month in preparation for its rights issue showed the value of its portfolio actually rose by 175,000 pounds between end-March and April 15 on the back of steady rental income prospects, giving further fuel to calls that the two-year property slump was coming to an end.
Its group rental income rose to 30.5 million pounds, an increase of 1.6 million pounds from the first half last year.
The board has recommended a 50 percent year-on-year increase in the interim dividend to 7.5 pence, reflecting stable income levels and strong tenant demand for its property. (Reporting by Sinead Cruise; Editing by John Bowker and Andrew Macdonald) ($1=.6465 Pound) (See www.reutersrealestate.com for the global service for real estate professionals from Reuters)
