GM plans to shift production a problem - US senator
2009-05-19 19:14:00.0
(Reuters) - A proposal by General Motors Corp (
) to close factories and ship some production overseas has become a "real problem" in negotiations with auto workers on concessions, but changes in the company's business plan are possible, two U.S. lawmakers said on Tuesday.
Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat and staunch industry ally, said he believes the Obama administration task force overseeing GM's restructuring would like the company and the United Auto Workers to reach a deal, rather than force a government-imposed solution.
"I think it's a real problem but I hope the UAW can negotiate it," Levin told Reuters as hopes for a quick deal this week appeared to be in question.
"If they can't, it will be up to the White House as to whether they accept a GM plan which has a reduction of the kind we're talking about," Levin said.
GM's business plan, being reviewed by the task force overseen by the White House and the Treasury Department, proposes to close 16 plants and cut 21,000 factory jobs, shifting some production to China, Korea, Mexico and Japan.
The issue raises the political stakes for the administration on preserving U.S. jobs during recession and on corporate outsourcing, especially when GM has received more than $15 billion in taxpayer support since January.
GM faces a June 1 deadline from the task force to prove it can be viable or face probable bankruptcy. The automaker's business plan is also being reviewed by bondholders who have been asked to sign off on a debt-reduction plan. [ID:nN19441558]
Levin and other lawmakers like Representative Gary Peters, also of Michigan where U.S. automakers are based, support UAW objections to the business plan and believe changes to it are possible as negotiations intensify.
"When I met with GM and raised this issue, they repeated that nothing was carved in stone, nothing was firm - it was all the basis for negotiation," Peters said in an interview. "They led me to believe there was certainly some room for change and there was a possibility of some plants staying open, depending on how negotiations go."
Neither GM nor the UAW would comment on the talks that also include discussions on finalizing deals to reduce GM's retiree health care costs and to bring UAW wages in line with those of workers at foreign automakers operating plants in the United States.
GM Chief Executive Fritz Henderson and UAW President Ron Gettelfinger met with administration officials on Tuesday for a second straight day at the Treasury Department after meeting at the White House with President Barack Obama along with other executives on the administration's new fuel efficiency and emissions programs.
Leo Gerard, president of the United Steelworkers, told Reuters on Tuesday that he will seek a meeting with the autos task force.
"I would like a chance to appear before them," Gerard said. "We want to talk about it so they understand the kinds of jobs that are directly affected - not just auto jobs."
Gerard said GM factory closures would hit steelworkers, the container industry, tire and rubber manufacturers, trucking and paper firms.
Automakers are the second-largest user of carpeting behind homebuilders, Gerard added. (Reporting by John Crawley; Editing by Tim Dobbyn)
