Bank of America prices 800 million shares: source
2009-05-19 18:35:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue  EDT
), ordered by federal regulators to plug a $33.9 billion capital shortfall, priced roughly 800 million shares at $10 each on Tuesday, a person familiar with the transaction said.
The sale price is 11.1 percent below Bank of America's $11.25 closing price on Tuesday. Bank of America shares initially fell several percent in after-hours trading, but later recovered to $11.18.
A sale of stock may help Bank of America raise capital, after regulators told Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis the bank needed to bolster its finances following a government "stress test" of its ability to handle a deep recession.
Ten of the 19 large U.S. banks that underwent such tests were told this month to raise capital, with Bank of America's $33.9 billion shortfall being by far the largest.
Bank of America has taken $45 billion of TARP money, including $20 billion in a bailout to help it absorb Merrill Lynch & Co, which it bought on January 1.
The Charlotte, North Carolina-based bank has said it hopes to repay its TARP money within the next couple of years, and in any event before Lewis retires. He has suggested he would like to retire by the time he turns 65, which would be in 2012.
The bank has said it plans to raise roughly $17 billion more from asset sales and other means. Last week, it sold part of its stake in China Construction Bank Corp (
On Monday, a Citigroup analyst said Bank of America may have raised $3 billion to $4 billion from a common stock sale. It was not immediately clear how this offering may relate to Tuesday's pricing.
(Reporting by Elinor Comlay and Jonathan Stempel; Editing by Tim Dobbyn and Steve Orlofsky)
