BNY Mellon to help foreign firms list in China
2009-05-19 08:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Multinationals as well as Hong Kong-listed Chinese firms are keen to list in China, which is creating significant opportunities for the Bank of New York Mellon Corp (
), the world's biggest custodian and issuer of depositary receipts (DRs), a senior executive said on Tuesday.
The U.S. bank has been working closely with the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the country's two stock exchanges, advising them on the rollout of China Depositary Receipts (CDRs), which represent foreign companies' equity shares, said Christopher Kearns, Asia Pacific head of DRs.
Earlier this month, China agreed to let qualified foreign companies list on its stock exchange through issuing shares or depository receipts, paving the way for foreign firms such as HSBC Holdings Plc (
"Every multinational company would be interested in looking at Shanghai as a potential listing environment," Kearns said in an interview. "We've been in discussion with many companies who are very interested in accessing the market."
He added that helping foreign firms list in China would be a natural evolution of New York Mellon's business in the country, where it has helped about 60 local companies issue American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) during the past 15 years.
Bank of New York Mellon expects to play a big role in China's planned CDR programs, aiming to act as a custodian of foreign firms' shares and to partner with local banks on CDR issuance.
However, China is expected to take a cautious approach in letting individual overseas firms list. It may first allow for the launch of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that would include a basket of foreign securities.
"It's quite a big step for Shanghai and Shenzhen (exchanges) and the Chinese government is of course very deliberate in these decisions," Kearns said.
But the benefits of a China listing by multinational companies such as McDonald's (
) are obvious, he said.
Apart from access to capital and the ability to broaden their shareholder base globally, issuing CDRs could help foreign firms with China operations to promote their brand awareness locally and allow them to compensate local employees with stock options, Kearns said.
