UPDATE 1-Emerson order trends worsened in April
2009-05-19 09:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Industrial conglomerate Emerson Electric Co (
) said on Tuesday order trends worsened in April from the prior month, and said economic trends in Europe took "another step down," suggesting global industrial demand remains weak despite signs of stabilization.
Underlying orders were down about 25 percent in April, excluding an 8 percent negative impact from currency, and were down 30 to 35 percent overall, Emerson said in a regulatory filing.
"Unfortunately, we have seen a sequential deterioration in our underlying orders from the month of March to April and believe orders are still reflecting a volatile economic environment where customers continue to reduce inventory, backlogs and business spending levels," Emerson said in the filing.
In March, underlying orders were down 15 percent to 20 percent, excluding currency.
Emerson's commentary marked the first important data for U.S. industrial companies since the first-quarter earnings reporting season, JP Morgan analyst Stephen Tusa said in a research note, adding that Emerson's 2009 profit target may be "at risk."
Emerson showed "a surprising sequential weakening in the month of April, despite continued optimism on a 'stabilization' ... suggesting that destocking and cancellation trends are continuing," Tusa said.
The trailing three-month order rate in Emerson's process management segment, its biggest by sales, was down 25 percent.
Emerson also said it saw broad weakness across its industrial automation businesses, while weak housing and construction markets hurt its climate technologies and tools and appliances segments.
Orders were also down in its network power business, despite a boost from continued investment by China in telecommunications and wind power.
Emerson shares were down 2.3 percent to $34.01 in morning trading on the New York Stock Exchange. The shares are up more than 40 percent from their lows on March 5, outperforming the broader stock market. (Reporting by Nick Zieminski; Editing by Brian Moss)
