China export hub can cut emissions 12-24 percent: WWF
2009-05-19 08:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Carbon dioxide emissions in the Pearl River Delta, China's export engine, could be cut by up to 24 percent through low-cost, green technologies, according to a study released on Tuesday by WWF.
In a pilot study last July on three factories making garments, plastics and electronics, the global conservation group found that cuts in annual emissions of between 12 to 24 percent were possible at "low cost and with quick returns."
Extrapolating the results across the vast industrial region, which makes around a third of China's total exports and is dubbed China's "world's factory," WWF estimated potential carbon reductions at 74 million metric tons -- exceeding the annual emissions of Austria or Sweden.
That reduction can be achieved "if measures promoted under the LCMP (low carbon manufacturing program) are scaled up to all factories in the region," said Karen Ho, an expert at WWF Hong Kong.
It would "unlock huge potential to increase energy efficiency and reduce emissions" in the region, she said in a statement.
Previous attempts have been made to clean up the Pearl River Delta's rusting industries, which have caused widespread water and air pollution in the region, including nearby Hong Kong.
Voluntary schemes urging firms, intent on maintaining wafer-thin cost advantages in the Pearl River Delta, to invest in costly green technologies haven't proven popular so far.
WWF, however, said even low-investment solutions such as solar panels and improved electricity and air system management, could bring cost savings.
A four-tier carbon labeling system, touted by WWF to rate a product's carbon efficiency, might also bolster a product's attractiveness among discerning customers.
"The garment sector is under intense price competition. If manufacturers can credibly demonstrate their green qualifications it will provide them with an additional competitive advantage, other than price," said Philip Yeung, the Executive Director of the Clothing Industry Training Authority in the WWF statement.
To ease the region's longstanding pollution woes, the Guangdong and Hong Kong governments agreed in 2002 to implement emission reduction targets by 2010, including cuts of 40 percent for sulfur dioxide emissions. Green groups, however, have been critical of the limited cuts while expressing concerns the targets might not be met next year.
(Reporting by James Pomfret; Editing by Bill Tarrant)
