HSBC says consolidation to spur buying opportunity
2009-05-19 07:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
HSBC Holdings Chief Executive Michael Geoghegan speaks next to HSBC Asia Pacific Chairman Vincent Cheng (L) during an informal shareholders meeting in Hong Kong May 19, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Tyrone Siu
Tue  EDT
), Europe's biggest bank, expects to see consolidation in the financial industry later this year and in early 2010 that will create buying opportunities, Chief Executive Michael Geoghegan said on Tuesday.
The London-based lender expects the remainder of the year to be uncertain, with further corporate defaults on loans, another executive with the bank said in Hong Kong.
"We always have a history of acquiring things while others have to sell," Geoghegan said in a response to a question at a shareholders' meeting.
), sources have told Reuters.
Earlier on Tuesday, HSBC said it won approval for its Chinese unit to issue yuan currency-denominated bonds in Hong Kong, becoming one of the first two foreign banks able to do so as China looks to develop the offshore market for the yuan.
Stuart Gulliver, head of global banking and markets at HSBC, said the bank would look to issue a yuan bond in July, depending on market liquidity, and the size of the offering would be in line with those of similar issues in Hong Kong by Chinese lenders.
Five mainland Chinese banks have issued yuan currency bonds in Hong Kong since 2007, raising 20 billion yuan ($2.93 billion) between them, Gulliver said.
HSBC's London shares gained 4.23 percent on Tuesday after finishing 6.3 percent higher in Hong Kong amid a broad market rally.
(Reporting by Clare Jim, Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
