India vote rounds off improving BRICs outlook
2009-05-19 15:23:00.0
(Reuters) - The prospect of a stable government in India able to push further economic reform is just what foreign investors needed to round off an improving outlook for the world's four largest emerging economies.
The BRICs -- Brazil, Russia, India and China -- all now have wind behind their economic sails. It is blowing at variable strengths, to be sure, but it bodes well for the asset class and the world economy for which these countries are now critical.
Consider this, with an investor in mind:
-- Brazil's economy is driven primarily by global commodity prices, which have started rising. The commodity-tracking Reuters/Jefferies CRB Index .CRB has gained more than 7 percent so far this month.
As for India, look no further than Morgan Stanley's decision this week to move overweight for the first time following the clear cut political victory of the ruling Congress Party.
"Our economics team expects the decisive election victory by the Congress Party to lead to progress in areas including public finances, acceleration in infrastructure spending, augmentation of government resources through privatization and implementation of de-regulation for the pension funds, banking and retail sectors," it said in a client note.
and the 3 percent gain in the rupee, the largest one-day rise in more than a decade.
"It has been one of the most peaceful and arguably successful (Indian elections) of recent times. That should be good for investors' confidence," said John Cleary, chief investment officer of Focus Capital.
The BRIC grouping was, of course, originally an investment marketing concept.
The four countries share a number of factors, including huge populations, relatively untapped potential and the likelihood that they will compete on global terms with the Group of Seven industrial nations within a few years.
But because they arguably have as many differences than similarities, investors over time have tended to allocate between them rather than treating all four as equal.
During the boom years, for example, it was not unusual to find investors favoring, say, commodities-producing Brazil over importer India, with its relatively closed market and large fiscal deficit.
India has had mixed success this year. The Sensex rose a solid but underperforming 26 percent between year-end and the election results. By contrast, Brazil's stocks
were up more than 30 percent, China's
45 percent and Russia's
In dollar terms as measured by MSCI, however, India has fared better.
"Foreign investors were worried," said Bob Parker, vice chairman at Credit Suisse's asset management arm. The election "has removed uncertainty."
None of this is to say, however, that the BRICs have a free run ahead of them.
Russia, for example, has yet to clean up its banking sector problems and there is no guarantee that the Chinese stimulus will let Beijing meet its goals.
"The markets have moved a very long way," said Andrew Milligan, head of global strategy at Standard Life Investments. "There is a large amount of good news in the price."
Credit Suisse, meanwhile, pared back some of its exposure to China and Brazil in March, using profits from around three months of gains to diversify into other countries in the respective regions.
"The downside is limited and by September and October the markets will have recovered to higher levels than what we have now," he said.
