Frenchman in Bo Xilai case in good shape: embassy
2012-07-24 12:44:00.0
(Reuters) - A Frenchman at the heart of China's biggest political scandal in two decades has met French diplomats in Beijing and is "in good shape", a spokesman for the French embassy said on Tuesday.
Patrick Henri Devillers, 52, flew from Cambodia, where he had been living for several years, last week to China, where he is wanted as a witness in the case, the latest twist in a high-profile case already shrouded in mystery.
Devillers was detained last month in Cambodia at the behest of Beijing because of his suspected business links to the wife of deposed Chinese politician Bo Xilai, Cambodian authorities have said.
Cambodia said Devillers, an architect, had left of his own free will.
The embassy spokesman in Beijing, who declined to be named, told Reuters by telephone that Devillers had met two French diplomats on Saturday.
"He seems in good shape and had a good morale," he said. "So far as my colleagues could see, he seemed quite fine."
"We are in regular contact with him, and we are also in contact with the Chinese authorities on this subject, both in Beijing and in Paris," he said.
It is unclear why Devillers would voluntarily cooperate with China, a country run by a single political party with no independent judiciary.
The spokesman gave no details on what grounds Devillers is in China, whether he is being investigated for any alleged offence or his whereabouts. Asked whether Devillers had access to a lawyer, he said he could not comment.
Bo's wife, Gu Kailai, has been named by China as a suspect in the murder last November of British businessman Neil Heywood. Both Heywood and Devillers were known to be close to her.
"What we know is he said the following in Cambodia: that he would cooperate with the Chinese justice (system)," said the embassy spokesman in Beijing, adding that Devillers had told the French embassy in Phnom Penh that he "had an agreement with the Chinese" that he would collaborate with the Chinese judiciary.
China had promised Devillers would only be needed for up to 60 days before being allowed to return, according to Cambodia's information minister. Asked whether he could confirm this, the embassy spokesman in Beijing said he could not comment.
China has not said publicly whether Devillers is accused of any crime. Neither Bo nor his wife, Gu, has been seen in public since mid-March, when Bo was stripped of his post as Communist Party secretary of Chongqing in southwest China.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee, Editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Why is it a question about Devillers¡¯ physical condition? ¡°a country run by a single political party with no independent judiciary.¡± In this country two parties mask a substantial similarity while in China ¨C one party masks deep divisions. What really changes or is accomplished by the naming or formalization of political divisions? One thing the Chinese seem to avoid is throwing vast amounts of money at the political process. One would think the two or three parties or positions would be the least to which any political process could be reduced but that doesn¡¯t seem to happen all that often. Newly formed Governments, like those in Iraq and Afghanistan, seem to start with a flurry of parties. Their stability seems to come about when the parties merge and agree on core principals and combine their strengths and reinforce relative weaknesses. It is odd how many countries like the monarch (president)? Prime Minister model for heads of state and yet, unlike Britain, both step down with a change of government. I can understand the reasoning for the Monarch/Prime minister model but have a hard time understanding variations on the theme. Around the world, there seem to be a lot of variations on the theme and the President/Prime minister model is common and also very confusing to this American. It¡¯s odd how so many governments keep the monarch position, (the president or premier) in a sense, and yet there are few monarchs left. Is there anywhere something like the ¡°Idiot¡¯s Guide to Parliamentary Process and the naming of Heads of State¡±? I hope there is an easier way to figure that out without having to read all the constitutions of the entire world? I¡¯m just trying to understand the meaning of a few words and the dictionary isn¡¯t much help. Political discussion can be parsed and reassembled in a variety of ways and yet the results can be about the same. One just has to figure out how the various systems distribute powers and authorities, but that is the hardest part.
Jul 26, 20129:37am EDT--
