China to formally garrison disputed South China Sea
2012-07-22 10:27:00.0
(Reuters) - China's powerful Central Military Commission has approved the formal establishment of a military garrison for the disputed South China Sea, state media said on Sunday, in a move which could further boost tensions in already fractious region.
China has a substantial military presence in the South China Sea and the move is essentially a further assertion of its sovereignty claims after it last month upped the administrative status of the seas to the level of a city, which it calls Sansha.
Sansha city is based on what is known in English as Woody Island, part of the Paracel Islands also claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan. China took full control of the Paracels in 1974 after a naval showdown with Vietnam.
Though Sansha's permanent population is no more than a few thousand, mostly fishermen, its administrative responsibility covers China's vast claims in the South China Sea and its myriad mostly uninhabited atolls and reefs.
Earlier this month, hundreds of Vietnamese demonstrated in Hanoi against China's establishment of Sansha city and its invitation to oil firms to bid for blocks in offshore areas that Vietnam claims as its territory.
The South China Sea has become Asia's biggest potential military flashpoint as Beijing's sovereignty claim over the huge area has set it against Vietnam and the Philippines as the three countries race to tap possibly huge oil reserves
Southeast Asian states sought to save face on Friday with a call for restraint and dialogue over the South China Sea, but made no progress in healing a deep divide about how to respond to China's growing assertiveness in the disputed waters.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Wan Xu in Beijing and Hanoi newsroom; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What is the U.N. position on countries taking possession of territory by force of arms? Oh, I almost forgot. China has a veto on U.N. positions. Sansha 1; South China Sea 0.
Jul 22, 201211:31am EDT--
This has nothing to do with the UN or veto power. This has everything to do with another display of raw power as China bullies its neighbors. The Chinese economy has sputtered, and the Government is taking a temper tantrum on the South China Seas dispute.
Jul 22, 201211:59am EDT--
It isn¡¯t looniness ¨C there are over a hundred border disputes around the globe ¨C Gibralter, many African borders, about a dozen along the current Chinese border. There¡¯s even a border dispute between Canada and Denmark over some rock spike in the Arctic Ocean. If there¡¯s a parallel to the Chinese unilateral action, it¡¯s the Argentine seizure of the Falkland Islands.
Jul 22, 20121:00pm EDT--
