WRAPUP 2-JA Solar results miss, Solarfun loss beat forecasts
2009-05-19 14:57:00.0
(Reuters) - China's JA Solar Holdings Co Ltd (
Its smaller Chinese peer, Solarfun Power Holdings Co SOLF.O, also posted a loss for the quarter but beat analysts forecasts, lifting its share price 21 percent.
Both companies, which make photovoltaic solar products that turn sunlight into electricity, said average selling prices (ASPs) would drop in the second quarter, although declining costs for the key raw material, polysilicon, had provided some relief.
Still, even with second-quarter ASPs for solar modules likely to be down 20 to 25 percent, prices appear to have stabilized, Anthea Chung, JA Solar's chief financial officer, told a conference call.
JA Solar has about 400 megawatts of solar module orders in its backlog, and expects to reach its end-year production capacity target of 875 MW, but will likely not reach its 2009 revenue target of $830 million to $952 million.
"Due to the lack of near-term visibility ... and the rapidly changing environment, it is difficult for us to determine how this year will shape up," Chief Executive Officer Samuel Yang told the conference call.
"We think that credit will flow soon after government stimulus money, which is scheduled to flow later this year, perhaps the third quarter," said Jesse Pichel, an analyst with Piper Jaffray.
That would help boost prices the companies get for both solar cells and modules, he said, and would also likely lift polysilicon costs.
Chinese makers of solar equipment have been among the hardest hit in the industry as currency fluctuations and their high-cost polysilicon contracts hurt margins, but newly announced incentives in China could help spark some demand there.
), the world's largest maker of photovoltaic modules, said on Tuesday it will build a 1.5 MW rooftop solar system in HuaiAn City that it expects will qualify for the new Chinese subsidies.
Both JA Solar and Solarfun saw costs for polysilicon drop sharply, with spot market prices declining by 40 to 50 percent from the fourth quarter as new production came on line and demand from solar makers shrank.
Solarfun said its polysilicon costs in the quarter fell by 25 percent, and JA Solar said it had signed new contracts to buy supplies below the $75 per kilogram spot price. Polysilicon had reached nearly $500 more than a year ago.
"As polysilicon prices come down rapidly, it is actually the companies that did not secure it at higher prices that are benefiting," said Simmons & Co analyst Burt Chao.
JA Solar posted a first-quarter net loss of $28.2 million, or 18 cents per share, compared with a profit of about $22.6 million, or 15 cents per share, a year ago, missing analysts' forecasts of a loss of 6 cents per share.
Solarfun, which announced Chief Executive Harold Hosken would leave the company on June 30 but provided no details on a successor, reported a loss of $1 million, or 2 cents per American Depositary Share, and a 43 percent drop in revenue to $100.1 million, but beat forecasts for a loss of 17 cents per share.
Shares in JA Solar pared earlier losses to trade ahead by 2 cents at $3.26 per share on the Nasdaq, while Solarfun shares jumped 21 percent to $6.13.
(Additional reporting by Nichola Groom in Los Angeles, Adveith Nair, Sakthi Prasad and Arup Roychoudhury in Bangalore, editing by Dave Zimmerman)
