HK shares close at 7-? month high in liquidity bounce
2009-05-19 04:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares rallied 3.1 percent to close at a 7-? month high, in its third straight day of gains on Tuesday as signs of an early turnaround in the global economy lured investors in droves.
) shot up 6.3 percent to finish at four-month closing high of HK$68.35, partly helped by news that the Britain-based lender and Hong Kong's Bank of East Asia (
) was up 5.6 percent at HK$24.55, while another London-based lender Standard Chartered (
ended up 521.12 points at 17,544.03, its highest closing level since October 2008.
"This rally is entirely liquidity-driven. Technically, the index closed above its 250-day moving average, which is a good sign, but fundamentally it is pretty overvalued," said Peter Pak, vice-president at BOCI Research.
Turnover jumped to HK$83.7 billion from Monday's HK$66.4 billion. Surging volumes sent shares in bourse operator Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing (
"With macro data finally stabilising, liquidity flows into risk assets have increased steadily in the past few weeks, giving equity markets a boost. We are still not convinced of a longer-term recovery, although we think this rally can continue for several months," said Andrew Orchard, analyst with RBS, in a note on Tuesday.
Other market watchers agreed that the more than two-month rally in Hong Kong, fuelled by increased confidence in a quick turnaround in the Chinese economy, was likely to be interrupted only in event of an external shock, potentially from the U.S.
of top mainland companies was up 2.9 percent at 10,072.51 as the Shanghai Composite Index
scaled a 9-? month high.
The premium gap between yuan-denominated A shares listed on the mainland bourses and their Hong Kong-listed counterparts, H shares, dropped to 28.3 percent with top bank stocks including ICBC (
Asia's largest oil and gas producer PetroChina (
) advanced 5 percent, while offshore oil specialist CNOOC (
Other resources stocks also gained as analysts noted signs of improving global demand for raw materials, mainly driven by China.
), better known as Chalco, jumped 7.6 percent, while Angang Steel (
Shipping stocks extended their rally after the Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI, which tracks rates to ship dry commodities, hit a fresh 2009 high on Monday powered by Chinese demand for iron ore, coal and grains.
), the country's largest shipping conglomerate, advanced 9.1 percent, while another dry bulk shipper China Shipping Development (
Bucking the broad trend, China Resources Land Ltd (
) dropped 2.8 percent to HK$14.84 after the property developer tapped the market for HK$4.3 billion (US$551 million), through a share sale to a major shareholder, to raise capital for future acquisitions for its land bank and for working capital.
The company placed its shares at HK$14.34 each, a 6.03 percent discount to Monday's closing price.
