RPT-US House panel begins debate of climate change bill
2009-05-18 16:06:00.0
(Reuters) - A key committee in the U.S. Congress on Monday kicked off what promises to be a rollicking, week-long climate change debate as Democrats aimed to advance a bill to slow global warming and Republicans maneuvered to kill a central part of a plan they say will hurt the U.S. economy.
With copies of the 932-page proposal sitting at the desks of the 59 members of the House of Representatives Energy and Commerce Committee, the debate started in the same partisan tone that has dominated the climate change debate for years.
"Our economy is suffering, we are squandering billions of dollars to feed our addiction on foreign oil and our environment is overheating," said Chairman Henry Waxman, who wants to put the bill to a committee vote by Friday.
Waxman later predicted to reporters that the measure would be approved by his panel. "I believe we'll have a majority to report the bill out," he said.
Waxman said that with its mandate to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 17 percent by 2020 from 2005 levels, the bill would shore up the U.S. economy with new high-tech jobs while also avoiding the ecological disasters some scientists forecast because of global warming.
But Representative Joe Barton, the senior Republican on the committee, warned Waxman, "You are about to embark on an episode of putting the entire American economy, which is the world's largest, through an absolute economic wringer."
With a 36-23 majority in the committee, Democrats are likely to defeat Republicans' moves to kill the "cap and trade" system at the heart of the bill that would be imposed on U.S. companies, many of which support such a plan.
Under cap and trade, an ever-decreasing number of carbon pollution permits would be available and companies that still lack the technology to meet the lower pollution requirements could buy more permits from companies that no longer need their quotas.
President Barack Obama has put climate control legislation at the top of his agenda and would like to see significant progress by December, when world leaders meet in Copenhagen to mull their next coordinated steps on reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
If Waxman is successful this week, other House committees would also review the legislation, which Democratic leaders want passed by the full House by August.
The fight would then shift to the Senate, where a minority of opponents would have an easier time stopping a bill.
Democratic Representative Edward Markey, one of the main authors of the House bill, said lawmakers should seize on the legislation that would encourage the wider use of cleaner alternative fuels like solar and wind power.
"Do not be fooled by the siren song of low gas prices. Just as we know the American economy will come roaring back, so too do we know that a return to $4 a gallon gasoline looms just over the horizon," Markey told the committee.
Republicans warned that the United States runs the risk of putting stringent new environmental requirements on companies without assurances that major foreign polluters, such as China, will do the same. That, they argue, would only lead to a transfer of jobs from the United States to countries with cheaper production costs.
"What good is it for the planet to shift production from here to China?" asked Republican Representative Fred Upton.
December's meeting in Copenhagen is aimed at launching an international pact to succeed the Kyoto Protocol, which gave developing countries such as China wider latitude to emit carbon dioxide than developed countries.
That is one of the reasons the United States, under then-President George W. Bush, did not sign onto Kyoto.
