PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - May 19
2009-05-18 16:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
Queensland toll-road operator BrisConnections BCSCB.AX will this week appoint a debt collection agency in an attempt to recover unmet second instalment payments on the company's units. BrisConnections has received A$111.7 million in payments, less than a third of the A$390.4 million due to be paid last month. The company's undewriting agreement with Macquarie Group (
) requires BrisConnections to use its 'best endeavours' to recover the money for six months after the due payment date. Page 17.
) yesterday announced a profit downgrade, with net profit for the year to the end of June expected to be between A$160 million and A$165 million. Chief executive Derek O'Neill said it was difficult to predict future sales as retailers are cutting orders and focusing on the short-term. Billabong also announced that it is to undertake a capital raising which could provide the company with up to A$290 million, with the issue priced at a 29 percent discount. Page 17.
) should be forced to demerge its retail and wholesale operations, and that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission should be given greater powers to ensure a demerged retail arm of Telstra does not receive discounts from the wholesale arm. Optus's arguments are contained in a 100 page submission that the company will provide to the Federal Government's review of the telecommunications industry. Page 18.
) has announced a A$60 million capital raising, with the funds to be used to reduce gearing and take advantage of growth opportunities. The institutional offer is priced at A$6.25 a share, a 15.5 percent discount to the stock's last closing price, while a share purchase plan will be launched next month. The move comes as the company yesterday announced a first-half net profit of A$32.3 million, and reaffirmed its full-year earnings forecast of between A$37 million and A$42 million. Page 19.
) yesterday announced the introduction of interline arrangements which will allow Qantas Airways and Jetstar Asia to offer integrated ticketing to all Jetstar Asia ports. The arrangements, which will be in place from the start of August, are intended to create a Singapore hub for the two airlines which will increase Jetstar Asia's global profile and provide Qantas with feeder routes for its flights to and from Singapore. Jetstar yesterday said it plans to introduce similar arrangements with a number of other carriers. Page 18.
Metals and mineral trading company China Minmetals has gained approval from a key Chinese regulator for its proposed purchase of most of mining company OZ Minerals' (
) assets for US$1.2 billion. However, Minmetals still requires a number of approvals from the Chinese government, as well as Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board and OZ shareholders, who are to vote on the deal at the company's annual general meeting on June 11. Page 18.
A report by the Australian Farm Institute has recommended that the number of wool-selling centres be reduced due to a decline in wool production. Although around 90 percent of Australia's wool is sold through five wool centres, the amount of bales sold has dropped from almost 3.5 million in 2000 to around 2.5 million in 2008. Peter Morgan, of the Australian Wool Industries Secretariat, says that the decline 'has really precipitated the need for a bit of thinking about it.' Page 19.
The Federal Government yesterday defended the performance of Australia's corporate regulators, which have come under question as investors have lost, or are prevented from accessing, around A$30 billion in savings following the financial crisis. A spokesperson for Nick Sherry, the Minister for Corporate Law, yesterday said that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission 'continues to do a good job in very difficult economic times.' Page 15.
Directors of Queensland-based whitegoods group Kleenmaid face civil and criminal charges after administrators found that 'there is a high likelihood they have been trading while insolvent for a period of time.' Kleenmaid now has debts of more than A$100 million. Administrator John Greig, of Deloitte, said the company had continued making sales, taking deposits and even full payments from customers, 'right up until we were appointed'. Page 16.
Collapsed investment bank Babcock & Brown (B&B) has sold its stake in an unlisted North American infrastructure fund, including management rights, as the firm continues its process of winding-down. The fund's current management team will move to its new operator, John Hancock Life Insurance. The funds raised from the sale will go to B&B International Pty Ltd, which owns B&B's assets and is seeking to repay lenders. Neither party would confirm the price paid for the asset. Page 17.
) is being sued by a gambler who lost almost A$1.5 billion over 15 months at Melbourne's Crown Casino. The Victorian Supreme Court was yesterday told that Gold Coast property developer Harry Kavakas was regularly flown to Melbourne by the company to gamble, and was also given gifts of between A$30,000 and A$50,000 in 'lucky money' to spend at the casino. Mr Kavakas says executives at the casino were aware that he had a gambling addiction and should have banned him. Page 17.
Charles Bright, chairman of Australia's oldest company, Australian Agricultural Company (AAco) (
), has announced that he will not stand for re-election at the company's annual meeting on June 12. Mr Bright's announcement follows pressure from AAco's largest shareholder, Dubai-based food group IFFCO, which has been seeking the removal of three board members, to be replaced by a board ticket which includes the former chairman and acting chief executive of AAco, Nick Burton Taylor. Page B2.
Two Federal Government advisors to the proposed national broadband network say the network cannot be created without the involvement of telecommunciations company Telstra. Professor Rod Tucker and Professor Reg Coutts were part of the expert panel which advised Communications Minister Stephen Conroy on the decision to create a fibre to the home network. Speaking to an industry forum last night, Professor Coutts said, 'Telstra is part of the Australia infrastructure...and they have to be part of the solution.' Page B3.
Shares in mining company Gloucester Coal GCL.AX yesterday surged nearly 18 percent to A$6.94 a share following Friday's announcement by Gloucester GCL.AX that it considered an amended takeover offer from Hong Kong's Noble Group (
) as superior to its proposed merger with Whitehaven Coal. In February, Noble had originally offered A$4.85 a share for Gloucester, however, on Friday the group increased its bid from A$6 a share to A$7 a share. The takeover is expected to be completed by mid-June. Page B3.
A report by administrators to collapsed investment company Allco Finance Group has recommended that creditors 'vote in favour of winding up each of the companies'. In the report, Anthony McGrath and Joseph Hayes of McGrathNicol say that 'the companies are insolvent and no acceptable deed of company arrangement has been proposed.' Creditors to Allco are owed around A$1.145 billion, including A$505 million of unsecured and subordinated loans. Page B3. --
