ST-Ericsson eyes seasonal demand pick up
2009-05-18 00:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Alain Dutheil, President and CEO of ST-Ericsson, addresses the Reuters Technology summit in Paris May 18, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Charles Platiau
Mon  EDT
) said it was seeing demand return to a normal seasonal pattern after the market slumped in the first quarter, but added the outlook for the second half was still uncertain.
"From Q1 on, the demand will follow the usual seasonal pattern. Visibility for the rest of the year, Q3, Q4, is still very poor," ST-Ericsson Chief Executive Alain Dutheil said, speaking at the Reuters Global Technology summit in Paris.
"In Q2, compared with Q1, we are expecting double-digit growth. We see this market growing in Asia, and when I say Asia I mainly mean China."
ST-Ericsson reported last month sales of $391 million for its first two months in business and an operating loss of $98 million, and announced a new savings program to cut annual costs by $230 million by the second quarter of 2010.
It is cutting 1,200 of its roughly 8,000 staff -- mostly in Europe and North America.
"For us the topline is absolutely the priority. Our R&D costs are huge, to justify that we need the topline," Dutheil said, adding the firm had enough cash for 2009.
"Between now and the rest of the year we don't need any additional funding. The last thing we want to do is go back to our parents and ask for more money," Dutheil said.
He forecast for the crises to lead to more consolidation in the wireless chip market, but said ST-Ericsson would focus on the integration of its businesses.
"Companies which do not have any cash are going to be in trouble," he said. "That will be the driving force for the consolidation."
"Our portfolio is rich... in certain areas its a bit too rich," Dutheil said.
The company blamed the weak first quarter results on weaker consumer demand, especially in Europe and particularly for mid-ranged feature phones, exacerbated by handset makers reducing inventory of components.
"We will probably see feature phones decreasing quarter after quarter and year after year," he said.
ST-Ericsson supplies the world's top handset makers except Motorola MOT.N. Its clients include Nokia (
), Samsung (
), Ericsson's joint venture with Sony (
), Sony Ericsson, and LG Electronics (
(Additional reporting by Paul Sandle; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter and Hans Peters)
