Asia worries over H1N1 flu vaccine production
2009-05-18 03:40:00.0
(Reuters) -Asia has shown steely resolve in fighting the H1N1 flu virus with health checks and quarantines, but with more than 90 percent of flu vaccine production capacity located in the West, is less prepared than it wants to be.
Vaccines are a key weapon to fight any pandemic influenza virus, but the bulk of production is sited in Europe and the United States and health experts and officials in Asia find that worrying.
"Do you actually think that in a really serious pandemic that vaccines will be shipped here (to Asia)?" said a microbiologist in Hong Kong, who declined to be identified.
Even though the new H1N1 appears mild for now, countries like India and Indonesia are keenly aware of their vulnerability and have recently ordered local companies to develop H1N1 vaccines.
But Asia lacks sophisticated medical technology, experts say, and while it takes an experienced vaccine maker in the west four to six months to prepare a vaccine, Indonesian drugmaker Bio Farma said last week that it would need two years.
Lily Sulistyowati, an official with Indonesia's Ministry of Health, said that if the country failed to come up with its own vaccine, it would push the WHO to distribute stocks fairly.
"We had the experience with bird flu where we had to line up to buy Tamiflu behind other countries that didn't have any cases. Why should we line up when we have the most cases?" she said.
"We hope that won't happen again, we should be given priority if we have more cases than other countries," she told Reuters.
V.M. Katoch of the Indian Council of Medical Research told Reuters: "We'll do our best ... We are very confident, whatever we try to do, we do succeed."
In Geneva on Saturday, health negotiators from rich and poor countries failed to clinch a full deal on virus sharing to produce vaccines, but said they had closed gaps on some tough political issues.
The WHO, whose data lags national tallies, earlier put the number of confirmed worldwide cases of the flu strain, a mix of swine, human and avian viruses, at 8,480, with 72 deaths.
Ben Cowling, public health expert at the University of Hong Kong, said it would be interesting to see whether governments in Asia forge deals with western vaccine makers.
"Many western countries have agreements with vaccine makers. That's why phase 6 alert is a big deal because it means we promise to buy vaccines from you, it gives the vaccine producers the assurance that they need (to go into production)," he said.
Nearly all of the world's flu vaccine factories - which produce 350 million doses annually - are in Europe and the United States. They can ramp up production to 500 million doses, but that's not enough for a global population of over 6 billion.
China, Japan, South Korea and Australia produce seasonal flu vaccines but these are mostly for domestic use and their combined share make up less than 10 percent of the world's total.
"We are in touch with vaccine makers and have expressed our interest to buy. But there are no details as they have not started production yet," a Hong Kong government spokeswoman said.
Tawee Chotpitayasunondh, head of Thailand's unit for strategic planning in fighting pandemic flu, said Thailand was "thinking about vaccine' but this was not a priority.
"The priority now is how to stop the spread among people to prevent secondary spreading, that is what we are fighting now."
Major vaccine makers in the west have already obtained the new H1N1 virus samples from the WHO, but the organization has not decided whether manufacturers should shift their production away from seasonal flu vaccines to targeting H1N1.
(Additional reporting by Matthias Williams in New Delhi and Sunanda Creagh in Jakarta; Editing by Valerie Lee)
