FTSE rises at midday; banks, energy gains
2009-05-18 07:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index was 0.7 percent higher at midday on Monday led by the banking sector as Lloyds Banking Group (
) gained after Victor Blank said he would step down as chairman, while energy stocks rose with crude prices.
was up 29.75 points at 4,377.86 points in choppy trade having been down as low as 4,307.72 points earlier.
"The banks have taken the initiative this morning. They have been sold off over the past two weeks and recovering some of that ground this morning," said Rob Griffiths, equity strategist at Cazenove.
"We have just come from the reporting season so it is not clear what is going to drive the market this week... it will be interesting to see if we can hang on to the current level or will give up ground like last week," he said.
) up 1.6 percent. Victor Blank is to step down as chairman of the group in the next year, following intense criticism of the part-nationalised British bank's purchase of troubled rival HBOS. [ID:nLH227272]
), which has a controlling stake in Thomas Cook, plans to ask the German government for 650 million euros ($885 million) in loan guarantees and a loan from the German state development bank. [ID:nLF952872]
"The end of last week saw it (Thomas Cook) report revenues up around 12 percent for the first six months, suggesting it has weathered the storm much better than many were expecting for the travel sector," said David Jones, chief market strategist at IG Index.
"Since November last year, the share price has risen by around 80 percent and at the moment some traders seem to be banking on this recovery continuing and eyeing a run back to the highs for this year, just above 300 pence," he said.
) recovered from earlier falls to gain 0.3 percent. The Times said shareholders at the oil giant have increased the pressure on it to reconsider its pay policy as a second institutional investor promised to vote against the directors' remuneration report at tomorrow's annual meeting.
), Tullow Oil (
), which has significant exposure in India was up 3.1 percent, while miner Vedanta Resources (
) gained 2.4 percent, as the Indian company was bolstered by the decisive victory for the ruling coalition in that country, calming fears of political instability.
Otherwise mining stocks took the most points off the index as copper MCU3=LX fell 1.1 percent, with Rio Tinto (
An executive at the global miner said roughly half of China's iron ore mines may have shut down since prices for that commodity dropped, opening the door for other low-cost producers to supply China with the key mineral for making building materials. [ID:nHKG256795]
), Antofagasta (
), BHP Billiton (
), Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation (
