GLOBAL MARKETS-Global stocks rise on Lowe's results, dollar ebbs
2009-05-18 13:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Global stocks rose and the dollar weakened on Monday after results at No. 2 U.S. home improvement retailer Lowe's spurred hopes an economic recovery may be closer than previously thought and boosted risk appetite.
Rising equity markets, particularly on Wall Street, and strengthening crude oil prices fueled the view that the global downturn may be slowing.
Oil prices rose almost 4 percent as violence in top African crude exporter Nigeria and a fire at a key U.S. East Coast refinery revived supply concerns. A weaker dollar and an early equity surge also helped spur crude's gains.
Treasury debt prices eased as U.S. and European stock markets rallied sharply, denting demand for safe-haven government bonds.
"I think all of the moves are consistent with the general improvement in risk appetite," said Omer Esiner, senior market analyst at Ruesch International in Washington.
Financial stocks climbed on hopes that recession in key global economies was abating, while energy stocks tracked the price of crude oil higher.
But the better-than-expected quarterly earnings at Lowe's Companies Inc (
) and its upward forecast revision for the full year on signs it saw that the slumping U.S. housing market may be ebbing provided the biggest catalyst for Wall Street's rally.
"Lowe's numbers come at a time when the market is looking to rebound. It does show that consumer spending in general has been a bit stronger than many had anticipated," said Steve Goldman, market strategist at Weeden & Co in Greenwich, Connecticut.
"Stocks tend to react with a very sharp rally six months before the recession ends. Hopefully what we are basing this investment on does materialize," he added.
At 1 p.m. EDT (1700 GMT), the Dow Jones industrial average
traded up 187.81 points, or 2.27 percent, at 8,456.45. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 19.86 points, or 2.25 percent, at 902.74. The Nasdaq Composite Index
jumped 34.45 points, or 2.05 percent, at 1,714.59.
), up 10.4 percent, also underpinned the market.
In Europe, banking led the rally, with Standard Chartered Bank (
) rising 8.5 percent, Commerzbank (
"The market is bouncing back after last week's weakness and is showing that investors are prepared to increase their risk appetite and continue to buy into the prospects of improving economic background," said Henk Potts, equity strategist at Barclays Stockbrokers.
The dollar fell against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY down 0.36 percent at 82.65.
rose 0.30 percent to $1.3533, while the dollar
June Bund futures FGBLc1 hit a session high of 121.55 on slim volume, but the benchmark turned lower in late trade.
Gold prices slipped as stocks bounced, denting the precious metal's appeal as a haven from volatility in other markets. Spot gold prices XAU= fell $9.45 to $921.25 an ounce.
Copper rose as equities rallied, but the market was still hounded by worries about oversupply in China, the world's top copper consumer.
Copper MCU3 for three-month delivery in London was $4,521 a tonne, up from $4,450 on Friday.
Most Asian stock markets fell overnight on concerns about corporate profits and uncertainty over the global economy, but Indian shares surged after the ruling coalition's sweeping election victory on Sunday.
India's benchmark 30-share BSE index
surged more than 17 percent before trading was halted, pulling the MSCI index of Asian stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS to a 1.2 percent gain, although most individual markets fell.
Japan's Nikkei average
fell 2.5 percent. (To read Reuters Global Investing Blog, double-click
