EU urges Australia to make deeper carbon cuts
2009-05-18 04:34:00.0
(Reuters) - The European Union urged Australia on Monday to make deeper cuts to greenhouse gas emissions than it has committed to so far, saying the success of climate change talks this year depended on tougher action from rich nations.
Australia has committed to a 5 percent cut in carbon emissions by 2020, from 2000 levels, with an "aspirational" goal of cutting by 25 percent if other developed nations agree to similar reductions at the talks in Copenhagen in December.
Greens have dismissed the 5 percent commitment as ineffectual and well behind other rich nations such as EU states, which have pledged to cut emissions of carbon dioxide to a fifth below 1990 levels by 2020, the world's most ambitious climate policy.
Asked if the EU would call on Australia to turn its 25 percent conditional goal into a firm commitment, EU Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs said: "Definitely, because we need support if Copenhagen should be a success."
"If developed countries are dragging their feet, it's impossible to convince the developing world (to take action)," he said in an interview on a visit to Australia where he was due to meet Australia's energy and climate-change ministers.
"If Australia makes 25 percent an official target, at least it will be comparable with the EU target," Piebalgs said.
The Copenhagen summit is being held to hammer out a replacement for the Kyoto protocol, which set binding targets for developed nations to cut emissions by an average of 5 percent below 1990 levels over the five years to 2012.
Developing nations, which blame the rich for stoking global warming by burning fossil fuels since the Industrial Revolution, are calling for the rich world to make far deeper cuts than currently being considered in the run-up to Copenhagen.
In return, there is pressure for the giant emerging economies of China and India to also curb growth of their emissions.
Commissioner Piebalgs also spoke about the EU's need to safeguard its energy security and diversify away from Russian gas supplies, which were cut off to hundreds of thousands of European homes last winter because of a pricing row between Russia's monopoly gas exporter, Gazprom, and Ukraine.
Europe imports a quarter of its gas from Russia, largely through pipelines that cross through Ukraine.
Piebalgs spoke optimistically of an alternative gas pipeline, known as Nabucco, which would bring gas from Central Asia to the EU through Turkey, and said he was confident of clinching a required inter-governmental agreement with Turkey within weeks.
"We are quite advanced on the inter-governmental agreement," he said, saying there were few remaining sticking points with Turkey and these should be resolved by end-June.
The agreement, which would set out conditions for putting gas through Nabucco, would remove one of the main uncertainties for potential investors in the 3,300-km, $10-billion pipeline.
Piebalgs, who will attend an EU-Russia summit in Khabarovsk later this week, said the EU was also looking to boost its purchases of liquefied natural gas (LNG), which is essentially frozen for easy shipment and thawed at its destination.
The EU could boost its LNG reliance from only about 4 percent of energy consumption now to as much as 15-20 percent, he added, noting that LNG supplies were likely to come not only from the Gulf, where Qatar is ramping up LNG capacity, but also Australia.
"There is a new tendency for LNG after the crisis we have just had," Piebalgs said, referring to the January shutdown of Russian gas supplies piped through the Ukraine.
(Reporting by Mark Bendeich; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
