Japan's Murata says growth stable
2009-05-18 06:29:00.0
Japan's Murata says growth stable | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Japan's Murata says growth stable
Mon  EDT
), which counts Nokia and Nintendo among its clients, said customer orders had stabilized and it expects to gain market share from smaller rivals.
"We don't expect demand to fall as quickly as it did in January and February again," President Tsuneo Murata said, citing fiscal stimulus measures and a pickup in demand for products such as cell phone parts in China. "We believe the worst is behind us."
Demand for its mainstay ceramic capacitors -- tiny electronic parts that control the flow of electricity -- picked up in March and April, as makers of mobile phones, flat TVs and PCs restocked on components after reining in orders in January and February.
Murata, the world's largest maker of ceramic capacitors, expects monthly demand in both May and June to match April's orders.
But analysts say that they can't yet see the light at the end of the tunnel, pointing to idled factory lines following over-expansion during boom years.
"Do you see the economy now as a glass half full or half empty? Is this the start of a recovery, or is it a false start?" said Mizuho Investors Securities analyst Yuichi Ishida.
"Final consumer demand has not yet come back, and until then, it's just too soon to say anything for certain."
Global shipments of ceramic capacitors fell around 25 percent in the year to March, even as the industry's production capacity rose, according to industry group Japan Electronics and Information Technology Association.
Murata's output is now 70 percent of its capacity, compared with over 100 percent last year and up from a dismal average 45 percent utility rate in January-March.
Murata, which is forecasting its second straight annual operating loss this year, will seek growth in part by grabbing market share from other loss-making rivals, given the prospects for a slow and gradual recovery, Murata told the Reuters Global Technology Summit in Tokyo.
"We need to shift more production overseas to countries such as China and Malaysia," to hedge against currency fluctuations, and better compete, Murata said.
Murata's Japanese rivals include Kyocera Corp (
), TDK Corp (
). It increasingly competes against low-cost products from South Korea's Samsung Electro-Mechanics Co Ltd (
) and Taiwan's Yageo Corp (
The boom years that prompted the components maker to set out a sales target of 1 trillion yen by 2015 have passed, he said. That target has now been put on hold.
But Murata, which plans to shave 42 billion yen ($440 million) in costs this year, has the scale to better shoulder price falls as it waits for a full recovery, its president said.
"Some companies are facing very heavy losses, and we plan to move in to take market share," Murata said.
Murata, which reported an operating loss of 10.3 billion yen in the year ended in March, expects a loss of 8 billion yen this financial year, by breaking even in October-March.
Shares of Murata, founded by Murata's father Akira Murata in 1944, have eked out a gain of 5.4 percent this calendar year, underperforming a 17 percent rise in the Tokyo bourse's electrical machinery index .IELEC.T.
(Reporting by Mayumi Negishi; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
