White Young Green cuts 324 jobs, warns of lower profit
2009-05-18 10:40:00.0
(Reuters) - White Young Green Plc WHY.L, a British construction consultancy, said it cut 324 jobs, closed seven regional offices and warned of lower profit for the full year on related costs, sending its shares down as much as 21 percent.
The company, which cut the jobs and closed the regional offices during December end to April end, said it might shut five more regional offices before fiscal year ending June 30.
It expects to incur about 8 million pounds ($12.2 million) cash charges related to redundancies, 12 million pounds of property costs that would mainly be non-cash and 30 million pounds of goodwill related costs for the year, Finance Director David Wilton told Reuters in an interview.
"We would like to think that we would need no further restructuring, but the world is a very unpredictable place," Wilton added.
The company had 24 regional offices in Great Britain and Ireland at the beginning of the year and had 2,940 employees as of April 30 with most of them in the United Kingdom.
White Young Green, which had warned in February that it might breach a banking covenant, said the restructuring was to cut costs and that it was still in talks with its lenders. The company's debt position remained flat from December levels.
"This leaves the group in a position where it will almost certainly breach its banking covenants," analyst David Brockton of brokerage Arbuthnot said in a note to clients.
White Young Green's debt was 91.5 million pounds as of December 31.
It has a 112 million pounds banking facility and two bond facilities of about 35 million pounds in total, Wilton said.
"We remain of the view that White Young Green was poorly positioned heading into the current downturn, given its business and geographic spread, and this is reinforced by today's update," analyst Brockton said, adding that "the risk profile remains high."
The company, which has been on a cost-cutting spree since last year -- cutting 235 jobs in the first half of the fiscal year and scrapping dividend to preserve cash, is now looking to expand internationally to boost its revenue.
Chief Executive Paul Hamer said the company plans to expand its business globally with about 50 percent of the total revenue coming from international operations by 2012, compared with an 18 percent contribution currently.
White Young Green plans to invest 1 million to 2 million pounds over the next three years as it looks to expand in markets in the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia in the Gulf, the CIS region and China, Hamer added.
The order book for the company's international business is currently at about 111 million euros ($149.3 million).
For the year ending June, White Young Green sees adjusted pretax profit of about 12 million pounds.
Analysts on average were expecting a pretax profit before amortization and exceptional items of 16 million pounds, according to Reuters Estimates.
( Editing by Gopakumar Warrier, Himani Sarkar)
