INTERVIEW-SAP sees stronger Asia-Pacific H2 order book vs H1
2009-05-18 06:08:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
), the world's largest maker of business software, expects its Asia-Pacific order volume to improve as Asian economies are bottoming out from a severe downturn, its regional head said on Monday.
Geraldine McBride, president of SAP Asia-Pacific and Japan, told Reuters in an interview that as the Asian economy has bottomed out, companies, including small to medium-sized businesses, have started to invest in technology and software.
"If you look at our pipelines, looking forward towards the end of this year, pipelines are actually getting stronger," she said. "We expect the second half of the year to be better for us than the first half has been." However, McBride said the average value of the new orders are generally lower compared to the previous ones as it came more from small to medium-sized businesses rather than big enterprises.
SAP's Asia-Pacific operation posted a 12 percent drop its first-quarter revenue on constant currency basis, far worse compared with the 6 percent fall in the global revenue of the firm which a market value of about $49 billion.
The Asia-Pacific operation generated a first-quarter revenue of 297 million euro ($399.3 million), out of 2.36 billion euro worth of global revenue.
She said about three quarters of the Asia-Pacific revenue came from China, Japan and India, and among the sectors that she sees as "bright spots" during this tough economic conditions are telecommunications, retail, utilities and public services.
((harry.suhartono@thomsonreuters.com; +65 6403 5658; Reuters Messaging: harry.suhartono.reuters.com@reuters.net)
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com)) Keywords: SAP/ORDERS
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nSIN410144
