Energy, drugmakers dent FTSE, Barclays up on BGI
2009-05-15 00:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Weakness in energy stocks and drugmakers outweighed gains in miners, leading Britain's FTSE 100
to close down 0.3 percent on Friday, while Barclays (
Britain's blue-chip index closed 14.47 points down at 4,348.11, after rising 0.7 percent on Thursday to snap a three-day losing run.
Trade was thin going into the weekend and investors were wary about putting big positions on the table, with just 77 percent of the volume of the last 90 trading days transacted.
"There's a bit of a sense of nervousness around, there were bits and pieces of data around," said Jim Wood-Smith, analyst at Williams de Broe in Exeter, pointing to U.S. retail sales and jobs data earlier in the week.
Data on Friday was slightly more upbeat, however. U.S. consumer prices were unchanged in April from March and industrial output declined at a slower pace, hinting that the worst phase of the recession may be over.
) saw the biggest fall, down 3.9 percent after UBS cut its rating to "sell" from "neutral" and Nomura cut its price target and assigned it a "reduce" rating.
Drugmakers also retreated, with AstraZeneca (
) losing 0.8 percent, GlaxoSmithKline (
) fell 2.3 percent retreating from gains made earlier in the week, with investors looking ahead to results on Tuesday.
), people familiar with the matter said.
"Selling off an asset like that rather makes you worry what might be beneath the bonnet," said David Morrison, market strategist at GFT Global Markets.
Other banks were mixed, HSBC (
The European Union's statistics office Eurostat said on Friday the gross domestic product of the 16 countries using the euro shrank 2.5 percent quarter on quarter for a 4.6 percent contraction year on year -- the worst on record.
) gained 2.7 percent after the miner said it remained committed to a planned $19.5 billion tie-up with Chinese metals firm Chinalco, responding to talk that the deal may be revised to let more shareholders take part in a rights issue. [ID:nSYD453576]
Elsewhere in the sector, BHP Billiton (
), Anglo American (
), Kazakhmys (
), Lonmin (
) rose 1.9 percent, extending Thursday's 13 percent rise after beating expectations on operating profit and resuming the payment of a final dividend.
) was set to ask the German government for up to 700 million euros ($948.9 million) in loan guarantees, financial sources close to the matter said on Thursday. (Reporting by Simon Falush; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
