Missile shield may spark China nuclear upgrade: officer
2012-07-18 17:48:00.0
(Reuters) - China may need to modernize its nuclear arsenal to respond to the destabilizing effect of a planned U.S.-backed missile defense system, a senior Chinese military officer said on Wednesday.
"It undermines the strategic stability," said Major General Zhu Chenghu of China's National Defense University about the U.S.-led development of a missile shield, which has also alarmed Russia.
"We have to maintain the credibility of deterrence," he told Reuters on the sidelines of a panel discussion on nuclear disarmament, referring to the military doctrine that an enemy will be deterred from using atomic arms as long as he can be destroyed as a consequence.
The United States is spending about $10 billion a year to develop, test and deploy missile defenses, which would include a European shield as part of a layered system.
But Moscow says the interceptors that the United States and NATO are deploying will be able to destroy its own warheads in flight by about 2018, upsetting the post-Cold War balance of power.
China "will have to modernize its nuclear arsenal" because the deployment of a missile defense system "may reduce the credibility of its nuclear deterrence," Zhu told the seminar.
"Therefore Beijing will have to improve its capabilities of survival, penetration ... otherwise it is very difficult for us to maintain the credibility of nuclear deterrence."
Joseph Cirincione, president of the Ploughshares Fund, a global security foundation, said any American military planner in Zhu's position would say the same.
Planned anti-missile systems and other advanced weapons in the future could "make it theoretically possible for the U.S. to launch a first strike on China, knock out most of its 40 or so long-range missiles, and intercept any left that were launched in response," he said.
"Missile defenses, however benign they appear to the side building them, always force others nations to improve and increase their offensive weapons," Cirincione, who also took part in Wednesday's discussion in Vienna, said in an e-mail.
The United States and Russia hold the vast majority of the world's nuclear weapons. China, France and Britain are the three other officially recognized nuclear-armed countries, but their arsenals are much smaller.
China closely guards information about its nuclear weapons. However, the U.S. Department of Defense has said that China has about 130-195 deployed nuclear-capable ballistic missiles.
(Additional reporting by Jim Wolf in Washington; Chris Buckley and Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Andrew Heavens)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
We come up with a system to DEFEND against nuclear attack and China wants to come up with a better way to ATTACK! Does everyone get the message now? So why were the Russians so set against this and what did Obummer mean, ¡°I can do more once re-elected¡±. Just asking?
Jul 18, 20127:56pm EDT--
When you have the ability to defend against nuclear attack, you no longer need to worry about the possible retaliation when launch an nuclear attack first. That¡¯s why Russia and China are worried.
Jul 18, 201211:13pm EDT--
DEFENSIVE systems make offensive systems more potent. Novices don¡¯t understand this. All you have to do is look at the 1972 ABM Treaty the US signed to see we were (rightfully) against defensive systems at that time. It¡¯s akin to a gladiator is more powerful with a shield and a sword (rather than just a sword). The ballistic missile threat from Iran and North Korea is virtually nil. But gives us a false pretext to develop ballistic missile defense. The one who would most be affected would be china with their relatively tiny nuclear arsenal. Their reaction is natural given their focus on the economy. Indeed if they were acting like hardliners they would welcome our ballistic missile defense development as a pretext to upgrading and increasing their deterrent.
Jul 18, 201212:30am EDT--
