REFILE-UPDATE 3-Temasek offloads BofA stake; eyes emerging mkts
2009-05-15 05:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Singapore's Temasek [TEM.UL] sold its 3 percent stake in Bank of America (
) in the first quarter of this year, taking a loss of around $3 billion in the process, as the state investor refocuses on emerging markets.
Temasek invested in Merrill Lynch and other global banks during the early phase of the credit crisis but, like most sovereign wealth funds, was burnt by losses as the crisis deepened.
But the U.S-centric Bank of America may not have been the first choice of investment for Temasek, given the state investor focuses on global companies that aim to grow in Asia, sources familiar with Temasek's thinking told Reuters.
Singapore's bigger sovereign wealth fund, GIC, also invested in Citigroup (
"Bank of America is no longer a global franchise. It's pulled out from a lot of its overseas operations," said Mike Kerley, a London-based fund manager at Henderson Global Investors.
He added the U.S. Federal Reserve's recent 'stress tests' on banks showed BofA needed to raise new capital, which would dilute the holdings of existing investors such as Korea Investment Corp.
Bank of America's (
), Singapore's DBS (
) and Indonesia's Bank Danamon (
"It seems they feel the China growth story is better than the 'green shoots' of recovery in the U.S.," said Song Seng Wun, chief executive of CIMB Research in Singapore.
He said Temasek probably sold its BofA holdings to cap its exposure to financial stocks, which at the end of March 2008 was 40 percent of its portfolio.
Temasek CEO Ho Ching, who will be replaced by former BHP Billiton (
) Chief Executive Chip Goodyear in October, said this week that the investment firm has debated whether to raise its long term Asia exposure, and add new exposures to other geographies.
Temasek's portfolio fell 31 percent between March 2008 and November last year to S$127 billion ($87 billion).
The global financial crisis has sent Temasek's portfolio value back three years to the level seen in March 2006, said Ho, who is the wife of Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, in a speech posted on Temasek's website on Thursday.
For the speech, click:
At that time, its stake in Bank of America was worth around $2.6 billion, or $13.7 a share.
Bank of America had an average price of $6.8 during the first quarter, according to Thomson Reuters data, giving Temasek a loss of about $1.3 billion since January.
