Q+A-Unrest in Nigeria's oil heartland
2009-05-15 00:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Nigeria's main militant group has declared an "all-out war" in the creeks of the Niger Delta after a military offensive against one of its major camps in the heart of Africa's biggest oil and gas industry.
WHY IS THE DELTA IMPORTANT?
The Niger Delta, a network of thousands of shallow creeks opening into the Gulf of Guinea, is the heartland of a 1.9 million barrels per day (bpd) oil industry which makes Nigeria the world's eighth biggest oil exporter.
), U.S. energy firms Exxon Mobil (
), France's Total (
) and Italy's AGIP (
The United States, the world's top energy consumer, has said it wants the Gulf of Guinea to supply a quarter of its crude oil imports by the middle of next decade. China depends on Africa for some 30 percent of its oil imports.
WHO ARE THE MILITANTS?
MEND launched a series of attacks, dubbed a six-day "oil war", in September and carried out a daring raid on Royal Dutch Shell's Bonga platform 120 km (75 miles) offshore last June.
But it has failed to carry out any attacks as spectacular as those of early 2006 when it first burst onto the scene, knocking out almost a quarter of Nigerian output in a matter of weeks.
HOW SERIOUS ARE THE THREATS?
But it has issued such warnings several times before, most recently in late January when it warned of a "sweeping assault" on the oil and gas industry which never materialised.
The latest fighting is nonetheless the most serious in more than eight months, targeting militant leader Government Tompolo's camp in Delta state. Security contractors expect MEND to try to launch retaliatory attacks against the oil industry.
WHAT IMPACT FOR THE NIGERIAN ECONOMY?
Oil revenue fell to around $1 billion in January from last year's monthly average of around $2.2 billion.
OPEC set Nigeria an implied production target of 1.67 million barrels per day (bpd) that came into effect in January, but trade sources said before the latest violence they expect exports to average 1.83 million bpd in June.
Nigeria's installed production capacity is 3 million bpd.
WHY IS THE REGION SO HARD TO SECURE?
The gangs behind kidnappings, oil theft and violent crime in the delta were first hired by local politicians to intimidate opponents or rig elections and rights groups say their political links mean they go unpunished.
The policy of successive governments to "settle the boys" -- pay militant leaders off for laying down their weapons -- has exacerbated the problem, giving armed gangs greater leverage.
The spoils of a lucrative trade in stolen oil, which is funding the militants, benefits not only the criminal gangs but also local politicians and some members of the security forces, meaning there is little impetus to break the status quo.
(For full Reuters Africa coverage and to have your say on the top issues, visit:
