FACTBOX - Bullish and bearish factors behind oil price
2009-05-15 07:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil prices fell from a high of $147.27 last July to a low of $32.40 in December, the weakest since early 2004.
OPEC and the U.S. government's Energy Information Administration have also lowered their demand forecasts.
Potentially providing some support, the U.S. summer driving season is about to begin, although gasoline demand has so far been below last year's levels.
Weak demand has generated huge stockpiles of refined products and unrefined crude not just on land, but also at sea.
In addition, well over 100 barrels of crude and refined products are estimated to be stored in super-tankers.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries has agreed to reduce supply by 4.2 million barrels per day compared with last September's output.
Analysts have estimated it has delivered around 80 percent of its promised cuts, which has helped the oil market to rally from last December's lows.
At its last meeting in March, the group said it would limit its action to tighter compliance with existing curbs, rather than introducing new ones in spite of the high levels of inventory and weak demand.
To help heal the world economy, it said it was willing to accept a price lower than its preferred level of around $75 a barrel.
SPECULATORS/INVESTORS?
Last December's slide to the lowest oil price for nearly five years coincided with a massive deleveraging by some market players.
Still some investors never left, while others have crept back in, but cautiously.
could have recovered too quickly and commodities such as oil, which have experienced an unusually close correlation to the stock markets, could find themselves chasing them back down again.
From an investor viewpoint, commodities' traditional benefits of being an inflation hedge and a means to diversify a portfolio are not valid for now. Inflation is not yet an issue and the current trend is for all asset classes to move upwards together.
HEDGERS?
Some consumers, such as shipping lines, have also been reported to be hedging against further price rises by buying contracts for future delivery, potentially adding upward momentum.
Others, however, are thought to have stayed away because of uncertainty about future price direction.
The new H1N1 swine flu virus could still mutate into a more virulent form, the World Health Organization has said.
To assess the possible demand impact, Deutsche Bank in a note looked to the world's experience of SARS as a guide.
Between November 2002 and June 2003, there were more than 8,000 SARS victims world-wide, include 775 who died from the illness. The greatest impact for energy was on the use of jet fuel.
The demand surge associated with the record price rally was led by an economic boom in China, which, according to IEA data, in 2003 overtook Japan to become the world's second biggest fuel consumer after the United States.
As most of the world has sunk into recession, Chinese growth has stayed positive, but the pace of expansion -- and its commodity demand -- has slowed.
"The market appears willing to believe a 6-8 percent GDP growth level in 2009 is positive (for China) -- a subdued growth rate by recent standards and not a sustained driver of commodity prices in the years ahead," said Richard Batty of Standard Life Investments.
Dollar-denominated commodities, such as oil, can be more attractive to investors when the dollar is weak.
Oil companies as well as OPEC members have said that to ensure investment in the most costly new production, an oil price of around $75 a barrel is needed.
