FTSE ticks down as weak oils, pharmas weigh
2009-05-15 06:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's leading share index edged lower in mid-session trade on Friday as oil producers and drugmakers slipped, while Barclays (
By 1046 GMT, the FTSE 100
was down 2.14 points, or 0.05 percent at 4,360.31, after rising 0.7 percent on Thursday to snap a three-day losing run.
"The recovery rally is over and we're now seeing the market settling down. More uncertainty as the general newsflow this week has been negative. The green shoots of recovery have a touch of frost on them," said Howard Wheeldon, senior strategist at BGC Partners.
) slipped 0.8 percent and 1 percent, respectively.
Drugmakers also retreated, with AstraZeneca (
) losing 1 percent, GlaxoSmithKline (
) surged 8.2 percent after a source familiar with the matter said the lender was in talks to sell its asset management arm, Barclays Global Investors.
"Selling off an asset like that rather makes you worry what might be beneath the bonnet," said David Morrison, market strategist at GFT Global Markets. .
Within the banking sector, HSBC (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
), Lloyds Banking Group (
) advanced 1.2 percent to 5.6 percent. Investors also looked ahead to U.S. consumer prices for April, due at 1230 GMT, and industrial production data, due at 1315 GMT, which will provide a further gauge to the state of the world's largest economy.
The euro zone economy shrank more than expected in the first quarter, led by a drop in output in Germany.
"It's no surprise. These figures are going to be bad. Where ever we look there isn't a nation that's not been affected by the downturn. It's about countries working on a strategy together to build a way out," said Wheeldon.
The European Union's statistics office Eurostat said on Friday the gross domestic product economy of the 16 countries using the euro shrank 2.5 percent quarter-on-quarter for a 4.6 percent contraction year-on-year -- the worst on record.
Japanese machinery orders fell in March, showing companies remained reluctant to spend despite signs that recession may have hit bottom. [ID:nT14922]
) gained 3.2 percent after the miner said it remained committed to a planned $19.5 billion tie-up with Chinese metals firm Chinalco, responding to talk that the deal may be revised to let more shareholders take part in a rights issue. [ID:nSYD453576]
Within the sector, BHP Billiton (
), Anglo American (
), Xstrata XTA.L, Kazakhmys (
), Lonmin (
) rose 2.8 percent, extending Thursday's 13 percent rise after beating expectations on operating profit and resuming the payment of a final dividend.
) was set to ask the German government for up to 700 million euros ($948.9 million) in loan guarantees, financial sources close to the matter said on Thursday. (Editing by Mike Nesbit)
