UPDATE 2-Hansard Global sees trading in line with its view
2009-05-15 08:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Hansard Global Plc (
), a long-term savings provider, said on Friday trading continued to be in line with its estimates despite a 30 percent fall in new business volumes in the 10 months to May, and forecast continued profitability.
The move will reduce future margins and European Embedded Value (EEV) operating profit for the period to March 2009, by 2 million pounds ($3.05 million), Hansard said. The company, with target markets in Europe and South America, plans to expand operations in Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, Chief Financial Officer Vince Watkins told Reuters, adding that "China is a long-term market we are considering".
"We are not particularly interested in growing by acquisition. We would rather grow organically," Watkins said.
"The Asian (market) hasn't really been damaged by the financial crisis as some other markets and we expect that to be more buoyant, quicker than Europe for example," he said.
Isle of Man-based Hansard, which is a holding company for Hansard Europe Ltd and Hansard International Ltd, offers offshore insurance policies that are sold through intermediaries to global customers.
Brokerage Panmure Gordon cut its price target on Hansard's stock to 204 pence from 235 pence to reflect the lower Embedded Value forecast, but maintained its "buy" rating.
"We have cut our EEV operating earnings (forecast) to reflect a more cautious outlook, changes in policyholder charging and a possible experience assumption change for the current year," analyst Barrie Cornes said in a note.
Hansard, which has 230 employees, plans to reduce expenses by 1 million pounds by June 2010, CFO Watkins said.
Senior management took a 5 percent salary cut since February and the company has frozen hiring at its head office which employs about 170 people, Watkins added.
Hansard said as of May 1, assets under administration since Dec. 31 fell 5.9 percent to 1.03 billion pounds.
Foreign exchange fluctuations and investment performance of policyholder funds during January-March reduced the cumulative total European Embedded Value (EEV) profit by about 5 million pounds from Dec. 31, 2008, Hansard said.
"Whilst we expect continuing uncertainty in the financial markets to restrain new business flows in the near term, the apparent strengthening of global capital markets over the last few weeks has, however, caused an increased level of interest in Hansard's products among intermediaries and their clients," the company said in a statement.
At 1215 GMT, Hansard shares were down 6.7 percent at 135.25 pence on the London Stock Exchange. ($1=.6565 Pound) (Editing by Mike Miller and Gopakumar Warrier)
