BMO sees Canada M&A activity picking up
2009-05-15 15:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Merger and acquisition activity in Canada is likely to pick up toward the end of the year as companies shift their focus from survival to growth, Daniel Barclay, head of Canadian M&A at BMO Capital Markets, told Reuters in an interview on Friday.
Barclay, a veteran of Canada's mergers and acquisitions sector, said Bank of Montreal (
"We are very bullish on our franchise here. If anything, we are investing in our M&A business," Barclay said from BMO's offices in the heart of Toronto financial district.
Bank of Montreal is one of Canada's Big Five bank and one of the country's most active in mergers and acquisitions activity. BMO Capital Markets is the bank's corporate and institutional unit.
The bank was involved in 45 completed Canadian M&A transactions in 2008, among them a $5 billion deal between Husky Inc (
), Canada's No. 3 oil explorer and refiner, and British oil major BP Plc (
Barclay, who in his role at BMO Capital Markets helped advise BP on the integrated oil sands and refining joint venture with Husky, said M&A activity in general in Canada has fallen off since the global economic crisis scattered investors.
Global banks have also cut back on their presence in Canada as they focus efforts on dealing with global financial turbulence, and Barclay said BMO has even hired professionals let go by other banks worldwide.
"U.S. and global banks have retreated from Canada substantially," he said.
But that doesn't reflect a smaller customers base in resource-rich Canada, where Barclay said energy and metals and mining will lead the charge in mergers and acquisitions.
"Energy is going to be very very big," he said.
Fear of survival and greed for growth tend to motivate most mergers and acquisitions, depending on the state of the overall economy, and Barclay said he was seeing a shift toward the latter trend as companies thought in terms of expansion.
He said most players in the Canadian market today are strategic buyers looking for growth, rather than equity firms involved in buyouts.
He said China, where the bank completed its first transaction in 1818, is particularly attractive as it moves to turn trillion-dollar holdings into hard assets and as it takes advantage of cheap buying opportunities in mining and energy.
"M&A activity in China is very robust these days," he said.
(Reporting by Pav Jordan; editing by Rob Wilson)
