Kuwait looks to raise stake in China's ICBC
2009-05-15 10:25:00.0
Kuwait looks to raise stake in China's ICBC | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Kuwait looks to raise stake in China's ICBC
The company logo of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) is displayed at a news conference in Hong Kong March 25, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
SWEIMEH, Jordan
Fri  EDT
SWEIMEH, Jordan
) (ICBC) and invest in Chinese energy and industrial sectors, its finance minister said on Friday.
Speaking to Reuters on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum at the Dead Sea in Jordan, Mustapha al-Shamali also said the world's fourth-largest oil exporter would not reduce its dollar-denominated assets.
Kuwait is home to one of the world's largest sovereign wealth funds, the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA).
"We have an investment in ICBC. We have a portion of it and we are going to enlarge it," Shamali said in an interview, without disclosing the size of the stake.
"We could get our share from the market," he said.
Kuwait, the only state in the oil-exporting Gulf region that does not peg its currency to the U.S. dollar, was not reducing its dollar assets and was keeping some liquid assets to meet its budget requirements, Shamali added.
"No, we are not going to reduce dollar assets," Shamali said. "We've kept some liquid and some semi-liquid to fulfill our requirements for the budget."
Kuwait, which relies on oil export revenues for about 94 percent of total state revenues, is likely to post a budget deficit this year after oil prices plunged from peaks of almost $150 a barrel last July.
Shamali said Kuwait was also looking at making investments in other sectors in China, while also pursuing agreements in Southeast Asia to guarantee food security for the desert state that relies predominately on imports of food.
The Gulf state had not, however, discussed buying agricultural land, he said.
"We are looking for investment in any field of either industry or infrastructure, or any of these kinds of investments. We do have some investment there," Shamali said of Kuwait's plans in China.
Without giving specifics, Shamali also said Kuwait had reached an agreement with China on a refinery project in which it would hold a 10 percent stake.
(Writing by Daliah Merzaban in Dubai; Editing by David Cowell)
