Emerging market funds draw investors' cash -EPFR
2009-05-15 13:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Investors poured cash into emerging market equities for a 10th straight week and the increase in risk appetite is spreading more broadly, Boston-based fund tracker EPFR Global said on Friday.
"There is a general creeping up on the risk curve. ... At the country level, China has been and remains the driver of this upwelling of positive sentiment," Cameron Brandt, global market analyst at EPFR Global, said.
China has embarked on a two-year $585 billion spending plan to boost its economy, which is having a better-than-expected impact in the first half of the year, a central bank official said last Sunday. [ID:nBJD000772]
Brandt noted that while net new cash into emerging market equity and bond funds for the week ended May 13 was broad-based, large inflows into a handful of large exchange traded funds boosted overall figures for western Europe and U.S. equity funds.
"You always wonder what's going on there as this is typically a tactical rather than strategic investment," he said.
However, much of the money that went into U.S. small and mid-cap funds was actively managed and could be taken as a sign of improved investor sentiment, Brandt said.
Dedicated long-only emerging market equities had net inflows of $3.587 billion, bringing the 10-week total to $18.64 billion. China-focused equity funds took in a net $624.6 million. As a result, Asia ex-Japan funds took in a net $1.908 billion.
Investor risk appetite was strong enough to put $1.144 billion into high yield bond funds, a record draw since EPFR started tracking weekly data.
Money market mutual funds were largely bypassed in the latest week with just $540.7 million in net new cash, though this broke a four-week streak of outflows.
"The outflow from the money market funds, which we view as an indication that 'cash on the sidelines' was being put back into the market, were fading since early March, indicating that the recent surge in investors' risk appetite has its limits," Dmitry Sentchoukov, Dresdner Kleinwort emerging market strategist, wrote in a research note.
While money flowed into funds, overall for the week MSCI's broad emerging markets stock index slipped 0.31 percent .MSCIEF and the American benchmark Standard & Poor's 500 stock index fell roughly 3.75 percent
Commodity/materials, energy, financials and real estate-focused sector funds took in cash, indicating investor focus on growth.
Emerging market debt took in $325.1 million in net new cash, the majority of which went into local-currency denominated funds (+$180.34 million).
