China paper decries pretext to intervene in Syria
2012-07-16 22:19:00.0
(Reuters) - There can never be a pretext for foreign intervention in Syria no matter how good the intentions, China's top newspaper said on Tuesday ahead of a U.N. Security Council vote on a Western-backed resolution that threatens sanctions.
The resolution, proposed by Britain, the United States, France and Germany, would extend a U.N. observer mission in Syria for 45 days and place international envoy Kofi Annan's peace plan under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter.
Chapter 7 allows the 15-member council to authorize actions ranging from diplomatic and economic sanctions to military intervention. U.S. officials have said they are talking about sanctions on Syria, not military intervention.
While China has yet to explicitly say how it will vote on Wednesday on the new resolution, comments in the Communist Party mouthpiece the People's Daily suggest it will not be won over, with Beijing nervous about any suggestions of intervention.
"Foreign interference to bring about regime change to forcefully prevent a humanitarian disaster sounds like a fully just and responsible thing to do," the newspaper said in a commentary.
"But is it not a humanitarian disaster that more than a decade after regime change that there are attacks and bombings which there are no way to stop?" it added, in an apparent allusion to Iraq.
"Several wars that have happened in this new century prove again and again that 'promoting democracy' and 'humanitarianism' are just a pretext for large foreign powers to seek private gain," the People's Daily commentary said.
The People's Daily said Western military backing for Libya's rebels should be "a warning to us all" about the perils of foreign involvement.
"Do those who eulogize the 'meritorious statesmen' at NATO who went to war to end the Gadaffi era think about the tens of thousands of innocent people carried off by the flames of war?" it said.
The commentary was published under the pen name "Zhong Sheng", meaning "Voice of China", which is often used to give the paper's view on foreign policy issues.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The voice of China in this case is the voice of Wisdom and true humanism. Wheas the voice of the NATO barbarians is the voice of opportunism, hate, racism, and treachery. Anyone who reads the article wih open mind cannot fault the voice of China about Syria, Iraq, and Libya. Alas these last 2 countries wee subjected to he murderous rape of the West.
Jul 16, 201212:09am EDT--
Surprise, surprise.
Surprise, surprise.
And again we are shocked, dismayed and disappointed.
Rather, we will join other countries willing help to take care of the necessary business in Syria ¡ª just as we had done in Libya.
This time around, Russia and China had their chance to be part of the solution. Over and over, they have refused ¡ª less they ultimately rattle their own house of cards.
But their inaction has committed them to getting out of the way. They can do so and save face, or that they can continue to be obstreperous and lose more face.
Either way, we are moving forward without them.
As for Lavrov¡¯s claim that the West is blackmailing Russia, most countries see it the other way around.
Jul 16, 201212:49am EDT--
China would be the expert on pretext for invasion. Can anyone say, ¡°Tibet¡±?
Jul 17, 20129:07am EDT--
