SCENARIOS: North Korea to be more lonely after nuclear test
2009-05-14 22:55:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea is widely expected to carry out its threat to test a nuclear device, part of the slow march to developing an atomic arsenal and cementing its position as one of the world's most isolated states.
It portrays the test, its second, as a way to increase its military might in the face of an increasingly hostile world. More immediately, it raises its bargaining power on the global stage, especially with Washington.
The impoverished state's first nuclear test, on October 9, 2006, is considered by the outside world to have been only marginally successful. It was used at home by state media to inspire greater national pride and respect for leader Kim Jong-il.
Financial markets have become largely immune to North Korea's saber-rattling, but a nuclear test would worry a region which accounts for a sixth of the world's economic output and which is repeatedly nagged by disputes among its states.
The United States and the major powers in the region all have sensitive equipment for detecting a blast and its strength but because the device will, as with the first, likely be underground they cannot easily predict when it will take place.
IT IS SUCCESSFUL, OR PARTIALLY SUCCESSFUL
Analysts expect financial markets to take a hit, even if only briefly. That is especially the case in Japan where markets have been more sensitive than others to the North's displays of military prowess.
After the 2006 test most regional markets dropped, with the yen slumping to an eight-month low against the dollar and oil and gold prices moving up. Stock markets mostly fell across the region. The impact was short-lived but resurfaced two days later on speculation -- that proved incorrect -- of a second test.
This time, analysts say regional markets would dip again, including Japanese shares and currency. Most, however, believe it will blow over fairly quickly because although it adds to regional political tension, the test is not seen as having much material impact nor likely to lead to any outright military conflict.
It will, as North Korea is aware, trigger international condemnation, more U.N. sanctions and further upset China -- the only major country the North can claim as a benefactor and ally.
Years of sanctions, self-imposed poverty and an ideology that enjoys going it alone make it hard for the international community to devise ways to punish the North Korean government that will force it to change and risk undermining a grip on power at home that partly relies on defiance of global opinion.
Also, while China will probably back additional U.N. sanctions -- it already irritated Pyongyang by condemning it for a rocket launch in April -- it may not want to go so far as to completely alienate its prickly neighbor and squander the foothold it does still have there.
So additional sanctions, which would need China's okay in the U.N. Security Council, are unlikely to have much more than symbolic bite. One option is to toughen up the Proliferation Security Initiative, a U.S.-led program to interdict shipments of sensitive material to and from North Korea.
However, the test will challenge the value of policies that either ignore the North or simply try to manage its nuclear ambitions. It could give greater strength to those voices which want Washington to be far tougher on the reclusive state.
A demonstrably successful test would be a boon at home for the 67-year-old leader of Asia's only communist dynasty, and with the 1-million-strong military which he has carefully nurtured since coming to power in 1994.
Already glorified at home to the level of cult status, a test would allow state media to further confirm his legitimacy and strengthen his hand in engineering his successor. A lot of recent speculation has focused on his third son as preferred heir.
North Korean media does not discuss errors by the government. For example, it contends that April's rocket launch successfully sent a communications satellite into space that continues to beam patriotic songs. The United States and other countries which monitored the launch say it never left the earth's atmosphere and large parts eventually crashed into the Pacific Ocean.
Even if word of failure were to leak out, it is unlikely to dent the North Korean government's position at home or make it any easier to bring it back to the negotiating table.
Weapons experts reckon it may have enough plutonium for six to eight bombs. It has also said it will resume its nuclear plant that when fully operational can produce about one bomb's worth of fissile material a year.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing, Park Jung-youn and Seo Eun-kyung in Seoul, Kaori Kaneko and Elaine Lies in Tokyo and Paul Eckert in Washington; Editing by Dean Yates)
