UPDATE 3-MOVES-Evercore, JP Morgan, Bank of America
2009-05-14 17:26:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Thursday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The U.S. merger advisory boutique investment firm appointed Mark Friedman as a senior managing director to co-head the firm's transportation practice. Friedman, previously with Bank of America Merrill Lynch, will set up and head Evercore's new shipping advisory business. He will be based in New York.
Law firm Arent Fox said it hired former Washington, DC, Mayor Anthony Williams as director of its new state and municipal practice.
The law firm said two of the five partners who last week were reported moving to law firm Dechert LLP are staying with Chadbourne. The firm said that Mikhail Rozenberg and Jennifer Handz are remaining with the firm, both in Moscow. In addition, counsels Julia Romanova, Dmitry Gubarev and Olga Koniuhova will remain with Chadbourne.
Charles Li, a Wall Street veteran and top boss of JP Morgan in China, confirmed media reports that he would leave the bank to pursue other interests. [ID:nSHA28201]
The head of Bank of America's Asia mergers and acquisitions practice is leaving the bank, a source familiar with the matter said, the latest in a series of high-level departures for the company. Kalpana Desai is head of Asia M&A, excluding Japan and including India and Australia. She spent more than a decade in Hong Kong with Merrill Lynch before the BofA takeover. [ID:nSP424489]
Deutsche Bank hired Michael Masterson away from Bank of America to help run its transportation and infrastructure investment banking business in the Americas, according to an internal memo obtained by Reuters. Masterson will be a managing director at Deutsche Bank and co-head of the Americas transportation and infrastructure group with Craig Fuehrer, according to the memo.
The UK firm has promoted Marykay Fuller and Nick Smith to partners, and appointed Lloyd Gold as a director. Fuller joined KPMG Restructuring in 2002 while Smith has been here since 1996. Gold joins from REL Consultancy Group, where he was account director and head of operations in the United States over a 13-year period.
PEOPLE'S BANK OF CHINA
Joseph Yam, chief executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA), will join the People's Bank of China as an adviser after he retires in September from Hong Kong's central bank, influential Chinese publication Caijing Magazine reported. [ID:nHKG341551]
The insurance broker and risk advisory unit of Marsh & McLennan Co has appointed Nabil Khawaja to lead its global energy practice's London-based offshore construction team. Khawaja joins from Benfield Corporate Risk, with more than 20 years of insurance industry experience.
The European bank appointed Muge Eksi head of Capital Markets Turkey and Senior Originator in the Central and Eastern European region, effective immediately. Eksi joins from Goldman Sachs in London, where she was responsible for debt-related marketing and origination for sovereign, quasi-sovereign, corporate and financial institutions clients in Turkey and Israel.
Investment banking firm Morgan Keegan on Thursday said it hired Lawrence Keusch as a senior equity analyst and managing director. Keusch, previously a managing director in Goldman Sachs' global investment research department, will cover the medical technology sector and will be based in the firm's Boston office.
The global network of professional services firms appointed Brian Eaton chairman of the International Board of Directors. Eaton joined RSM Betty & Dickson, RSM International's South African member firm, in 1973 and has been the managing partner of the Johannesburg office since 1995.
The global asset management firm appointed Erich Gerth global business development director. Gerth will be based in London and report to Aviva Investors CEO Alain Dromer, as a member of the executive committee. He will begin his new role in July 2009.
Most recently Erich was CEO of Janus International, where he was responsible for Janus Capital's non-U.S. institutional and financial institutions businesses. (Compiled by Mansi Dutta in Bangalore, Michael Erman and Tenzin Pema in New York)
