UPDATE 1-Taiwan's KGI to buy Taishin brokerage arm
2009-05-14 22:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's KGI Securities 6008.TWO will pay T$29 billion ($880 million) for the brokerage arm of Taishin Financial (
), in the latest consolidation of the island's fragmented and competitive financial sector.
The deal will take KGI's market share in Taiwan's securities sector to 8.34 percent from 3.73 percent, making it the island's second-largest brokerage behind Yuanta Securities, an arm of Yuanta Financial (
), official and company data showed.
The announcement, made before Taiwan's stock market opened, boosted KGI Securities' stock by its daily 7 percent limit, while Taishin Financial's shares rose 5 percent, both outperforming the main TAIEX index's
"We don't often see such deals in the brokerage sector in Taiwan. The merger will allow us to become No.2 from No.9, so this is a good opportunity for us," Janet Sheng, an executive vice-president for KGI Securities, told a news conference.
KGI would acquire Taishin Financial's Taiwan International Securities, Taishin Futures and Taiwan International Securities' branch in Hong Kong, the Taiwan stock exchange said in a statement on Friday.
KGI wouild pay T$28 billion in cash and T$1 billion in shares for Taishin's entire brokerage arm, KGI officials said.
Yuanta had originally planned to buy Taishin's brokerage, but KGI won the acquisition bid by paying a higher price, KGI officials said.
Sheng also said KGI Securities was in touch with Chinese brokerages as Taiwan and China forged closer trade ties, but there were no specific plans for the mainland market so far.
Taishin Financial, Taiwan's No.3 financial holding firm has been trying to improve its balance sheet in the face of huge losses that totalled a net T$5.4 billion last year.
On Thursday, Taishin said it would reduce its capital by 6.8 percent to improve its financial structure as the global crisis hampered its business. [ID:nTP351101] (Editing by Lee Chyen Yee and Chris Lewis)
