Asia Steel-China prices hold firm; POSCO cuts prices
2009-05-14 03:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices edged up 0.3 percent this week in a third consecutive weekly gain, as traders rebuilt stocks after prices fell to a five-month low in April and industrial production showed firm growth.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil rose 0.3 percent to around 3,320 yuan ($486.6) a tonne, versus 3,290/3,330 quoted last week, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphic on Chinese spot steel prices, click:
"Inventories at distributors' level have stabilised and some traders are now rebuilding their stocks, keeping prices firm," said a Chinese steel trader.
"Automakers began buying steel again in April as their destocking came to an end. Nine of 13 mills we spoke to said that auto-use steel orders had picked up, with small-engine passenger cars, agriculture automobiles and heavy trucks leading the recovery," CLSA analyst David Murphy said.
But the rebound, which comes after prices more than halved from record highs hit last year, risks a reversal again, as China's nearly $600 billion in fiscal spending has yet to fully translate into widespread real demand recovery and as producers keep output at buoyant level.
"The modest recovery in prices has been driven mainly by trader restocking, rather than a real improvement in demand," Goldman Sachs analysts said earlier this week.
China's crude steel production held firm at 43.4 million tonnes in April from March, with daily production staying little changed at 1.45 million tonnes, while exports tumbled by 60 percent to the lowest level since October 2004.
"The April data, which showed production on an annualised basis was around 527 million tonnes, surprised us again but only added to our short- to medium-term concerns that overall inventory levels in the marketplace might start to increase," Macquarie analysts said on Thursday.
China, which increased steel output by 1.4 percent in the first quarter to 127 million tonnes while global output fell by 23 percent, appears ready to take tougher action to rein in rampant production.
News agency Xinhua agency said on Wednesday the government was planning to crack down on steel producers that are still raising output by restructuring or cutting off banks' credit. [ID:nPEK282873]
In South Korea, POSCO (
), the world's No.4 steelmaker, unexpectedly cut its domestic product prices by up to 20 percent on Thursday, its biggest ever reduction, as a rebound in the Korean won threatened to open the door to cheaper imports. [ID:nSEO318736]
POSCO cut hot-rolled steel prices by one fifth to 680,000 won ($548.8) a tonne, but its product is still expensive compared to Chinese imports, which are quoted at between $480 and $520, traders said.
"Domestic steel mills have kept prices at relatively high level to imported products, as a weaker won has helped them gain price edge," said a trader.
"With the won rebounding strongly, they have sold steel at discounts from list prices and prices are likely to come further under pressure." ($1=1239.0 Won) ($1=6.822 Yuan) (Reporting by Miyoung Kim; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
