RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asia stocks drop, US retail sales dent rally
2009-05-14 02:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks fell on Thursday as weak U.S. retail sales underscored the long road to economic recovery, prompting investors to take profits on winning bets in equities, higher-yielding currencies and commodities over the past two months.
The retreat in Asian shares tracked an overnight drop on Wall Street after retail sales unexpectedly fell in April, suggesting that consumers were still struggling from job losses, falling home prices and tighter credit.
Futures on Britain's FTSE 100 FFIM9 were up 0.5 percent in early trade, while futures on Germany's DAX FDXM9 wer little changed.
"U.S. retail sales point to a continued slump in the world's largest economy," said Y.S. Rhoo, a market analyst at Hyundai Securities in Seoul.
Ratings agency Standard & Poor's said in a report on Asian economies on Thursday that it was too early to say the global economy has bottomed.
On Wednesday, the S&P 500
shed 2.7 percent, and futures on that U.S. stock index SPc1 were down slightly in Asia.
Japan's Nikkei average
fell 2.6 percent. Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
shed 3.2 percent, with HSBC (
In another sign that investors were taking profits, open interest in Hang Seng futures HSIc1 fell on Wednesday after reaching its highest level since Oct. 8 -- at the tail end of last year's slide to five-year lows.
"Even though money is continuing to come into Hong Kong, it is not directly flowing into the stock market anymore," said Linus Yip, strategist with First Shanghai Securities in Hong Kong.
Investors are also keeping an eye on the results of India's general election. The ruling Congress-led coalition is slightly ahead of the opposition Hindu nationalists-led alliance, but both groups have fallen short of a parliamentary majority, according to early projections. [ID:nSP437509]
The decline in Mumbai's SENSEX
was limited compared with the rest of the region, shedding 1 percent.
DOLLAR LIMPS UP, BONDS JUMP
The dollar limped up from a four-month low hit on Wednesday, partly on the revival of risk-taking but also because its break through the 200-day moving average against the euro sparked wide selling.
Chart technicals for the U.S. currency have turned negative since the break of the widely tracked 200-day moving average, which has signalled turning points against the euro in the past.
after having jumped to $1.3722 the previous day, threatening to push above the peak reached in March that would likely add fuel to the rise.
The dollar index, a gauge of its performance against six major currencies, edged up 0.1 percent to 82.671 .DXY. Against the yen, the dollar was up slightly at 95.70 yen
The dollar's slide had reinforced a jump in gold and oil prices. Gold was down 75 cents an ounce at $924.70 XAU=, while U.S. crude CLc1 dipped 44 cents to $57.58 a barrel after having climbed as high as $60.08 this week.
South Korean government bonds rebounded sharply in early trade after the country's finance minister said he was not confident about the improvement in the job market.
Korean government bond futures KTBc1 rose 26 ticks, bouncing from a one-month low hit this week.
(Additional reporting by Jungyoun Park in Seoul and Parvathy Ullatil in Hong Kong; Editing by Kim Coghill)
