UPDATE 2-POSCO makes record steel price cut on import threat
2009-05-14 01:45:00.0
(Reuters) - POSCO (
), the world's No.4 steelmaker, unexpectedly cut its domestic product prices by up to 20 percent on Thursday, its biggest ever reduction, as a rebound in the Korean won threatened to open the door to cheaper imports.
Despite swift price cuts this year by many Asian rivals, the South Korean mill had resisted making its first reductions since January 2006 until it had finished talks on annual iron ore contract prices. But protracted negotiations and more aggressive action by foreign competitors appear to have forced its hand.
The cuts, although not as big as some analysts had expected, reflect the increasingly dire state of the global steel industry as stimulus packages meant to revive economic growth have yet to translate into end-user demand, and deep production cuts aimed at draining excess supply have yet to balance the market.
"We've decided to lower the prices of all our products earlier than we had planned, as international steel prices are falling and raw material prices are also expected to decline," POSCO said in a statement.
Although shares in POSCO dropped 4.6 percent to 405,500 won, its biggest percentage drop in nearly three months, the move may provide some long-term benefits if it helps POSCO win a 40-50 percent cut in iron ore prices by highlighting the weak state of consumption, despite a rebound in other commodity prices.
The price reduction comes after POSCO raised prices of its benchmark hot-rolled steel three times by a total of 63 percent last year when global steel prices soared to a record high above $1,000 per tonne, which more than halved to below $500 this year.
POSCO will slash prices of hot-rolled steel by 20 percent to 680,000 won ($548.8) per tonne and prices of cold-rolled steel by 16 percent to 785,000 won per tonne from Friday.
Prices of ship plates will be also lowered by 11 percent to 820,000 won, while prices of zinc-galvanised steel, mainly used in auto, will be reduced by 14.5 percent to 1.035 million won.
Although the move came earlier than planned, POSCO has lagged regional rivals, which have already cut prices as tumbling demand had forced them to idle capacity and incur massive losses.
"POSCO has refused to cut prices, as a weaker won has helped it gain price edge over imported steel and a early cut would have hit its earnings. But it is now forced to take action, as the won is strengthening sharply," said Cho In-je, a KB Investment & Securities analyst.
has risen about 30 percent against the U.S. from an 11-year low hit in early March, as South Korean economy shows tentative signs of recovery and concerns over dollar liquidity shortage in the banking sector had eased.
Even after the price cut, POSCO's hot-rolled steel, priced at $550, is still expensive, compared to Chinese imports, which are quoted at between $480 and $520, traders and analysts said.
For a graphic on POSCO and Chinese spot steel prices, click:
China's top steelmaker Baosteel (
Japan's Nippon Steel (
), the world's No.2 steel maker, also agreed last month with Toyota Motor (
) to cut steel prices by a smaller-than-expected some 10 percent, as it keeps output reduction at 45 percent.
Asian steel shares were heavily battered on Thursday after S&P steel stocks .GSPSTEEL tumbled 8.5 percent on Wednesday, as job losses and production cut plans by major steelmakers raised investor concerns over the sector's recovery.
), the world's top steelmaker, on Wednesday said it would cut almost 1,000 U.S. jobs and AK Steel (
) said it would likely idle a mill employing 750 workers, hit by vehicle production cuts. [ID:nN1337618] ($1=1239.0 Won) (Editing by Jonathan Hopfner and Chris Lewis)
