UPDATE 3-Tower Semi Q1 loss narrows, cuts salaries
2009-05-14 11:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Israeli chip maker Tower Semiconductor (
"Customers' forcasts are looking nice for the second half of the year," Chief Executive Russell Ellwanger told Reuters.
Although in February he said the company could become profitable by the fourth quarter if the industry recovered, Ellwanger said he now does not see a rebound to that extent.
"Though I see nice forecasts from customers, I don't see forecasts that would justify that," he said.
Tower's shares ended 1.9 percent lower at 1.11 shekels in Tel Aviv. Its Nasdaq shares were flat at 28 cents.
To avoid layoffs while cutting costs, Tower's 1,000 workers in Israel -- including management -- have taken a 20 percent cut in pay above the first $1,000, starting in April, Ellwanger said.
This will be reversed "when we think we can afford to change it," he added. "We have no plans for layoffs."
Tower, a small player in a $20-billion-a-year chip industry, has carved out a niche as a specialty maker of image sensors used in medical and dental x-rays, mobile phone cameras and digital cameras as well as radio-frequency chips and embedded memory chips.
Tower aims to be the number one specialty foundry in the world, Ellwanger said, noting it has moved away from some non-specialty customers that were not profitable for Tower.
"We are a different company than we were three years ago or two years ago. We are very actively changing according to what the market needs are," he said.
The company is always evaluating possible mergers and acquisitions or joint ventures, especially in China and India.
"In this economy from our standpoint they are a much higher probability than in a more stable situation," he said.
"We are very actively involved in China, where we are pursuing different avenues. We are looking at different things in India as well."
Tower recorded a quarterly net loss of $27.6 million, or 17 cents per share, compared with a loss of $29.6 million, or 24 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue increased to $58.1 million from $57.6 million and was at the midpoint of the company's forecast [nPnUKTH014].
In a conference call, Ellwanger estimated second-quarter revenues of $57 million to $61 million.
Synergies from last September's acquisition of Jazz Technologies enabled Tower to complete the quarter with the same operating cash and EBITDA as the fourth quarter of 2008 despite a 25 percent revenue decline, Ellwanger said.
"Although our results were impacted by the global economic environment, our revenue decrease was 40 percent less than the industry-weighted average due to our focus on specialised non-commodity products and services," he said.
(Editing by Steven Scheer; Editing by David Cowell)
