China commentary says U.S. uniform row Olympic blasphemy
2012-07-16 03:46:00.0
(Reuters) - An uproar over the U.S. Olympic team's made-in-China uniforms is a blasphemy on the Olympic spirit which is supposed to separate sports from politics and a show of pure ignorance to boot, China's official Xinhua news agency said on Monday.
With U.S. unemployment hovering just above 8 percent, U.S. politicians have spoken out against the uniforms for the London Games, which start later this month, and six Democratic senators said they plan to introduce legislation requiring the ceremonial uniforms be produced in the United States.
"The Olympics spirit is all about separating sports from politics, but these U.S. politicians are going too far and trying to force a political tag onto the uniforms," it said in the Chinese-language commentary.
"This is a parochial nationalistic attitude, a blasphemy on the Olympic spirit and a show of ignorance," Xinhua added.
There can be little doubt that U.S. election year politics are to blame for this spat, as in the previous years the U.S. Olympic team's uniforms have also be made abroad, it said.
"The reason this issue has stirred people up is because the words 'made-in-China' touch upon the most sensitive topic of the U.S. election - 'outsourcing'," Xinhua added.
Democrats have attacked Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney who, while at private equity firm Bain Capital, was involved in firing workers and outsourcing U.S. jobs to foreign countries.
Romney, for his part, has repeatedly pledged to get tougher with China on its trade and currency practices, including pledging to quickly declare China a currency manipulator if elected.
"The unjustified criticisms of U.S. politicians about 'made-in-China' is incredibly politically hypocritical," it added.
While such commentaries do not necessarily constitute official statements, they may be read as a reflection of Chinese government thinking on important issues of the day.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I totally agree, the US cant shell out an extra few buck to have our uniforms homemade? that¡¯s really cheap and just plain embarrassing. American Apparel makes all there products in downtown LA, I¡¯m sure they would love an olympic contract. Stop being so damn cheap when your willing to shell out billions to fight wars that the majority of America disapproves of and bail out companies that made their riches by cheating the common folk and then dispersed their riches too liberally. My country is really starting to grind my dang gears.
Jul 16, 20126:06am EDT--
Yes, I agree the US consumer is totally drenched in products made in China. But the whole purpose of the Olympics is Nationalism. And our Nation is competing in sporting events and what our athletes wear on opening day is signifcant. There¡¯s a huge difference between me buying cheap underwear made in china and our Olypic hopefuls opening day ceremony clothes. Where the hell is our national pride and priorty? No offense to Ralph Lauren but I hope this doesn¡¯t happen again.
Jul 16, 20128:54am EDT--
The confidence of US has become so fragile. sigh!
Jul 16, 20129:36am EDT--
