GLOBAL MARKETS-World stocks, oil extend losses; dollar firmer
2009-05-14 07:35:00.0
(Reuters) - World stocks fell for a fourth straight day on Thursday while the low-yielding dollar and yen advanced as the previous day's weak U.S. retail data prompted investors to cut back on risky assets after their 9-week rally.
Oil prices also fell, weighing on energy shares, while government bonds rose as investors took a break from a risk buying frenzy after data showed on Wednesday sales at U.S. retailers fell for a second straight month in April.
"Yesterday's retail sales were a blow to the green shoots theory because that theory had been predicated on the resilient U.S. consumer," said Lee Ferridge, vice president and senior macro strategist at State Street.
However, market indicators showed a recovery is still on track. The cost of borrowing dollars, euros and sterling for three months hit record lows in London, suggesting banks are more willing to lend, while shipping costs hit a 2009 high on Wednesday on the back of strong Chinese demand for commodities. MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS fell 0.9 percent, extending a decline after hitting a six-month high on Monday. The index is on track for the first weekly loss in 10 weeks.
Emerging stocks .MSCIEF fell 2.2 percent. U.S. stock futures were down around 0.5 percent SPc1, pointing to a lower open on Wall Street.
"Equity markets now look 'toppy' after their fantastic run. A measure of profit-taking is now sensible as the prices become divorced from economic reality of conditions in the developed countries," Peter O'Connor, deputy chairman at FundQuest, an asset management arm of BNP Paribas, said in a note.
The pullback in stocks comes after a near 40-percent rally since mid-March which generated optimism even among central bank governors, including European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, who said earlier this week the global economy might have turned around the corner.
In a further sign of easing tensions, the interbank cost of borrowing three-month dollar, euro and sterling funds plumbed fresh all-time lows. Three-month dollar rates fell to 0.85438 percent LIBOR.
On Wednesday, the Baltic Exchange's main sea freight index .BADI, which tracks rates to ship dry commodities, hit a new 2009 high, driven by continued demand for goods by China.
The index, which gauges the cost of shipping resources including iron ore, cement, grain, coal and fertiliser, rose to 2,332 points on Wednesday from 2,253 on Tuesday.
The June bund futures FGBLc1 rose 50 ticks, helped by comments from ECB Governing Council member Ewald Nowotny who said key interest rates may approach a lower boundary of zero.
(Additional reporting by Naomi Tajitsu; Editing by Victoria Main)
