HIGHLIGHTS-Purged Chinese Communist Party chief's memoirs
2009-05-14 01:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Reuters has obtained Zhao Ziyang's memoirs, which were secretly taped while he lived under house arrest after his ouster in 1989 as China's Communist Party chief for opposing the military crackdown on the Tiananmen protests.
Following are excerpts which were transcribed and translated into English. The full text will be published this month in the book "Prisoner of the State", ahead of the 20th anniversary of the crackdown on June 4.
"On the night of June 3rd, while sitting in the courtyard with my family, I heard intense gunfire. A tragedy to shock the world had not been averted, and was happening after all ... "
"First, it was determined then that the student movement was a planned conspiracy of anti-Party, anti-socialist elements with leadership. So now we must ask, who were these leaders? What was the plan? What was the conspiracy? What evidence exists to support this? It was also said that there were black hands within the Party. Then who were they?"
"Second, it was said that this event was aimed at overthrowing the People's Republic and the Communist Party. Where is the evidence? I had said at the time that most people were only asking us to correct our flaws, not attempting to overthrow our political system."
"If a country wishes to modernise, not only should it implement a market economy, it must also adopt a parliamentary democracy as its political system. Otherwise, this nation will not be able to have a market economy that is healthy and modern, nor can it become a modern society with a rule of law."
"If we don't move toward this goal, it will be impossible to resolve the abnormal conditions in China's market economy: issues such as an unhealthy market, profiting from power, rampant social corruption and a widening gap between rich and poor. Nor will the rule of law ever materialise."
"If the final destination is a parliamentary democracy, the ruling Party must achieve two breakthroughs. One is to allow other political parties and a free press to exist. This can happen gradually, but it must be pursued. The second breakthrough is having democracy within the Party: that is, the Party needs to adopt democratic procedures and use democratic means to reform itself ... Different opinions must be allowed to exist, and different factions should be made legitimate." (Reporting by Benjamin Kang Lim, Chris Buckley and Ben Blanchard; Editing by Nick Macfie and Dean Yates)
