China calls for deeper CO2 cuts by rich nations
2009-05-13 16:36:00.0
(Reuters) - China urged rich nations on Wednesday to sign up to tougher 2020 targets to cut carbon emissions, as U.N.-led negotiations intensify on a broader climate pact meant to rein in the pace of global warming.
An official with China's National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) said rich nations must commit to cutting emissions by 25-40 percent by 2020 as well as ramp up funding for developing countries.
Democrats had agreed to an emissions reduction target of 17 percent by 2020 from 2005 levels, said House Energy Committee chairman Henry Waxman.
The NDRC official said China, the world's top emitter of planet-warming greenhouse gases, wanted to commit to emissions reductions in certain industries but was still figuring out how to do this.
"The success of Copenhagen needs strengthened and deeper cuts and more aggressive targets from developed countries," said Li Liyan, deputy head of the Climate Change Office of the NDRC, China's chief economic planning agency.
Delegates from about 200 nations meet in the Danish capital Copenhagen at the end of the year to try to agree on a broader climate pact to replace the Kyoto Protocol, whose first phase ends in 2012.
Asked by Reuters if China would commit to specific reduction targets from certain industries, Li told a conference in Beijing "we want to, we just don't know how to do it yet."
China was also proposing to establish a specific financing mechanism for the transfer of green energy technology and funding for climate change adaptation for poorer nations, Li said.
In a submission to the United Nations last month meant to guide the ongoing climate negotiations, China called for the creation of a U.N. body to pursue urgent action on adaptation.
"One of the main points from now on is to see how ... far the level of ambition can be increased," Yvo de Boer told Reuters.
He said the marathon climate negotiations ahead of Copenhagen will get a spur from May 18, when a first draft negotiating text is due to be published. The text will sum up submissions from governments in recent weeks.
China's total power generating capacity rose by more than 250 percent from 2000-2008 to reach 792.5 gigawatts. On present growth rates, China is projected to overtake the United States as the world's top power producer by 2015.
While a large portion of China's energy comes from burning coal, the government has also embraced large-scale use of renewable energy such as wind and hydro.
(Reporting by David Stanway and Tom Miles; Additional reporting by Alister Doyle in Oslo; Editing by David Fogarty)
