European shares advance as drugmakers, oils gain
2009-05-13 05:18:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities advanced in choppy morning trade on Wednesday, with investors taking refuge in defensive drugmakers and energy companies, but financial stocks retreated after recent heavy gains.
At 0911 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
index of top European shares was up 0.5 percent at 856.49 points after falling as low as 849.26. The benchmark, which slumped 45 percent in 2008, is up more than 32 percent from its March 9 lifetime low.
Energy stocks tracked crude oil prices CLc1, which rose 1.4 percent to trade near $60 a barrel. Royal Dutch Shell (
), BG Group (
), Tullow Oil (
), Repsol (
), Total (
) rose 2.7 percent, Sanofi-Aventis (
"The nadir that was March 2009 has been long forgotten, as talk of 'green shoots' replacing 'credit crunch' as the phrase of the moment," said Chris Hossain, senior sales manager at ODL Securities.
"Whether realistic or not, more and more people are buying in to the recovery play, looking for undervalued stocks."
Financial stocks fell, however, after recent gains as investors took profits. The DJ Stoxx banks index .SX7P, which hit a six-month high last week, has doubled from a trough in early March.
) was down 3.7 percent, Barclays (
) fell 4 percent, Lloyds (
) fell 5.6 percent after it reported a much-bigger-than-expected first-quarter net loss, hurt by a sharply weaker insurance business.
"There has been some consolidation after a sharp move in the past weeks as people are waiting to see whether the upward move is sustainable," said Koen De Leus, economist at KBC Securities.
"There are some indicators that justify an improvement in optimism. Recent data has come better than expected and has rebuilt market confidence, but it still has to be confirmed by more consumer spending," he added.
), Anglo American (
), Antofagasta (
), Xstrata STA.L and Eurasian Natural Resources (
) fell 5 percent on growing speculation the global miner is set to launch a rights issue instead of selling $19.5 billion in stock and assets to China's Chinalco aluminium group. [ID:nSYD465849]
), Britain's third-biggest grocer, posted an 11 percent rise in annual profit and said it was pressing ahead with expansion into convenience stores and non-food ranges despite the recession. But its shares were down 0.3 percent.
) rose 1.5 percent as it beat market expectations with a 9.8 percent rise in first-quarter net profit, as strong Latin American business helped offset Spanish weakness and allowed it to stick to full-year forecasts.
