FOREX-Dollar rebounds as weak US data boosts risk aversion
2009-05-13 13:56:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar rallied broadly on Wednesday after an unexpected decline in April's U.S. retail sales rekindled demand for the greenback as a safe haven.
The report, which showed sales at U.S. retailers slipped 0.4 percent last month, dimmed optimism about hopes for a rapid recovery in the world's largest economy. Economists polled by Reuters had forecast April sales would be flat after falling in March. For story on retail sales data, see [ID:nN13384420]
After being sold off the past few weeks, the dollar rose from four-month lows against a basket of six currencies and seven-week troughs against the euro. It also gained sharply against some higher-yielding currencies, such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars, which tracked a slide in Wall Street stocks.
"Green shoots of a global recovery were hit by a round of frosty economic data today," said Vassili Serebriakov, a currency strategist, at Wells Fargo Bank in New York. "The U.S. consumer still appears under significant pressure with retail sales unexpectedly falling."
"The greenback is somewhat firmer today, although still reversing only a fraction of its recent decline," he added.
The dollar's uptrend this past year was consistent with safe-haven flows as a global slowdown accelerated, with investors brushing off the country's extreme fiscal weakness. But that support is expected to fade once investors price in the United States' enormous debt load over the next several years.
In afternoon trading in New York, the euro was 0.5 percent lower near a session low of $1.3567
, according to Reuters data. The European currency earlier hit a seven-week high of $1.3721.
The ICE Futures' dollar index, which measures the value of the dollar against a basket of major currencies, rose 0.2 percent on the day to 82.440 .DXY, having hit a four-month low of 81.871.
Serebriakov said weak U.S. data later this week may boost risk aversion and pave the way for the dollar to rebound to the 1.32 level against the euro. But much of that reaction will depend on equity and commodity markets' reaction, he said.
The dollar fell earlier to fresh lows after an article in the Financial Times flagged a risk of the United States' losing its top sovereign credit rating.
While analysts warned against reading too much into the article since the United States has run persistent and growing budget deficits for years, they said a downgrade would have huge economic, political and financial implications.
"If the U.S. loses its rating, we could see a massive outflow of foreign investment," said Kathy Lien, director of foreign exchange research at GFT Forex in New York. "Also, a downgrade is the perfect excuse to push through an alternative reserve currency to replace the dollar because it would strip the confidence of sovereign funds like China that have been buying dollars to prop up the U.S. economy."
The British currency's sharp fall relieved some of the selling pressure on the dollar that had intensified since last week's break below key 200-day and 200-week moving average support levels on technical charts.
Meanwhile, the dollar slid 0.7 percent against the yen to 95.72
, a two-week low. Talk about the potential for fund repatriation flows from Japanese investors related to redemptions and coupon payments on U.S. Treasuries this week also helped push the dollar lower against the yen, traders said.
, while the New Zealand dollar dropped 2.2 percent to US$0.5916
. (Additional reporting by Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss in New York; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
