Drop China deal for rights issue, Rio holders say
2009-05-13 11:38:00.0
Drop China deal for rights issue, Rio holders say | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Drop China deal for rights issue, Rio holders say
Rio Tinto's new chairman Jan du Plessis (L) and Chief Executive Officer Tom Albanese pause during a news conference after the company's annual general meeting in Sydney April 20, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Tim Wimborne
Wed  EDT
The sustained objections to the proposed transaction come despite a new charm offensive from recently-appointed chairman Jan du Plessis, who is meeting top shareholders again this week.
"The world has completely changed since the Chinalco deal. This was a bad deal few months ago and it's a bad deal now," said one top 25 investor who is due to meet the chairman over the next couple of days.
Another large investor, who asked not to be named, said: "We are going to encourage the Rio chairman to look at other alternatives such as capital raising and frankly, expedite that process as quickly as possible.
"The Chinalco deal is a very poor deal for shareholders. And we do believe a sizeable capital raising can be completed. We wouldn't be proposing it if we didn't think it was a probability, and we think it is," the investor said.
A rights issue could be complicated as Chinalco already owns 9 percent of the group, which is dual-listed in London and Sydney. Any capital raising after the China deal was dumped could be "awkward," conceded one top 10 investor.
Under the Chinalco plan, the Chinese group would buy stakes in Rio's iron ore, copper and aluminum assets and spend $7.2 billion on convertible debt that could double its Rio stake to 18 percent.
"The main issue here is that we want them to treat all shareholders equally, that is honor pre-emption."
"There are a range of views," said a spokesman for Rio. "Some shareholders have said they are supportive. Jan du Plessis is very much in the listening mode and has said he will not put anything to the vote that he does not think will pass.
"We believe that the deal, although far from ideal, is the best we have got. But I do believe that Rio will offer some sweeteners - perhaps reduce Chinalco board representation from two to one. They must have left some wriggle room because they know how unpopular the deal is with shareholders."
Another top 20 investor also indicated support for the Chinalco deal, but Rio is known to face opposition from the very top of its shareholder roster. When the deal was announced in February, Legal & General Investment Management -- the group's largest UK investor -- expressed its dismay over the plans. LGIM was unavailable for comment on Wednesday.
"We want assurances that (Rio) will be genuinely open to any new bid from BHP Billiton," said the top 25 investor.
"Under (Paul) Skinner, BHP was constantly rebuffed and they are terrified of being used as a stalking horse."
The shareholder added: "There is enormous overlap between the share registers of BHP and Rio and if the two companies merge, they could have a capital raising following the merger."
One top 30 investor said Rio should make selective asset sales to BHP rather than pursuing a merger. The top 10 investor noted likely problems over Rio's debt in any proposed BHP deal.
Rio's London shares fell by 9.10 percent to 2543 pence at 11:33 a.m. EDT.
