UPDATE 1-StanChart hires 5 veteran consumer bankers - source
2009-05-13 05:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Asia-focused British lender Standard Chartered Plc (
) hired five veteran bankers from institutions such as Citigroup and Hartford Financial Services Group to strengthen its businesses, a person with direct knowledge of the matter said on Wednesday.
The new appointments, all within Standard Chartered's consumer banking division, follow a string of senior executive losses in Asia, as rivals including Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd (
Standard Chartered is hiring to strengthen its position as a leading consumer bank, said the source, who declined to be named because he is not authorised to speak to the media. The bank's wealth management business suffered last year from the impact of the financial turmoil.
Michael Pratt, most recently a KPMG consultant and former chief executive at Bank of Melbourne, will join Standard Chartered next month as Northeast Asia head of consumer banking. He will also become head of consumer banking China, replacing Wilson Chia, who will leave the bank.
Christine Ip, former China head of consumer banking joined ANZ as its new China chief executive early this year. Standard Chartered has also lost its China credit officer and China private equity head recently.
Marianne Hay, former Citigroup (
) CEO of Global Wealth Management, will head Standard Chartered's private banking business in Europe, Americas, Middle East and North Africa. Another former Citi banker T.S. Anil will head the bank's cards and personal loans division.
Standard Chartered also hired Greg Brennan as its head of insurance, who was formerly Hartford Group's (
Pearl Wang, who played a key role in major mergers and acquisitions at GE Money, will join Standard Chartered's consumer banking division as head of business development, responsible for driving growth through strategic alliances and acquisitions.
Chief Executive Peter Sands has said that the bank prefers to focus on organic growth, but would look at acquisitions that were "financially attractive and strategically compelling."
), which has announced plans to exit up to 36 countries, people with direct knowledge of the matter have told Reuters.
Standard Chartered said in March it had no plans to cut jobs despite global cost-cutting by banks struggling to survive the financial crisis, but warned that 2009 would be a challenging year. (US$1=6.832 Yuan)
