Zimbabwe exceeds $1 bln target for credit from Africa
2009-05-13 08:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Zimbabwe has exceeded its target of securing $1 billion in credit lines from Africa, Economic Planning Minister Elton Mangoma said on Wednesday, at the launch of a 100-day government plan to repair the shattered economy.
The southern African country, ravaged by a decade of economic decline blamed on President Robert Mugabe's policies, urgently needs $1 billion in credit lines to revive industries and the same amount for direct budget support, mostly to pay workers.
A total of $8.3 billion is needed to restore the country's economy.
"We've made major strides in obtaining lines of credit for the private sector ... so our $1 billion target has already been surpassed," Mangoma said during the public launch of a government 100-day economic plan.
Mangoma said Zimbabwe had so far secured $1 billion from African financial institutions such as the African Development Bank, the Cairo-based African Export-Import Bank and $150 million from neighbouring South Africa and Botswana.
The loans will be used to revive Zimbabwe's industries, which are operating at around 10 percent capacity due to foreign currency shortages, a hostile operating environment and government price controls.
Mangoma, however, said efforts to raise $1 billion in direct aid from donors which the government desperately needs to fund its operations, had largely been unsuccessful, with only $35 million secured from South Africa and China.
International donors are yet to release any funding to the unity government, formed between Mugabe and Prime Minister Tsvangirai, insisting the new administration carry out political and economic reforms and open up the media.
Despite the government's urgent need to raise funds, Mangoma said there would be no sell-off of underperforming state enterprises.
"Our focus is not going to be on wholesale privatisation of parastatals. They will be reformed to increase efficiency. Prices are low at the moment, so bringing public assets for sale now will not bring much benefit," Mangoma said.
Speaking at the launch of the economic plan, Tsvangirai said its success was at risk from some elements in the unity government opposed to reforms.
"Sadly, there appears to be reluctance by residual elements from the old government to obstruct and frustrate the successful implementation of the global political agreement," Tsvangirai said.
"This residual resistance represents an unwillingness to accept the fact that the new political dispensation is not only irreversible, but also offers the country the only way forward."
Tsvangirai, however, said progress had been made in finalising outstanding issues, such as appointments of ambassadors, the central bank governor, the attorney-general and other senior government officials. He said an announcement would be made soon.
Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa, a Mugabe ally, repeated the new government's commitment to implement political reforms and to end Zimbabwe's international isolation by engaging Western governments that imposed sanctions on Mugabe's ZANU-PF government, all within the 100-day period.
"We want to see the review of media policy and laws to create a plural media sector, to kick-start the constitutional reform process and the re-engagement of the international community," Chinamasa said. (Editing by Giles Elgood) (macdonald.dzirutwe@reuters.com; +263 4 799 112)
