UPDATE 4-Tsvangirai-says power-sharing issues threaten aid
2009-05-13 13:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Zimbabwe Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai said on Wednesday violations of a power-sharing deal with President Robert Mugabe were depriving the country of aid from Western donors pushing for democratic reforms.
But Tsvangirai said at the launch of a 100-day government economic plan that some members of Mugabe's ZANU-PF were opposed to reforms and were putting the power-sharing deal at risk.
"The continued violations of the rule of law and the GPA (Global Political Agreement) prevent the inflows of development aid, obstructing a progressive legislative agenda and risk keeping Zimbabwe mired in poverty and the fear of persecution," he said.
International donors are yet to release any funding to the government, insisting the new administration carry out political and economic reforms and open up the media.
The southern African country, ravaged by a decade of economic decline blamed on Mugabe's policies, urgently needs cash to revive its stricken industries. It estimates it needs a total of $8.3 billion to restore the economy. Mangoma said the $1 billion would come from African financial institutions such as the African Development Bank (AfDB), the Cairo-based African Export-Import Bank and $150 million from neighbouring South Africa and Botswana.
"As long as they implement that agreement, we are calling on the international community to come forward in support of Zimbabwe," he told a news conference in Dakar.
Mangoma conceded efforts to raise $1 billion in direct aid from donors had largely been unsuccessful, with only $35 million secured from South Africa and China.
Tsvangirai's MDC party protests against what it says is the persecution of its supporters, many of whom have cases pending in the courts for allegedly plotting to oust Mugabe.
But Tsvangirai said progress had been made on outstanding issues, such as appointments of ambassadors, the central bank governor and the attorney-general.
"Sadly, there appears to be a reluctance by residual elements from the old government to obstruct and frustrate the successful implementation of the GPA," said Tsvangirai.
"This attitude, should it continue, will limit the effective implementation of the 100 Day Plan and subsequently impact negatively on our ability to make a positive difference to the lives of all Zimbabweans."
Justice Minister Patrick Chinamasa, a Mugabe ally, repeated the new government's commitment to implement political reforms and to end Zimbabwe's international isolation by engaging Western governments that imposed sanctions on Mugabe's ZANU-PF government, all within the 100-day period.
"We want to see the review of media policy and laws to create a plural media sector, to kick-start the constitutional reform process and the re-engagement of the international community," Chinamasa said. (macdonald.dzirutwe@reuters.com; +263 4 799 112)
