UN council voices grave concern over Sri Lanka
2009-05-13 18:46:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.N. Security Council on Wednesday for the first time voiced grave concern over civilian deaths in Sri Lanka's war and ordered the army and rebels to take urgent action to protect civilians.
"The members of the Security Council express grave concern over the worsening humanitarian crisis in northeast Sri Lanka, in particular the reports of hundreds of civilian casualties in recent days," the unanimously agreed statement said.
The message to the Tamil Tiger rebels and government of Sri Lanka was agreed upon during a closed-door meeting of the 15-nation Security Council, its first formal consultations on the issue since the Sri Lankan war escalated sharply several months ago.
Shelling killed a Red Cross worker inside Sri Lanka's war zone on Wednesday and hundreds of civilians were reported killed on Sunday and Monday by artillery fire as troops attacked a narrow strip of land held by Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) rebels, who look set to lose a 25-year war.
Diplomats said the massive civilian deaths reported over the weekend were one of the factors that helped to convince Russia, China, Vietnam and Libya that it was necessary to have a formal meeting on the situation in Sri Lanka.
Although the council had held several informal meetings on the war, the four countries had opposed any formal council action on what they see as an internal Sri Lankan matter. While it is not legally binding, council diplomats said the unanimous statement would help to ratchet up the pressure on Sri Lanka.
"Without urgent action this humanitarian crisis could turn into a catastrophe," Obama said at the White House.
"Now is the time to put aside some of the political issues that are involved and to put the lives of the men, women and children who are innocently caught in the cross fire, to put them first," he said.
The statement, which was drafted by France, Britain and Austria with the backing of the United States, also expressed support for the "personal involvement" of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, whom the government has invited to go to Sri Lanka.
In exchange for discussing Sri Lanka, Western council members agreed to hold a brief session earlier on Wednesday on a U.N. board of inquiry report about Israel's January war against Hamas militants in the Gaza Strip that was critical of Israel, diplomats said.
They said the United States and its allies on the council had initially balked at the idea of discussing the Gaza report. The council also issued a very brief statement about the Gaza report, expressing the council's "concern" about its findings. (Additional reporting by John Whitesides in Washington, editing by David Ljunggren and Cynthia Osterman)
