U.S. tops confidence survey on foreign investment, displaces China
2013-06-26 12:07:00.0
(Reuters) - After a 12-year hiatus, the United States reclaimed first place among top executives in a survey on foreign direct investment sentiment, displacing China as it makes progress toward sustainable and steady economic growth, a study showed on Wednesday.
The United States jumped from fourth place in 2012, according to the 2013 Foreign Direct Investment Confidence Index, a survey of more than 300 executives from 28 countries by global consulting firm A.T. Kearney.
The survey, conducted between October and November of last year, highlighted executives' views that U.S. workers are becoming more competitive and, until recently, the weakness in the U.S. dollar helped improve the country's exports profile.
Combined with a recovering housing market and the surge in production of unconventional oil and gas, the United States took back the top spot for the first time since 2001 despite still serious fiscal policy uncertainty and sizeable debt issues.
"Investors are demonstrating more mature judgment about what the risks are and what the expected returns will be and how long it will take the global economy to recover," Paul Laudicina, chairman emeritus of A.T. Kearney, told Reuters in a telephone interview.
The FDI Confidence Index ranks countries on how political, economic and regulatory changes will affect foreign direct investment.
The United States is the top recipient of FDI inflows for a sixth consecutive year, according to the survey.
Respondents were most optimistic about the United States' prospects, with 63 percent expecting some economic growth, compared with 62 percent who believe Europe may have no growth or return to recession over the next three years.
Rounding out the top five in the confidence index are Brazil, Canada and India.
CHINA'S DROP
Factors that impacted the outlook for FDI into China include a doubling of labor costs since 2007, rising transportation costs and the appreciation of its currency, the renminbi, which made it less competitive against other low-cost alternatives such as Mexico.
The push by China, the world's second-largest economy, for the last 30 years to be a manufacturing powerhouse has given way to trying to create a more consumer-driven economy, "sparking internal debates about companies' future plans," the survey said.
Investors might be more upbeat today about the world's prospects than years past. Yet they are holding back investments waiting for a clearer solution to current risks such as the economic slowdown in China and the euro zone debt crisis.
"I expect when investors look at an individual investment play and opportunity, most cite macroeconomic uncertainty. In fact 71 percent say reasons my company's FDI flows have not recovered to pre-recession levels is because of macroeconomic instability or uncertainty," Laudicina said.
While investors are holding back investments due to worries about the global macroeconomic situation, companies are amassing record cash holdings.
U.S. firms in the S&P 500 Index held $900 billion in cash at the end of June 2012, according to the report, up 40 percent from 2008. Japanese cash rose 75 percent since 2007.
"This surplus could fuel more rapid global growth when the macroeconomic clouds finally dissipate," the report said.
Even while the world economy looks to the United States for economic leadership given its massive monetary policy stimulus program, perceptions of risk between emerging and developed markets are equalizing, the survey said, in nearly all areas save for politics.
"In area after area, from macroeconomic volatility and consumer demand to regulatory barriers and taxation, investors say that developing markets have roughly the same level of risk as developed markets," the survey said.
(Reporting by Manuela Badawy and Daniel Bases; Editing by Leslie Adler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
i got not even on thing made in usa.on the contrary everything is made in china.tatatataa!!!
Jun 26, 20131:37am EDT--
Jun 26, 20132:28am EDT--
There is some big industries moving back to the US, high energy consuming industries see the gravy. Intel new 11nm Fab plant¡­ Have very few items made in China, just small ticket items (small low cost furniture, short life span). Big ticket items are primarily from Korea, Japan, Taiwan¡­ white-ware is F&P (F@P is now Chinese owned, though production is still not yet moved off shore from New Zealand?). Will we soon see a return of US durable goods? This coupled with renewed movement in the Asia-Pacific with the supply chain and we could truly have our pacific century¡­ But then again, the region resembles Europe of the 19th Century, with Napoleon residing in Beijing.
Jun 26, 20135:07am EDT--
