BUY OR SELL-Australia's miners priced for a new boom?
2009-05-13 04:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian mining stocks have staged a spectacular recovery so far this year, far outpacing a 4 percent gain in the broader market .AXJO as investors latch on to glimmers of hope for a global recovery.
) has nearly doubled in value, while third-largest iron ore miner Fortescue Metals (
) has lagged the gains, but is trading on roughly the same price-earnings multiple as rival Rio Tinto, at more than 15.
Has the rally gone too far?
"The scenarios indicate to us that this optimism is now excessive," said JP Morgan analyst David George. "Current prices really anticipate, we believe, the return of 2007-08 peak prices as being sustained for about five years. And the conditions have changed."
"So, when demand returns, there'll be upwards movement in commodity prices, but not to the extremes, because the supply side constraints are not there."
The rally has taken a breather this week, with Rio Tinto retreating about 9 percent and BHP down about 3 percent.
"There's been a bit of a pullback, but my expectation is that they need to come back further to get to a point where you can advise clients to start buying again. In the sub-A$30 range it starts to look interesting," George said of BHP.
"You'd have to be pretty cautious. These metals have run very hard. The real economy's pretty tough at the moment," said Peter Chilton, investment analyst at Constellation Capital Management. "Generally, the copper producers have all had tremendous runs and look fairly fully valued at the moment," said Tim Schroeders, a portfolio manager at Pengana Capital.
"It's simply just too early to put your hand on your heart with any conviction in the other metals. They've had good share price movements that belie what are going to be fairly ordinary profit results come the June half-year."
"If commodity prices keep going up and the data out of China stays relatively strong, then there's a bit more upside," said Don Williams, chief investment officer at Platypus Asset Management.
The outcome of protracted talks between BHP, Rio and Asian steel mills to settle iron ore prices for April 2009-March 2010 could be a watershed, he said.
"I'd argue that if bulk commodity prices across the board settle around where current spot prices are, for the major players it's highly profitable and the stocks over time could get re-rated. If that's your downside, it's pretty good," Williams said.
For related stories, click [ID:nLC801305] [ID:nSYD465849] (Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
