Gold steadies off 5-week high as dollar recovers
2009-05-13 07:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold steadied in Europe on Wednesday after earlier touching a five-week high, as the dollar recovered some lost ground against the euro, denting the precious metal's appeal as an alternative asset.
However, prices remain supported by the U.S. currency's overall weakness, analysts said.
Spot gold touched a peak of $928.30 an ounce, its firmest since April 2, and was bid at $922.95 an ounce at 7:11 a.m. EDT, against $921.85 an ounce late in New York on Tuesday.
"At the moment, the markets are looking for direction," said David Wilson, an analyst at Societe Generale. "A weakening dollar is obviously supportive of gold, and that is coming back into play."
Like all dollar-priced commodities, gold becomes cheaper for holders of other currencies as the U.S. unit weakens.
Its relationship with the dollar is particularly strong, however, as it is also often bought as an alternative asset to the currency and a hedge against rising prices.
Underlying demand for gold remains relatively lackluster. Holdings of gold exchange-traded funds are stable, while dealers say bullion buying in India, the world's biggest gold consumer, is sluggish at higher prices.
Commodities such as oil and base metals as well as gold are rising, however, on the weaker dollar and hopes the economic downturn may be bottoming out.
"Investment in commodities is growing," said broker MF Global in a note. "The rise in interest explains the ability of commodity markets such as gold and oil to remain relatively strong despite disappointing fundamental news."
But doubts over the health of the global economy linger. News that euro zone industrial output dived and China's industrial output rose less than expected offered another reminder that a recovery might not be imminent.
Silver prices tracked gold back toward Tuesday's close, after earlier reaching an 11-week high of $14.35 an ounce. Spot silver was bid at $14.14 an ounce against $14.19.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was bid at $1,125.50 an ounce against $1,130, while spot palladium was bid at $233 an ounce against $232.50.
The autocatalyst materials suffered last year from a fall in demand, as the economic slowdown knocked car sales. Hopes the downturn may be bottoming out has taken some downward pressure off the market, although bad news is still emerging.
"Although we are bullish on the platinum group metals, a sustained rally may be difficult to achieve without a modest recovery in auto demand," said HSBC in a note.
