GLOBAL MARKETS-Global stocks, oil slide on recovery worries
2009-05-12 13:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Global stocks slipped and oil prices retreated after hitting $60 a barrel on Tuesday as a rally in riskier assets lost steam on worries that expectations of a recovering economy might have been overdone.
Optimism was at cross currents among investors. The U.S. dollar fell to a four-month low, as currency markets focused on positive news out of Europe, revising some appetite for risk, while gold was firmer, reflecting some discomfort with recent rallies in stocks and crude oil.
Oil prices hit $60 for the first time in six months, boosted in part by the weaker dollar and stock market gains.
The euro extended gains against the dollar after a member of the European Central Bank Governing Council said there is no need for the ECB to expand its asset purchase program to other sorts of private debt. For more, see [ID:nLAG003429].
Longer-dated euro zone government bonds came under selling pressure as gains by the euro, which broke through a seven-week high of $1.37, ebbed
Weaker financial, mining and materials stocks outweighed positive drugmakers and energy shares in the United States and Europe, with banking shares among the biggest decliners.
Analysts said some investors, worried that there were unlikely to be any catalysts to sustain the recent hefty gains in the near-term, were taking profits.
"At this point there are not a lot of new reasons to buy stocks, earnings seasons is over and we've got through the stress tests," said Bruce Zaro, chief technical strategist at Delta Global Advisors in Boston.
At 1 p.m., the Dow Jones industrial average
fell 51.69 points, or 0.61 percent, at 8,367.08. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
fell 12.60 points, or 1.39 percent, at 896.64. The Nasdaq Composite Index
slipped 34.95 points, or 2.02 percent, at 1,696.29.
"The markets are looking a little overbought. They had such a sharp move in such a short space of time that they are in a need of a period of consolidation," said Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin.
"But in a sense, the market doesn't want to consolidate. The underlying tone still seems to be very firm," he said.
Although there was a lack of euro zone data, British retail sales, housing market surveys and industrial output bolstered a bullish view of the global economy, encouraging investors early in Europe to push riskier assets higher.
Gains in equity markets have also driven crude higher, with oil and stock prices being closely correlated since stocks bounced in April.
"Oil is riding the coat-tails of the equity market bounce for now, largely ignoring the build-up in oil inventories," said Harry Tchilinguirian, senior oil analyst at BNP Paribas.
"Weakness in oil fundamentals is reflected in elevated inventories, yet the market's price assessment appears to have brushed this aside."
The dollar fell against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY off 0.42 percent at 82.497. Against the yen, the dollar
The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note US10YT=RR fell 4/32 in price to yield at 3.18 percent. The 2-year U.S. Treasury note US2YT=RR was break-even, yielding 0.89 percent.
Earlier in Asia, sentiment was hit by data showing Chinese exports in April fell more steeply than expected from a year earlier, casting fresh doubt on the prospects for recovery in the world's third largest economy. Imports also dropped. [ID:nPEK146927]
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS recouped some earlier losses, falling 0.7 percent. Japan's Nikkei average
fell 1.6 percent. (Reporting by Edward Krudy, Wanfeng Zhou, Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in New York; Atul Prakash and Jane Merriman in London; writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Leslie Adler)
