RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-US dollar drops to 4-mth low, Asia stocks ris
2009-05-13 02:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar fell to a four-month low on Wednesday as optimism about a global recovery and concerns about U.S. fiscal health reduced its safe haven appeal, while oil prices near $60 a barrel helped energy shares push most Asian stock markets higher.
Major European stock indexes were expected to open as much as 1.1 percent higher, according to financial bookmakers, with energy and mining companies expected to benefit from higher commodity prices.
Government bonds continued to fall out of favour because investors were looking for higher returns elsewhere, with 10-year Japanese government bond futures hitting a six-month low and U.S. Treasuries under pressure.
"The decline in the U.S. dollar that we have seen over the past few weeks coupled with rising stock markets seems reflective of an asset allocation shift out of cash into equities," Ashley Davies, currency strategist with UBS in Singapore, said in a note to clients.
Adding to souring sentiment on the U.S. dollar, a commentary in the Financial Times about the risk of the U.S. government losing its top credit rating touched a nerve among traders. [ID:nSP488687]
The ICE Futures U.S. dollar index was down 0.4 percent .DXY after earlier plumbing its lowest level since Jan 9. The index has fallen 8.1 percent since March 9, when a global stock market rally started.
rose to its highest point against the dollar in seven weeks at around $1.3722, before easing to $1.3710, up 0.5 percent on the day.
U.S. crude for June delivery rose 1.6 percent to $59.76 a barrel CLc1 after briefly topping $60 on Tuesday, its highest level since November 2008.
An unexpectedly large draw down of U.S. inventories last week, reported by the American Petroleum Institute on Tuesday, helped buoy bullish sentiment in oil. [API/S] [EIA/S]
Gains in commodity prices in the last few months have not been as big as equity markets since they have been stymied by high inventory levels. However, in the last week the falling dollar and evidence of demand in China have propped them up.
Copper for three-month delivery traded in Shanghai rose 1.4 percent SCFc3, after the three-month copper futures on the London Metal Exchange rose 0.9 percent overnight MCU3.
In equities, a brief rally in defensive sectors fizzled by midday and sectors that benefit from positive turns in the business cycle -- consumer discretionary, technology and energy -- were leading by afternoon.
Signs that consumer spending incentives and government infrastructure projects were boosting China's economy have given added confidence to investors that a recovery is slowly unfolding and a shift to risker assets has room to run.
Dennis Stattman, head of BlackRock's global allocation fund, said in a note he was adding to the fund's equity position and diversifying fixed-income holdings from only government bonds to include convertible and corporate bonds on early signals of a turnaround.
"We're gradually increasing exposure to what people would consider 'risk,' in both stocks and bonds," he said.
Japan's Nikkei share average
edged up 0.5 percent in choppy trade, helped by a 6.3 percent rise in shares of Nissan Motor Co (
Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
rose 0.7 percent with shares of China's top offshore oil and gas producer CNOOC Ltd (
The energy sector was the main gainer in the MSCI index of Asia Pacific shares traded outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS, which rose 0.8 percent, just below a seven-month high struck on Monday. The index has gained 45 percent since March 9.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note rose about 3 basis points to 3.21 percent US10YT=RR ahead of U.S. retail sales data due later in the day, with dealers are not anticipating a change to the general theme of improving economic conditions.
