TOPWRAP 8-Optimism on world economy grows but trade data weak
2009-05-12 15:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. trade gap widened in March and Chinese exports fell sharply in April, data showed on Tuesday, but central banks expressed some optimism that the worst is over for the world economy.
Commercial banks, at the center of the crisis, continued to hold markets' focus. Several large U.S. banks undertook big capital-raising efforts, hoping to satisfy regulators, and sources said the resilience of European banks would be tested.
Warnings against too much optimism came from several quarters, including the president of the World Bank and the head of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, and equity investors appeared to agree.
Global stocks slipped and oil prices retreated after hitting $60 a barrel as a rally in riskier assets lost steam on worry that expectations for economic recovery might have been overdone. For details, see [ID:nN12428822].
"The markets are looking a little overbought," said Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin. "They had such a sharp move in such a short space of time that they are in a need of a period of consolidation."
The U.S. trade deficit widened in March for the first time in eight months, but the data held silver linings. Both exports and imports fell, but the trade gap was not as wide as expected. The drop-off in demand could be nearing a bottom. [ID:nN12305876]
A bigger-than-expected 22.6 percent annual fall in Chinese April exports showed subdued global demand, with Japanese exporters suffering. [ID:nPEK146927].
Analysts took heart from signs that Beijing's efforts to prop up domestic demand via a $585 billion stimulus seemed to be bearing fruit, but said global conditions remained difficult.
(For a related Graphic, click:
After Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke gave U.S. banks a vote of confidence, EU sources said the European Union would conduct its own bank stress tests by September, although it would look at the whole sector, not individual institutions.
"It is more a highly aggregated stress test, which should show the degree of resilience of the overall EU banking sector," one source familiar with EU finance ministers' deliberations said. [ID:nLC780880]
Late on Monday, Bernanke said he was confident in U.S. banks' ability to raise cash following government "stress tests" of the 19 biggest U.S. banks.
"Many of the banks are well ahead in finding private-sector options for increasing their common equity, and several have announced plans for new equity issues," he said. [ID:nN11480695]
) to a group of investors, a source said on Tuesday. U.S. Bancorp (
The IMF said Europe should take bolder steps to fix its banks, starting with stress tests of vulnerability, and should better coordinate national policies to improve chances of the region shaking off recession in 2010. [ID:nLC787314]
Policy-makers expressed cautious optimism about a gradual recovery, something that has propelled stock markets upward in the past two months.
A Bank of France survey on Tuesday predicted the French economy would shrink 0.6 percent in the second quarter, an easing in its rate of decline. [ID:nLC762967]
The sense of returning confidence was also apparent in the Bank of Korea's decision to hold interest rates steady for a third consecutive month and its forecast of "mild growth" in the months ahead. [ID:nSEO141340]
On Monday, leading central bankers said the global economy was about to turn the corner.
UK data on Tuesday backed the growing consensus that the first quarter of 2009 probably marked the low point for the world economy. The British Retail Consortium said sales jumped 4.6 percent year-on-year in April. A separate survey showed house prices in England and Wales fell at the slowest pace in 15 months in the quarter to April, and new buyer inquiries rose at their fastest pace in a decade. [ID:nLC770404]
But World Bank President Robert Zoellick said a high degree of uncertainty remained about the global economy [ID:nN12327519], and Atlanta Fed President Dennis Lockhart said it would be premature to say the economic storm was over. [ID:nN12298951]
Australia unveiled its largest deficit on record and forecast a decade of debt, starkly demonstrating the price to pay for trillions of dollars of public spending worldwide to tackle the economic crisis and the damage recession does to government revenues. [ID:nSYD465247]
), Japan's biggest electronics maker, lost $8.1 billion and drugmaker Daiichi Sankyo (
In contrast, Thomson Reuters research shows that of the more than 400 major U.S. companies that have reported first-quarter earnings to date, 65 percent have reported earnings above analyst expectations and only 28 percent missed forecasts. (Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
