WRAPUP 2-U.S. trade gap widens first time in eight months
2009-05-12 17:25:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. trade gap widened in March for the first time in eight months as oil imports jumped in a sign of a U.S. economic recovery, but weak overseas demand took a bite out of exports.
The trade gap grew to $27.6 billion in March, the U.S. Commerce Department reported on Tuesday, after shrinking in each of the previous seven months and hitting its lowest level in nine years in February.
Both U.S. imports and exports have fallen sharply since last July, as the global finance crisis has tightened credit and caused consumers and businesses to cut spending.
"The real story is much the same as it has been in recent months: global trade is drying up," said Tim Quinlan, economic analyst with Wachovia.
However, in a sign the U.S. economy could be nearing a turnaround, imports declined at a slower rate, down 1 percent in March compared with a 5.1 percent drop in February and even bigger declines in some preceding months.
"Today's numbers are better than many economists predicted, and it's worth noting that the trade deficit is half of what it was in the first quarter of 2008. Still, they indicate just how difficult the global economic environment is," Commerce Secretary Gary Locke said in a statement.
"While we have begun to see a few promising shoots of green, there is still much work to be done," Locke said.
"Taking account of all information presently available, it is likely that the Q1 GDP decline will be revised from 6.1 percent to 5.7 percent," said Nigel Gault, chief economist at IHS Global Insight.
The deep U.S. recession caused the government to post its first April deficit in 26 years, the Treasury Department said in a report that showed a record $20.91 billion shortfall for the year's biggest tax collection month.
The Dow rose on Tuesday as investors bought into shares of companies, including Pfizer (
), that supply goods people need no matter how the economy is faring. Energy stocks climbed as oil hit a six-month high.
U.S. Treasury debt prices held firm, while the dollar fell to a four-month low amid growing optimism about the global economy that boosted investors' risk appetite and curbed demand for the U.S. currency as a safe-haven.
That pushed the monthly petroleum import tab to a seasonally adjusted $17.2 billion, up slightly from February but still about half what it was in March 2008, when crude prices averaged $89.85 a barrel.
A further rise in oil prices since March suggests the trade gap could widen further in the months ahead, especially if exports remain weak. U.S. crude oil futures briefly touched $60 a barrel on Tuesday before settling up 35 cents at $58.85 on hopes economic recovery may boost fuel demand.
"I believe the gap will start to widen out as oil goes higher and we see some recovery," said Steve Goldman, market strategist at Weeden & Co. in Greenwich, Connecticut.
U.S. exports tumbled in March to $123.6 billion, after rising for one month in February. The March downturn resumed a trend dating back to July.
"The steepest export declines are behind us. But given the weak state of overseas economies, we do not expect the U.S. recovery to be export-led," Gault said.
Exports fell in most manufactured goods categories. In the capital goods sectors, which accounts for close to half of U.S. manufactured goods exports, 25 of the 32 categories declined, the National Association of Manufacturers said.
U.S. exports to China grew 19.1 percent in March to $5.6 billion, the highest in five months. However, U.S. imports from China also increased and the politically sensitive trade gap with that country grew to $15.6 billion in March.
In a separate report, the National Association of Realtors said U.S. home prices dropped in 134 of 152 metro areas on a year-over-year basis during the first quarter of 2009.
The national median price for an existing single-family home was $169,000, 13.8 percent lower than in the first quarter of 2008. The median is the half-way point, with half the prices above and half below this level.
Sheila Bair, head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., said in a speech to the real estate group that a recovery in the U.S. housing market could be as much as two years away.
"It's going to be a slog. It'll require hard work on the part of industry and government," Bair said, noting housing prices had fallen about 31 percent from a peak in early 2006. (Editing by Dan Grebler)
