GLOBAL MARKETS-Stock investors waver, oil gains, dollar falls
2009-05-12 17:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Global stocks faltered and oil edged higher on Tuesday, rising over $60 a barrel for the first time in six months, as growing optimism about the world economy was offset by a sell-off in financial and technology shares.
Markets were buffeted by cross currents of investor sentiment. The dollar fell to a four-month low as currency markets focused on positive news out of Europe, reviving some appetite for risk. But gold climbed, reflecting a degree of discomfort over recent rallies in stocks and crude oil.
Crude oil reached $60.08 a barrel, its highest level since November, on hopes an economic recovery may prompt rising fuel demand and on buying to hedge against a weaker dollar.
"We've passed the worst in the recession," said Matt Esteve, a foreign-exchange trader at Tempus Consulting in Washington. "We're not necessarily moving into growth yet, but at least the pace of deterioration has slowed."
U.S. Treasury debt prices held firm, maintaining strong gains from the previous day, as traders settled into a two-week break from this year's heavy schedule of bond auctions.
) and defensive stocks, including healthcare companies, like Johnson & Johnson (
), Pfizer (
But technology companies' stocks fell, led by a 4 percent decline in Apple (
), as investors also fretted over an apparent lack of incentives to drive the market higher.
"Investors are looking for some type of catalyst and there isn't a visible one out there that they can invest off of right now," said Bucky Hellwig, senior vice president at Morgan Asset Management in Birmingham, Alabama.
"The thawing of the financial markets, the end of the stress tests were clearly visible catalysts that played out well."
closed up 50.34 points, or 0.60 percent, at 8,469.11. But the Standard & Poor's 500 Index
fell 0.89 points, or 0.10 percent, at 908.35. The Nasdaq Composite Index
slid 15.32 points, or 0.88 percent, at 1,715.92.
The euro extended gains against the dollar after a member of the European Central Bank Governing Council said there is no need for the ECB to expand its asset purchase program to other sorts of private debt. For more, see [ID:nLAG003429].
Weaker financial, mining and materials stocks outweighed positive drugmakers' and energy shares in the United States and Europe, with banking shares among the biggest decliners.
Although there was a lack of euro-zone data, British retail sales, housing market surveys and industrial output bolstered a bullish view of the global economy, encouraging investors early in Europe to push riskier assets higher.
London Brent crude LCOc1 rose 46 cents, to $57.94 a barrel.
"There are institutional investors getting in, pushing up prices," said Jim Ritterbusch, president of Ritterbusch & Associates in Galena, Illinois. "The dollar is a little weak and that's also supportive for crude futures."
The dollar fell against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY off 0.69 percent at 82.267, after earlier hitting a session low at 81.998, its lowest since early January.
Late in the session, the euro
rose 0.4 percent to $1.3632. Against the yen, the dollar
The 30-year U.S. Treasury bond US30YT=RR rose 10/32 in price to yield 4.16 percent. The 2-year U.S. Treasury note US2YT=RR was break-even, yielding 0.89 percent.
Earlier in Asia, sentiment was hit by data showing Chinese exports in April fell more steeply than expected from a year earlier, casting fresh doubt on the prospects for recovery in the world's third-largest economy. Imports also dropped. [ID:nPEK146927]
The MSCI index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS recouped some earlier losses, falling 0.7 percent. Japan's Nikkei average
slid 1.6 percent. (Reporting by Leah Schnurr, Edward Krudy, Vivianne Rodrigues, Wanfeng Zhou, Joshua Schneyer and Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in New York; Atul Prakash and Jane Merriman in London; Writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Jan Paschal)
