Soy, grains firm on oil and dollar
2009-05-12 09:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Chicago soybean and grain futures were firm on Tuesday, supported by a weaker dollar and rising oil, as operators awaited a crucial supply and demand report from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
After trading flat earlier in a cautious pre-USDA market, Chicago futures turned higher on the back of gains for oil and equities amid renewed hopes of a bottoming out of the global recession.
"It's rare to see Chicago rise in an electronic session preceding the publication of a USDA report," one European trader said. "This reinforces bullish sentiment."
Euronext futures followed suit, with operators shrugging off export-penalizing strength in the euro, which hit a seven-week high against the dollar.
"People aren't paying attention to the euro. They are watching oil and Chicago," another European trader said.
Crude oil moved above $59 a barrel to hit a six-month high, helped by a four-month low for the dollar against a basket of currencies and fresh gains for share prices.
But operators cautioned that the session would hinge on reaction to the USDA's monthly crop report, due out at 8:30 a.m. EDT.
The main focus of the market is on soybeans, with analysts expecting the U.S. government to trim its estimates of world and U.S. soybean stocks.
However, talk that China is slowing imports of the oilseed has created some pressure on soy since Monday, although shipments are expected to remain high this month, traders said.
U.S. soy for May delivery, which expires this week, was up 0.27 percent at $11.33 per bushel at 1123 GMT. The most-active July soy was up 0.94 percent at $11.26-1/2.
On Euronext, November wheat added 0.97 percent to 155.75 euros a tonne to stay close to three-month highs.
Rapeseed showed sharper gains, with August up 2.38 percent at 322.00 euros a tonne, with traders citing the impact of technical adjustments in thin volumes.
Traders cautioned that Euronext wheat's rise in recent days was in the face of fundamentals that remained bearish in terms of heavy supplies and limited new export activity.
A keenly awaited number for wheat markets in the USDA report will be a first output estimate for this year's U.S. winter wheat crop.
In other crop news, the USDA said late on Monday that U.S. spring plantings for corn and wheat had progressed significantly last week but remained below-average because of recent wet weather.
In soybeans, China, the world's biggest soybean importer, bought 3.71 million tonnes of soybeans in April, a rise of 55.2 percent from a year earlier but down slightly from March's 3.86 million tonnes, official Customs figures showed.
Traders in Asia say China is expected to reduce buying of soybeans for July and August shipments, after booking a record 5 million tonnes for May and more than 4 million tonnes for June.
(Corn, soybean, wheat U.S. cents per bushel)
(Writing by Gus Trompiz, Editing by Peter Blackburn)
