FOREX-Dollar hits 4-month low as safe-haven demand eases
2009-05-12 00:26:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar fell to a four-month low on Tuesday as growing optimism that the global recession is easing dented the greenback's safe-haven appeal.
Stronger-than-expected UK retail sales, housing market and industrial production data pushed sterling up well over 1 percent versus the dollar earlier in the session, while the euro hit a seven-week high above $1.37.
Leading central bankers, including European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, said on Monday the global economy was at an "inflection point" and could turn the corner soon. [ID:nLB194016]
"We've passed the worst in the recession," said Matt Esteve, a foreign-exchange trader at Tempus Consulting in Washington. "We're not necessarily moving into growth yet, but at least the pace of deterioration has slowed."
"As the global economy approaches a turnaround, the dollar has really lost its appeal as a safe-haven investment," he added.
In midday trading in New York, the ICE Futures U.S. dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of six currencies, fell 0.4 percent, having hit 81.998, the lowest since early January .DXY.
The euro rose to a seven-week high of $1.3706, according to Reuters data. It was last up 0.3 percent at $1.3621
, getting a further lift after European Central Bank Governing Council member Axel Weber said there is no need for the ECB to expand its asset purchase program into other sorts of private debt at present. See [ID:nLAG003429].
Against the yen, the euro erased earlier gains to trade 0.6 percent lower at 131.55 yen EURJPY= and the dollar fell 1 percent to 96.58 yen
after sliding to 96.34 yen, the lowest since late April, according to Reuters data.
'GREEN SHOOTS'
"In general, market participants seem to be subscribing to the 'green shoots of recovery' theory," said Samarjit Shankar, director of global foreign exchange strategy at the Bank of New York Mellon in Boston. "If risk appetite remains in place, the dollar is likely to continue to weaken."
UK surveys overnight showed retail sales rising at their fastest rate in three years last month, while house prices declined at their slowest pace in 15 months. Separate data showed UK industrial and manufacturing output fell less than forecast in March [ID:nLC770404]. [ID:nLC775574].
, having earlier climbed to $1.5352, the best level since early January.
Despite the recent improvement in risk sentiment, many analysts cautioned that it remained too early to sound all clear on the economic outlook.
"There's still a lot of skepticism," said Steven Butler, head of FX trading at Scotia Capital in Toronto. "If the stock market can't make some new gains, I think the market will be very cautious about believing that the green shoots are here to last." (Editing by Leslie Adler)
