Venus bundled out in Madrid, Jankovic through
2009-05-12 19:13:00.0
Venus bundled out in Madrid, Jankovic through | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Venus bundled out in Madrid, Jankovic through
Venus Williams of the U.S. reacts during her match at the Madrid Open tennis tournament against Alisa Kleybanova of Russia May 12, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Juan Medina
Tue  EDT
The American was broken seven times by the 19-year-old world number 26 from Moscow, a day after Serena retired from her first round match against Francesca Schiavone with a knee injury.
Kleybanova, who knocked Ana Ivanovic out of this year's Australian Open, served for the match at 5-4 in the final set before Williams broke back.
But the Russian grabbed another break of serve in the next game and made no mistake second time around, sealing victory on her first match point when Williams went long with a forehand.
"It was not a good first set, just really flat, and that gave her the confidence that she had a chance," Williams said at a news conference.
With the French Open starting at the end of this month, one of two grand slams along with the Australian Open that she has never won, Williams said it was important for her not to take the defeat too much to heart.
"I think I'm playing really well and I'm moving well on the court and I feel good," she said. "I have another tournament to play so I'm focusing on playing positive there."
The Serb struggled with her fitness and the distraction of her mother's ill health earlier this season but appears to have regained her focus.
The former world number one next plays the winner of Wednesday's second-round match between Virginie Razzano of France and Russian qualifier Elena Vesnina.
'AWFUL TENNIS'
"I feel my game is getting back together and I am gaining confidence with my match and that is positive for me," Jankovic said at a news conference.
"I was playing awful tennis and it was a disaster for me and almost painful to watch me out there. But now it's a different story and I'm getting back into form and doing well so far."
Ninth-seeded Dane Caroline Wozniacki also went through to the third round, thrashing American qualifier Varvara Lepchenko 6-3 6-1, and Amelie Mauresmo of France beat China's Zheng Jie 6-2 7-5.
Current number one Dinara Safina, who had a bye into the second round, is due to play China's Li Na on Wednesday.
