Alpha Natural to buy Foundation for $1.5 billion in stock
2009-05-12 09:47:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue  EDT
) on Tuesday agreed to buy smaller rival Foundation Coal Holdings Inc FCL.N for about $1.5 billion in stock, in a deal that would create the third-largest U.S. coal producer.
The $2 billion deal, which includes $530 million debt, values Foundation at $32.73 a share and is at a 41 percent premium to its Monday closing price. Foundation shares surged more than 27 percent in early trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
The combined company will operate 59 coal mines and 14 preparation plants across the United States with reserves of more than 2.3 billion tons of coal, Alpha Natural said.
"We're creating a true U.S. leader in the energy sector with balance, size and scale," said Michael Quillen, CEO of Alpha.
But prices fell later as demand slumped amid the economic downturn prompting many large coal miners, including Alpha, to comment that they were looking at acquisition opportunities in the sector.
Under the deal, Foundation stockholders will receive 1.084 shares of the new company for each share held, while each share of Alpha will automatically become one share of the combined company.
The total consideration consists of about 50 million shares of the new company's stock and assumes about $530 million of Foundation Coal's debt, Alpha Natural said.
Upon closing of the deal, Alpha's current president Kevin Crutchfield will become chief executive officer of the combined company.
The deal, which is approved by both the companies, is expected to be completed later this year.
The combined company will retain the "Alpha" name and will continue to trade on the New York Stock Exchange under Alpha's current ticker symbol "ANR."
Shares of Alpha Natural were trading down 3 percent at $28.00 in before the bell trade, while Foundation Coal's shares rose as much as 27 percent on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Reporting by Chakradhar Adusumilli in Bangalore, Editing by Dinesh Nair)
