FOREX-Dollar falls sharply as buoyant mood continues
2009-05-12 08:13:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell to a four-month low against a currency basket on Tuesday as solid UK data fanned optimism that the global recession is easing, boosting sterling, as well as the euro and other perceived higher-risk currencies.
Stronger-than-expected UK retail sales, housing market and industrial production data pushed sterling up well over 1 percent versus the dollar, while the euro also hit a seven-week high against the U.S. currency.
The higher-yielding Australian and New Zealand dollars benefited from the rally in riskier assets, which helped to push oil prices to a six-month high just below $60 a barrel, while U.S. stock futures SPc1JDc1 also edged higher.
"The UK data is highlighting that the worst is probably behind us, which is giving a bit of a bid to riskier assets," RBC Capital Markets currency strategist Christian Lawrence said.
"It makes sense to see sterling rallying so much after the data, while the Australian and New Zealand dollars have been bid for most of the session," he added.
At 1154 GMT the dollar index was down 0.8 percent on the day, hitting a four-month low of 82.138 .DXY.
, its highest since Jan. 9.
, while the New Zealand dollar gained 0.6 percent to $0.6049
Against the yen, the euro rose 0.4 percent to 132.93 yen EURJPY=R and the dollar fell 0.4 percent against the yen at 97.18 yen
UK surveys overnight showed retail sales rising at their fastest rate in three years last month, while house prices declined at their slowest pace in 15 months [ID:nLC770404].
Adding to this, data also showed UK industrial and manufacturing output fell less than forecast in March [ID:nLC775574].
Investors also took heart from data from China overnight, which showed investment spending surged even though exports fell more steeply than expected [ID:nPEK146927].
"In the bigger picture not much has changed. The green shoots still have roots," said Maurice Pomery, managing director of Strategic Alpha in London.
Michael Hart, currency strategist at Citigroup in London advised caution, however, noting the numbers are merely "less catastrophic" and that the currency market's technical picture is triggering much of the dollar selling from model funds.
Australia's government unveiled on Tuesday its largest deficit on record, cut its growth predictions and raised its jobless forecasts [ID:nSYC000323], though this failed to put a significant dent into the global risk rally.
(Reporting by Jessica Mortimer; additional reporting by Jamie McGeever; editing by David Stamp)
