FOREX-Dollar falls to four-month low on economic hopes
2009-05-12 09:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar dropped to a four-month low on Tuesday as economic data bolstered the view that the global recession is easing and dented safe-haven demand for the greenback.
Stronger-than-expected UK retail sales, housing market and industrial production data pushed sterling up well over 1 percent versus the dollar, while the euro hit a seven-week high above $1.37 against the U.S. currency.
Investors also took heart from data from China overnight, which showed investment spending surged even though exports fell more steeply than expected. See [ID:nPEK146927].
"In general, market participants seem to be subscribing to the 'green shoots of recovery' theory," said Samarjit Shankar, director of global foreign exchange strategy at the Bank of New York Mellon in Boston. "If risk appetite remains in place, the dollar is likely to continue to weaken."
In early New York trading, the ICE Futures U.S. dollar index, which tracks the greenback against a basket of six currencies, fell 0.8 percent on the day, having earlier hit 81.998, the lowest since early January .DXY.
, extending gains after data that showed the U.S. trade gap widened less than expected in March boosted risk appetite [ID:nN11541619].
Against the yen, the euro rose 0.3 percent to 132.68 yen EURJPY= and the dollar fell 0.6 percent against the yen at 96.99 yen
, while the New Zealand dollar gained 1.1 percent to $0.6077
'GREEN SHOOTS'
UK surveys overnight showed retail sales rising at their fastest rate in three years last month, while house prices declined at their slowest pace in 15 months [ID:nLC770404].
Adding to this, data also showed UK industrial and manufacturing output fell less than forecast in March [ID:nLC775574].
, having earlier climbed to $1.5352, the strongest level since early January.
"The UK data is highlighting that the worst is probably behind us, which is giving a bit of a bid to riskier assets," RBC Capital Markets currency strategist Christian Lawrence said.
"It makes sense to see sterling rallying so much after the data, while the Australian and New Zealand dollars have been bid for most of the session," he added.
Michael Hart, currency strategist at Citigroup in London advised caution, however, noting the numbers are merely "less catastrophic" and that the currency market's technical picture is triggering much of the dollar selling from model funds.
Australia's government unveiled on Tuesday its largest deficit on record, cut its growth predictions and raised its jobless forecast [ID:nSYC000323], though this failed to put a significant dent into the global risk rally. (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer in London; editing by Padraic Cassidy)
