Central banks call turn in economy, but not quite yet
2009-05-11 17:10:00.0
(Reuters) - The global economy is about to turn the corner, leading central bankers said on Monday, but there were signs recovery could be long and painful.
The White House pushed up its forecast for the U.S. budget deficit, General Motors Corp (
) said a bankruptcy filing had become "more probable," [ID:nN11527661] and EU and U.S. businesses are set to cut more jobs while banks are still absorbing the impact of bad debts.
The central bankers' cautious optimism was backed by growing indications the economic and financial crisis is abating.
China said its efforts to boost economic growth were working, surveys showed business confidence returning in major emerging and European Union economies and the co-chief executive of German business software maker SAP (
Barclays Capital analyst Barry Knapp wrote that "we suspect the final month (of the recession) might be April 2009." But he added a note of caution, saying that "we continue to believe that the equity market and, more recently, some parts of the fixed-income market have overshot the improvement of the economic outlook."
"We are, as far as growth is concerned, around the inflection point in the cycle," said European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet. "In certain cases you see already a picking up (in gross domestic product). In other cases you see that it continues to fall but at a lower pace...
Crude oil imports data showed a spike in demand in China, adding to evidence that the worst of the recession may be over. China's rapid growth into one of the world's biggest economies was powered by global demand for its manufactured goods until the downturn last year.
Deputy Central Bank Governor Su Ning told a financial conference that "China's economy is expected to sustain rapid growth for some period in the future." Prime Minister Wen Jiabao told state radio the government's response to the financial crisis went far beyond its $585 billion stimulus and suggested it would roll out new initiatives throughout the year.
The White House on Monday increased its forecast for the U.S. budget deficit for the current financial year, reflecting the recession, a raft of new unemployment claims and corporate bailouts. The fresh estimate shows the deficit coming in at $1.84 trillion -- a massive 12.9 percent of gross domestic product -- in the year ending September 30.
With government "stress tests" on big U.S. banks out of the way, investors sold banking shares to take gains on both sides of the Atlantic. .N
Four big U.S. banks announced plans to sell $6.5 billion of common stock and repay funds from the government's bank bailout program.
"Banks are going to need to raise capital, that's weighing on the (stock) market," said Marc Pado, market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald in San Francisco. "We climbed a wall of worry, bought the rumor, and now we're selling the news."
U.S. stocks fell as investors booked profits in financials after a two-month run-up and news of several banks' share offerings heightened worries about their dilutive impact on current shareholders.
The dollar rose, rebounding from a four-month low, as the decline in stocks boosted its safe-haven appeal. <FRX/>
Oil fell toward $58 a barrel CLc1, pressured by weaker equity markets, a firmer dollar and profit-taking, all helping drive crude's price from six-month highs reached last Friday.
But not all the news in the financial sector was gloomy. HSBC HSBC.L, Europe's biggest bank, said first-quarter profit was "well ahead" of last year, swelled by record results in its investment bank, but would have been down without accounting gains on its debt.
Surveys of services sector firms in the European Union and the four major emerging economies -- Brazil, Russia, India and China -- showed an increasing number forecasting growing business and revenue in the next 12 months.
Even so, employment levels may still have some way to sink in the European Union, according to the surveys sponsored by accountancy firm KPMG.
"Much as we hesitate to talk of green shoots when employment expectations and other contributors to consumer confidence remain poor, the survey has a number of hopeful features," Mike Stevens at KPMG said of the survey.
"The bad news is that almost all sectors and all countries surveyed (UK, Germany, France, Italy, Spain and Ireland) expect a decline in employment and capital spending, and most countries expect a fall in profits, though to a lesser extent than six months ago," he added.
Industrial output fell more sharply than expected in March in both France and Italy, official data showed, with Italian production tumbling 4.6 percent month-on-month and French output down 1.4 percent.
The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development issued its leading indicator for March, which fell to 92.2 from 92.4 the previous month, with a 9.5-point drop year-on-year. However, it said the pace of decline in the world's major industrialized and emerging economies is easing, particularly in China, France, Italy and Britain.
(Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; Editing by Dan Grebler)
