BofA CEO sees big CCB stake despite capital need
2009-05-11 13:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
People stand in front of a China Construction Bank branch in Hong Kong April 16, 2007. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Mon  EDT
), ordered by the federal government to find $33.9 billion of capital, plans to retain a large stake in China Construction Bank Corp (
) even as it sells other assets, Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis said.
"It's a strategic partner, and we always want to have a very large ownership position," Lewis said on a conference call hosted by Calyon Securities.
CCB is China's second-largest bank. Bank of America owns a roughly 16.7 percent stake and was freed to sell some of it following last week's expiration of a lockup period.
Bank of America has said it plans to raise $17 billion of common equity, including from converting some preferred shares into common stock; $10 billion from selling assets including First Republic Bank and the Columbia asset management unit; and $7 billion from other sources.
Charlotte, North Carolina-based Bank of America has struggled with mounting credit losses, especially in credit cards, and a controversial acquisition of Merrill Lynch & Co.
It has taken $45 billion of taxpayer money from the federal Troubled Asset Relief Program, including $20 billion in January. Lewis said he hopes to start repaying the money in "months, not years."
Lewis, 62 years old, also said he would like to repay some if not all of the federal money before Bank of America installs his successor as chief executive.
He said "we have several people inside the company that I think would be very good successors, all of whom will go unnamed."
In April, a narrow majority of shareholders voted to oust Lewis as chairman. The bank installed Walter Massey, a director and president emeritus of Morehouse College, in that job.
Lewis has been Bank of America's chief executive for eight years, and had been chairman for most of that period.
In afternoon trading, the bank's shares were down 58 cents, or 4.1 percent, at $13.59 on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Reporting by Jonathan Stempel; Editing by Steve Orlofsky)
