Gold edges down as risk appetite returns
2009-05-11 05:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold edged down in Europe on Monday as returning risk appetite boosted the appeal of nominally riskier assets such as stocks and higher-yielding currencies, denting interest in bullion as a haven.
However, a much weaker dollar was limiting losses in the precious metal, analysts said.
Spot gold was bid at $913.10 an ounce at 0903 GMT (5:03 a.m. EDT), against $916.05 an ounce late in New York on Friday.
Commerzbank analyst Eugen Weinberg said investors are increasingly turning toward assets seen as riskier, such as stocks. "Gold is a safe haven, and you don't need to be safe at the moment," he said.
"Investment demand, which has been by far the most important guiding factor behind gold prices, is disappearing, so prices could correct," he added.
Nonetheless, fears over the inflation outlook and the prospect of a weaker dollar will still lend support to the gold market, he said.
Equities opened slightly weaker in Europe, but Asian shares rose to their highest in seven months as traders focused on the positive message of U.S. payrolls data released on Friday, which showed the economy shed fewer jobs than expected.
China added to positive news on Monday, as deputy Central Bank governor Su Ning told a conference the government's stimulus had worked better than expected.
On the foreign exchange markets, the dollar fell to its lowest in seven weeks versus the euro.
The U.S. currency's falls have supported gold, which is often bought as an alternative asset to the dollar, though the metal gave up some ground as the dollar lifted from lows.
Investment in gold-backed exchange-traded funds remained lackluster last week. Holdings of the world's largest, the SPDR Gold Trust, edged down 0.36 tonnes in the week to May 8 to 1,104.09 tonnes, while those of the three gold ETFs operated by London's ETF Securities were little changed.
Gold demand from India, the world's biggest bullion buyer, also slowed to a trickle on Monday, dealers said.
Meanwhile, spot silver eased to $13.90 an ounce against $13.98, tracking gold.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was bid at $1,136 an ounce against $1,145.50, while spot palladium was bid at $237 an ounce against $238.50.
ETF Securities said holdings of its platinum-backed exchange-traded commodities fell 5.7 percent last week or just over 19,000 ounces.
Buying of precious metals to back ETFs has been a significant source of demand for gold and silver in recent years, and is increasingly important for platinum and palladium.
), the world's third biggest platinum producer, unveiled a $457 million rights issue on Monday to cut its debt. It swung to a loss and scrapped its dividend in the first half after metals prices fell.
Investec said the company's guidance was "downbeat, with management saying it is "not planning for any significant recovery in platinum group metals prices in the next 12 months."
(Reporting by Jan Harvey; Editing by Anthony Barker)
