Gold firms despite stocks optimism, eyes inflation
2009-05-08 15:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold, despite losing some of its appeal as a safe-haven asset amid sentiment the worst of the financial crisis may be over, is holding its ground on expectations of long-term inflation once the economy reheats.
Even as renewed confidence in the equities market and appetite for risk reduced the need for a safe haven, the price of gold has been lodged above $900 per ounce.
"We seemed to avoid that fear about the financial meltdown. Now, people are looking forward through the valley of this economic crisis and thinking maybe the problem is going to be too much inflation because we are creating too much money," said Caesar Bryan, who manages $450 million assets at GAMCO Gold Fund in New York.
Recoveries in other commodities in recent weeks have not eroded the appetite for bullion much, the thinking being that the government's nearly $2 trillion economic and financial system bailout means that inflation will surface someday.
"Investors have been focusing on that the recession may be bottoming out and we are moving toward an economic recovery," said Jeffrey Christian, managing director of CPM Group in New York.
"There is a greater concern about inflationary implications of all the stimulus packages and less concern about deflation," he added.
This week, a flurry of positive U.S. economic indicators, including a slowdown in both private-sector and overall job losses as well as a brighter outlook for the housing market, have powered the broad-based S&P 500 index
"The economy seems to be recovering well and looks a bit firmer than what people had feared it might be at this point," said Mark Johnson, a portfolio manager at Texas-based USAA Investment, which manages close to $90 billion in mutual funds.
On Friday, U.S. gold futures for June delivery traded at $910, still far under a 2009 peak set above $1,000 on February 20 on safe-haven demand as equities plummeted.
Year to date, gold is up about 3 percent, while other economically sensitive commodities have rallied, with copper futures up more than 50 percent. Crude oil had reached a 2009 high of over $58 a barrel on Friday, recovered from levels around $34 set earlier in the year.
The "break-evens," or yield differences between the 10-year benchmark Treasury bonds and Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, known as TIPS, have been widening, albeit still at low levels, indicating deflation worries are subsiding.
On Thursday, the European Central Bank also slashed rates to a record low 1 percent and announced plans to buy bank bonds backed by mortgages.
"It would make sense that people might buy gold in this way. Should the recovery come ... the central banks will be too late to act. They will be way too slow to raise interest rates and counter inflation," said Eugen Weinberg, commodities analyst at Commerzbank in Frankfurt.
CENTRAL BANKS BECOMING BUYERS?
In addition, renewed interest of central banks to have gold as part of their monetary reserves could turn the official gold sector to a deficit from surpluses in recent years due to bullion's better price performance, market watchers said.
On April 23, China said that it has quietly increased its gold reserves by three-quarters to 1,054 tonnes since 2003, fueling expectations that China and other central banks will continue to be net gold buyers in the open market.
Meanwhile, GAMCO's Bryan noted that commodities such as copper and crude oil -- seen as barometers of global economic activity -- rallied sharply in the past several weeks.
"We are in uncharted territory in terms of central bank activities about what they have done to their balance sheets. We don't know what the consequences are going to be. Gold is an insurance policy against unintended consequences of these extraordinary moves by central banks," Bryan said.
(Additional reporting by Veronica Brown in London; Editing by Christian Wiessner)
