UPDATE 1-EU states seek more time on S.Korea pact-diplomats
2009-05-08 13:47:00.0
(Reuters) - The initialling of a $100 billion trade pact between the European Union and South Korea is unlikely to take place this month after EU states asked for more time to give political assent, diplomats said on Friday.
"A number of member states have asked for more details. Initialling at the summit is unlikely. A deal before the summer break is a more likely outcome," an EU source with knowledge of Friday's meeting of EU trade officials told Reuters.
EU and South Korean leaders will hold a summit on May 23 in Seoul to seek a final breakthrough in the talks aimed at lowering barriers to trade and investment. A deal with Seoul would be the EU's first such pact in Asia.
The United States is due to restart negotiations on a trade pact with South Korea, making the EU anxious to complete its own deal with Seoul before Washington signs off.
"There is concern that the Koreans would change their focus or become impatient with the EU, so the window of opportunity is certainly before the summer break," a second EU source said.
Even if the European Commission -- which oversees trade policy for the 27-country EU -- is given a mandate to initial the deal, South Korea has yet to give its blessing.
Once initialled, the full trade agreement could take up to seven years to be fully implemented.
The sources said a majority of EU countries supported the deal "in principle" but wanted more details from the Commission on a so-called "duty drawback" safeguard clause to protect European industry, notably influential carmakers.
Under duty drawback, South Korean carmakers can import cheap components from China and have all import duties paid on those parts reimbursed if they are in cars destined for the EU market.
The EU's auto industry -- employing 2.3 million people directly and a further 10 million in related sectors -- and some governments are unhappy over Korean manufacturers having this advantage.
But under the plan tabled by the Commission the amount of foreign components used in South Korean products would be limited to a maximum of 45 percent, otherwise known as the "country of origin rule".
"Member states, such as Germany, France and Austria asked for more clarity on this. They want to see how it will work in practice and how and when this clause will be triggered," another source said. (Editing by Dale Hudson)
