INTEVIEW-UPDATE 2-Diageo move for stake in Indian firm hits snag
2009-05-08 05:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Diageo Plc's (
) talks to buy a stake in India's United Spirits Ltd (
) haven't made headway as both sides are unable to agree on details, a Diageo executive said on Friday, sending United's shares down 8 percent.
"We have been in discussion, but we haven't yet been able to find a structure that is acceptable to both partners," Diageo Asia-Pacific President John Pollaers told Reuters in an interview. "We shouldn't assume that this will lead to a transaction overall," he said.
Diageo, the world's largest alcoholic drinks group, said in November it was considering a collaboration with United Spirits, to raise its exposure to one of the faster growing spirits markets in the world.
The Indian firm, the world's No. 3 spirits maker by volume, has said it was willing to offer a stake of more than 15 percent and board representation to Diageo.
At United's current market value of $1.35 billion, a 15 percent stake in it would cost Diageo at least $200 million.
"Both the parties are hard bargainers and there were issues with pricing and the structure of the deal even earlier," said Amnish Aggarwal, senior vice-president of research at Motilal Oswal Securities in Mumbai.
United Spirits shares were down 7.3 percent at 662.50 rupees on Friday afternoon, slightly above an intra-day low of 654.1 rupees. The broader Mumbai market was down 2.2 percent.
A deal, if done, would add to the flurry of M&A activity seen this year in the industry in Asia. On Thursday, Anheuser-Busch InBev INTB.BR agreed to sell South Korean subsidiary Oriental Brewery to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. for $1.8 billion.
Pollaers said Diageo, which owns Johnnie Walker whisky and Smirnoff vodka among its 200 alcoholic brands, had been growing at a "double-digit" rate in India from a small base and would continue to grow strongly even without United Spirits.
"We are very positive about our organic growth prospects in India," Pollaers, a former officer in the Australian Navy, said. "So we would not preclude ourselves from a transaction and we are in discussions, but it may not lead anywhere and our business is a strong business in its own right."
For instance, India was now the second-biggest market for Ciroc, Diageo's "superluxury" vodka, after the United States, and Black Label was an "iconic brand" in India, Pollaers said.
Diageo estimates India will account for 10 percent of the global spirits market by 2020 while China will have a 40 percent share, said Pollaers, whose responsibility spans from China to India, Southeast Asia and Australia and the South Pacific.
"We do see this region as an area we would continue to invest heavily in," Pollaers said, without elaborating. (Additional reporting by Janaki Krishnan in Mumbai; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
