Latest on th
2009-05-08 10:22:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
To see Reuters' Dealzone blog, click on:
Did you just feel a bottom?
Now that the stress test results are in and green shoots of economic promise abound, a great gush of lending is going to come spilling out of banks' lending spigots, right?
One of the more striking aspects about the Madoff affair is the large number of people who appear to have been 'hooked' on Madoff products.
The under-attack placement agent business has been given a vote of confidence from Blackstone's chief executive Stephen Schwarzman.
Schwarzman, whose Blackstone group has a placement agent subsidiary, Park Hill, said the investigations launched into middlemen had placed the whole industry under attack.
Energy asset on the block at Blackstone?
One intriguing remark that Blackstone COO Tony James let slip on today's earnings call is that it could be gearing up to sell an energy asset.
Faced with a $34 billion hole uncovered in the stress test, Bank of America might have little choice but to dump its investment in China Construction Bank, China's second-largest bank.
The Broadcom-Emulex saga seems to be unfolding by the book, but it turns out the two companies have some history.
Dell is looking to hire an M&A chief, The Wall Street Journal reports, adding that the computer maker has been interviewing "investment banking and technology industry veterans" for the newly created executive position, and could announce a hire within the next month.
Broadcom's tender offer for Emulex shares may be techland's first hostile deal this year, but unwanted moves seem to be fairly popular across the rest of the M&A landscape. At any rate, more popular than last year.
After March Madness, a little May rage
With the end of the economic meltdown so tantalizingly close, and stock markets pricing in the spring thaw, The Consumerist's annual Worst Company in America competition is just the tonic DealZone readers need to keep their prized sense of perspective appropriately tickled.
AIG's shares rose 15 percent when investors learned that the insurer would post a loss in the first quarter but it would not be as large as the hit it took in the last three months of 2008.
Pepsi Bottling has rejected PepsiCo's $6 billion offer for it and its main bottling competitor as "grossly inadequate". Given the two-headed nature of this best, don't be surprised to hear the same story from PepsiAmericas.
