S.Korea utilities in China coal talks, seek hefty discount
2009-05-08 04:47:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korean utilities have broken with tradition to jointly launch formal coal contract talks with Chinese miners in a bid to cut their contract tonnage by up to 40 percent, as well as secure a steep price discount.
An impasse over annual price talks, or a decision by South Korean power firms to walk away from the deal, could open the door for traders to sell more spot cargoes to Asia's second-largest coal market.
All five power companies will jointly negotiate with Chinese producers this year, departing from the norm of fixing term contracts individually, three utility sources said on Friday, as they press for a price cut of around 60 percent to sell the fuel in the low-$60 price ranges.
The power firms have sent a letter to China's Shenhua Energy Co (
), Datong Coal Mine Group and Shanxi Coal Import and Export Group on Thursday to initiate negotiations, a source from one of the power firms said.
"We're looking to settle in the low-$60s range. If they are not agreeable, we may decide not to buy any cargoes from them this year," said one utility source who is directly involved in the deal but did not want to be identified because of the sensitive nature of the talks.
"If that was the case, we can resort to buying more coal from the spot market. But of course, we want to first negotiate contract prices with our term contract suppliers."
South Korea's five power companies -- Kosep, Komipo, Kowepo, Kospo and Kewespo -- will cut their contract tonnage with Chinese miners to about 2.5 million tonnes this year, versus 4 million agreed last year at a price of $153.51 per tonne, based on coal with a calorific value of 6,080 kcal/kg (NAR) and including China's export taxes.
"Chinese producers will struggle to accept such prices," a Singapore-based trader said. "They may be happy to cut back on tonnage and sell more in the domestic market, where prices are much higher."
Utilities in South Korea, which are expected to import about 69 million tonnes of coal this year, have been actively seeking coal supplies through open tenders to take advantage of the price fluctuations on the globalCOAL Newcastle weekly index.
In recent tenders, several Korean power firms have finalised spot deals for Australian coal at between $57-$60 per tonne on a free-on-board basis, traders said, compared with benchmark prices that have hovered at between $62-$63 a tonne. (Additional reporting by Angela Moon in SEOUL; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
