Earnings to add more fuel to China stocks rally
2009-05-08 04:27:00.0
(Reuters) - China's benchmark stock index, the world's best-performing major index this year, is poised to rise another 10 to 15 percent over the next three months or so, boosted by brightening prospects for corporate earnings.
China's listed firms posted a steep fall in first-quarter earnings over a year earlier but combined profits jumped five-fold from the fourth quarter. Most importantly, earnings were stronger than expected.
That has fueled a 42 percent rally in the main Shanghai index this year, which is set to be propelled further as investors move money into large capitalized stocks, which are expected to play catch up with their counterparts in the wider market as Beijing's stimulus plans lift the economy.
"Corporate earnings are likely to improve each quarter for the rest of this year as China's economy is performing better than expected," said Wu Haijun, Shanghai principal at Power Pacific Corp of Canada, a foreign investor in Chinese stocks.
"Index heavyweights, in particular banks and other financial stocks, have lagged the market's rally this year, with their valuations remaining at a low level. Rises in the heavyweights are likely to spark another round of the rally in coming months."
The forecast price-earnings ratio for mainland large caps is around 12 to 15, lagging the broader market at 25 and Hong Kong at about 15. Also, the PEs on large caps have moved up more slowly since the end of 2008, suggesting some catch-up potential.
On the face of it, the reporting season that concluded last week showed companies in the grip of the downturn. The country's 1,600-plus listed companies posted a 26 percent fall in combined net profit in the first quarter from a year earlier.
But the results were better than a 40 percent slide forecast by analysts in mid-April and state media calculated the quarter's combined net earnings of 204 billion yuan ($30 billion) were more than five times bigger than in the fourth-quarter of 2008.
In April, as now, analysts pointed to banks, autos and refineries as likely to lead the stocks charge in coming months.
Eight stock analysts, fund managers and economists polled informally by Reuters forecast the benchmark Shanghai Composite Index would rise to around 3,000 points in August -- the peak reporting period for 2009 interim earnings reports that will decide the longer-term trend.
The index ended at a nine-month closing high of 2,597.447 points on Thursday and is up more than 42 percent so far this year. It slumped 65 percent last year as investors anticipated the earnings hit from the global downturn.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index is up 20 percent, Japan's Nikkei share average 6 percent and MSCI's index of Asia-Pacific stocks outside Japan 23 percent.
However, these markets have risen more strongly than the Shanghai index since hitting March lows.
Zhou Lin, senior stock analyst at Huatai Securities in Nanjing, said he believed first-quarter earnings had been stronger than expected because of the government's stimulus package to revive the economy.
The 4 trillion yuan, two-year plan announced in late 2008 is behind rising confidence that the economy is turning the corner after first-quarter growth slipped to its weakest in years.
This week, brokerage CLSA said its China purchasing managers' index (PMI) for April indicated the manufacturing sector was expanding for the first time since July 2008.
Analysts, however, warn that the market's rally this year may be built on fragile foundations having been fueled by heavy inflows of money from government pressure on banks to lend more.
However, the lending slowed to 632 billion yuan in April, banking sources said on Thursday, and a continued slowdown could undermine the rally, analysts said.
The 50 percent rise in average forecast price earnings ratios for China's listed firms since the end of 2008 has also pushed the premiums of mainland-listed yuan-denominated A shares over mainland firms listed in Hong Kong to 30 percent from 12 percent early this year, suggesting they may be ripe for profit taking.
"A big part of the market's rise this year is driven by huge liquidity in the system, and that means a threat will always be there that the market could fall once the liquidity pool ebbs," said Zheng Weigang, head of research at Shanghai Securities.
"High valuations also make the market vulnerable to a powerful correction if performance of the economy and corporate earnings fails to live up to investors' expectations."
