European shares up at midday, led by banks, energy
2009-05-08 07:24:00.0
(Reuters) - European stocks rose by midday on Friday, led by financials on relief that the results of stress tests on U.S. banks sprung no nasty surprises, while commodity shares advanced on hopes the economic slump could be easing.
By 1055 GMT, the FTSEurofirst 300
"The underlying sentiment is bullish," said Giuseppe-Guido Amato, equity strategist at German brokerage Lang & Schwarz.
"Many are still underinvested in equities. Buyers appear at any sign of weakness because so many have not yet jumped onto the bandwagon," he said.
But trading activity in Europe was dampened by a wait-and-see mood ahead of U.S. jobs data for April due at 1230 GMT. A Reuters poll of economists forecast that 590,000 non-farm jobs were lost compared with a loss of 663,000 in March.
On Thursday, an unexpected drop in new claims for U.S. jobless aid hinted that the labour market might be steadying.
"Falling initial claims data adds to the sense that even the labour market woes are turning, and if so, then mortgage delinquencies and other debt defaults may also be nearing their worst," ING said in a research note.
By midday on Friday, banks .SX7P added most points to the index. Royal Bank of Scotland (
) both gained over 7 percent, CS Group (
"Most of the numbers were known already but it seems people are relieved that there were no negative surprises," Amato said.
If subjected to the "stressed" case used by U.S. regulators, Europe's banks would need about 84 billion euros of extra capital, Credit Suisse analysts said.
Oil & gas .SXEP was the second strongest sector, helped by an over 2 percent rise in the price of crude CLc1 to almost $58 a barrel. [ID:nSP435537]
), Total (
), BP (
"Equity markets have begun to switch from a depression scenario to a scenario of 'only' a severe recession," said Commerzbank strategist Andreas Huerkamp.
"The outlook for the economy and thus for companies' earnings expectations should therefore stabilise in H2," he added.
A rebound in exports in Germany, Europe's biggest economy, provided another sign that the global recession may be easing. German exports rose 0.7 percent in March, the first positive reading in six months. [ID:nL8651157]
"It is undeniable that the recent tone of the data is becoming more positive," JPMorgan said. "Other data also suggest that German industry is starting to turn the corner," it said.
Gerhard Schwarz, equity strategist at UniCredit, saw the less bleak economic outlook underpinning stock markets.
"This will probably support the hopes of the global economy finding a more sustainable floor and -- looking to the summer months -- permit further price gains on the equity markets," he said.
Morgan Stanley, however, sounded a note of caution.
"While an improvement is noticeable, and has been supportive of cyclical share prices, it is important to remember that in absolute terms, these readings are still near all-time low levels," it said.
"The key question now is whether this is just stabilization in the rate of decline, or the beginning of a broader-based recovery. We think it's the former."
Mining stocks advanced on the back of metals prices [ID:nL8370147], which rose on improving sentiment about global economic prospects.
Xstrata XTA.L rose 5 percent, Vedanta (
) was up 4.2 percent, Antofagasta (
(Additional reporting by Atul Prakash in London; editing by John Stonestreet)
