UPDATE 2-China's Zhongwang shares drop 5 pct after $1.3 bln IPO
2009-05-08 01:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Shares of China Zhongwang Holdings (
), Asia's largest maker of aluminium extrusion products, fell nearly 5 percent in their Hong Kong trading debut on Friday after the company raised $1.3 billion in the world's biggest IPO since August.
The global market for initial public offerings, which had been all but shut for months, has seen increased activity over the past six weeks as stock prices have surged. Sources said this week that two more Chinese companies were close to launching Hong Kong offerings to raise a combined $1 billion.
Alfred Chan, chief dealer at Cheer Pearl Investment, said Zhongwang's muted debut should not crimp the appetite for future listings from China, where heavy stimulus spending has softened the impact of the global economic downturn.
"IPOs related to housing, to consumer spending will be highly attractive," he said.
Zhongwang shares ended the morning session at HK$6.68 each, compared with an initial public offering price of HK$7.00, which came towards the lower end of the offering's indicative range. The stock fell as much as 5.7 percent during the morning and traded below its offering price the entire session.
The IPO price valued Zhongwang at about 11 times forecast 2009 profit, a level some market players have said is expensive.
"Valuations are not very attractive because the P/E level is around 10 times. Most of the companies in the industrial sector are trading at single-digit P/Es," said Kenny Tang, associate director with Redford Securities.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index
ended the morning session up 0.2 percent after starting lower, building on a rally that has pushed the index to a seven-month high.
While the offering generated strong interest from institutions at the lower end of the range, Hong Kong retail investors were less impressed and the portion set aside for individuals was undersubscribed.
"The IPO was undersubscribed so it's reasonable that the opening price will drop below the IPO price," Tang added.
Globally, IPO volumes are down nearly 93 percent so far this year compared with a year ago, according to Thomson Reuters data.
China has been the biggest source of new listings in 2009, with five companies raising a combined $1.5 billion, according to Thomson Reuters data.
The Hong Kong bourse, operated by Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing (
), is the top market for IPOs this year, with eight companies raising $1.6 billion so far, or 37 percent of global volumes.
BBMG, one of China's top construction materials makers, plans to begin marketing a $500-$700 million Hong Kong IPO next week, sources involved in the deal have said.
Chinese herbal shampoo maker Bawang International also plans to list in Hong Kong in the next few weeks, source involved said, with an aim to raise $300 million.
Liaoning province-based Zhongwang, a privately-run firm, makes two main types of products.
Its industrial aluminium is used as components for railway cars, subways, trucks and autos, making it a beneficiary of China's heavy spending on transportation infrastructure. Its construction aluminium is used in the fabrication of door frames and window frames and interiors in upscale buildings.
In the IPO prospectus, Zhongwang said 2008 revenues nearly doubled to 11.3 billion yuan ($1.65 billion), mainly from growing demand and higher margins for its industrial aluminium.
The company's projects include a Beijing airport terminal and Beijing Olympic games venues. Zhongwang has said it would use the proceeds to expand capacity and buy equipment, as well as for working capital, debt repayment and research and development.
CITIC Securities, JPMorgan (
), Macquarie (
) were joint lead managers of the deal. CITIC Securities, JPMorgan and UBS were the bookrunners. (US$=HK$7.8) (Editing by Chris Lewis and Anshuman Daga)
