MONEY MARKETS-Hong Kong interbank rates fall after intervention
2009-05-08 01:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong interbank rates slumped again on Friday as authorities injected liquidity to keep the currency within its trading band while the cost of borrowing dollars in Asia remained below 1 percent as credit markets heal.
Funds are streaming into Hong Kong's financial markets on growing signs China will lead the territory out of the economic downturn and this has pushed the pegged Hong Kong dollar to the top of its trading band.
Under Hong Kong's currency peg, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) is obliged to intervene if the Hong Kong dollar, which can trade between 7.7500 and 7.8500 to the U.S. dollar, hits the upper or lower limit of its trading band.
On Thursday, the HKMA confirmed it injected HK$4.263 billion (US$550 million) into the money market lifting the aggregate balance -- sum of balances on clearing accounts maintained by banks with the HKMA -- to a record HK$211.033 billion by May 11.
"They are happy with it (the Hong Kong dollar) testing 7.75 and with injecting liquidity especially at a time when there are deflationary forces," said Craig Chan, analyst with Nomura Securities in Singapore.
HKMA chief Joseph Yam warned on Thursday hefty fund inflows could inflate asset prices in the territory, while local economic conditions remained difficult. He said the HKMA had issued extra exchange fund bills to absorb some of the funds, otherwise the aggregate balance would have been about HK$300 billion.
Asian dollar funding costs remained below 1 percent as dollar London interbank offered rates remained low, indicating banks' increased willingness to lend amid easing credit strains.
In Asia, three-month dollar funding rates in Singapore SIUSDD=ABSG fell to 0.95333 percent, down from 0.96857 percent.
Australian overnight index swaps AUOIS showed steady to slightly lower rates for a year ahead, as the central bank on Friday slashed its forecasts for economic growth.
The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) sees a sharp contraction this year, but expects record-low interest rates and fiscal stimulus to generate a gradual recovery through 2010.
"The RBA sounds like it's comfortably on hold now and perhaps believes it may be done cutting this cycle," said Rob Henderson, head of market economics at National Australia Bank.
"But its outlook for inflation also suggests that rates may stay low for longer, with no hike until 2011 even," he added.
The RBA skipped a chance to ease at its monthly meeting on Tuesday, after its slashed its cash rate by 425 basis points since September last year to a record low of 3.0 percent. (Editing by Neil Fullick)
