China lifts quarantine, denies discrimination
2009-05-07 10:43:00.0
(Reuters) - China lifted a seven-day quarantine for all passengers who arrived in Shanghai on the same flight as a Mexican found to be infected with H1N1 flu, and again denied discriminating against foreigners.
All 128 passengers, including one who had earlier shown flu-like symptoms, on the flight were released from quarantine, said Xinhua, citing a Health Ministry report on Thursday.
The passengers took a May 1 flight from Mexico City, which stopped in Shanghai on its way to Hong Kong.
One Mexican student criticized China's handling of the issue after leaving the Shanghai hotel where he had been quarantined simply for coming into contact with people on the flight.
"Unfortunately, I think there is a lot of ignorance about all this, and people just reacted without really knowing how you can get contaminated," Gerardo Santa Ana, who had just gone to the airport to collect a friend, told reporters.
"China reacted just really bad I think. In other countries, it hasn't been like this," he added. "It's really sad. I love China and Chinese people."
Mexico accused Beijing, armed with the experience of fending off the SARS crisis in 2003, of discrimination and called the confinement measures "unacceptable" and "without foundation". China rejected the criticism.
"The quarantine is not a discriminatory measure against foreign citizens," Chinese Foreign Minister Ma Zhaoxu told a news conference in Beijing. "In fact, the majority of the people in quarantine are Chinese.
Hong Kong, a former British colony and now a "special administrative region" of China, freed 28 people quarantined from the same flight on Thursday. A larger group of nearly 300 people are confined in a hotel and will be released on Friday. The infected Mexican man had stayed at the hotel.
"We have been giving them daily health checks and we are 100 percent satisfied with their fitness and they can now go on with their own business," Thomas Tsang, controller of the Center for Health Protection, told reporters.
Mexico has raised its confirmed death toll from the swine flu outbreak to 42 from 29, but says the worst is over and has eased curbs on commercial and public activity.
Twenty-five Canadian students were also released from quarantine in Changchun, capital of northeast Jilin province, the official Xinhua news agency said.
The students had shown no flu symptoms but were nonetheless quarantined after they arrived by plane last Saturday. Canadian Foreign Minister Lawrence Cannon signaled Ottawa's displeasure with their confinement and asked for an explanation.
