UPDATE 2-WHO says flu pandemic remains at level 5 of 6
2009-05-07 14:29:00.0
(Reuters) - H1N1 flu is not yet spreading in a sustained way outside North America, so the global pandemic level remains at 5 out of 6, a senior World Health Organisation official said on Thursday.
"We remain at Phase 5. That is not changed," said Keiji Fukuda, acting WHO assistant director-general. "We continue to see human to human transmission, community-level transmission, primarily in North America. We are not seeing it yet anywhere else," he told a news conference.
Chan has stressed that a move to the top level "does not mean, in any way, that we are facing the end of the world" and reflects assessments of how the virus is spreading, and not the severity of its effects.
The virus has killed 42 people in Mexico and two in the United States, according to the WHO's latest tally. Many of the 2,099 people worldwide with confirmed infections have had relatively mild symptoms similar to the seasonal flu.
Among affected countries in Europe, Spain and Britain have the largest number of confirmed cases, 73 and 28, respectively. This has raised concerns over sustained human-to-human spread that would trigger a rise in the global alert level.
"Based on the information we have, and we are in close contact with these countries, it is pretty much the status quo over the past few days," Fukuda said of the two countries.
Fukuda said governments should do all they can to get ready for possible infections with the H1N1 strain, which spreads through coughs, sneezes, and air droplets.
"This is a time in which we can work with countries to be as prepared as possible," he told a news conference in Geneva.
"Our bottom is line that there are things that countries can do, that we can help them with, to get them prepared for this potential increase in people getting sick."
Asked if a move to Phase 6 was likely, he said: "It is really impossible for anybody to predict right now."
It could take two years for a pandemic to ramp up momentum -- and if it does, the virus could infect as many as two billion people, or one in three people worldwide, Fukuda said.
"If we do move into a pandemic, our expectation is we will see a large number of people infected worldwide," he said, adding that "very large numbers of people" may develop pneumonia and require respirators and other hospital care to survive.
Up to 20 governments worldwide, including China and Russia, have imposed restrictions on pork imports from Mexico, the United States and other flu-affected countries.
The WHO and other international bodies including the Food and Agriculture Organisation and World Organisation for Animal Health have said there is no infection risk from meat from the virus, which is not food-borne. (Additional reporting by Jonathan Lynn and Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva and Michael Kahn in London)
