UPDATE 1-EU states seen backing EU-S.Korea trade pact-diplomats
2009-05-07 13:46:00.0
(Reuters) - European Union member states are expected to back the initialling next month of a $100 billion trade deal with South Korea, diplomats said on Thursday before a meeting of EU trade officials.
The diplomats told Reuters that a majority of the EU's 27 member states have indicated they will support the deal to tear down trade barriers with Seoul, held up by the concerns of Europe's ailing but influential car industry.
"It looks like most of the concerns have been addressed in the latest negotiating paper," one diplomat told Reuters.
"There will be tough talks on Friday, but overall I think there will be a political green light given to allow the European Commission to try to initial a deal at an EU-Korea summit on May 23."
For Brussels, a deal to lower barriers to trade and investment with South Korea would be its first such pact in Asia. The EU is the Asian country's second largest export market after China, and South Korea is the EU's fourth-largest non-European trade partner.
But so-called "duty drawback", whereby South Korean carmakers can import cheap components from China and have all import duties paid on those parts reimbursed by the South Korean government if they are in cars destined for the EU market, had been a major obstacle.
Once initialled, the full trade agreement could take up to seven years to be fully implemented.
The EU's auto industry -- employing 2.3 million people directly and a further 10 million in related sectors -- and some governments were unhappy over Korean manufacturers having this advantage.
"The compromise text tabled by the Commission seems to address industry concerns, notably carmakers, on duty drawback by setting the country of origin rule at around 45 percent as a safeguard," another diplomat said.
Under the "country of origin rule" plan being put forward by the European Commission, up to a maximum of 45 percent of foreign components used by Korean carmakers would be eligible for the tax break.
