China willing to do Rio deal without Hamersley stake
2009-05-07 07:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese state-owned aluminum maker Chinalco may be willing to go ahead with a $19.5 billion tie-up with Rio Tinto even if Australian regulators say it can't take a stake in a major Rio iron ore mine, people familiar with the deal said.
Dropping a proposed 15 percent stake in Rio's massive Hamersley mine would lop more than $5.1 billion from the overall deal, but that may be the price of getting the deal done.
"I don't think they're really worried about it," one source said, referring to Hamersley, adding that iron ore, while attractive to China, is not part of Chinalco's core business. "It's of value, but not strategic for them."
The Hamersley stake was seen as a sweetener for Chinalco back in February, but political momentum in Canberra has swelled against China's recent Australian resources shopping spree.
Hamersley is especially sensitive now that China is pressing for steep price cuts in iron ore contract negotiations. But there is little clarity on regulators' thinking given they approved in March a $438 million Chinese investment in Australian iron ore producer Fortescue Metals Group.
Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board is due to hand its recommendation on the deal to Treasurer Wayne Swan by mid-June. Swan has the final say, and Rio plans to put the deal to a shareholder vote if Swan approves it.
Chinalco executives say they are against any changes to the original debt and asset package, but it has signaled it's willing to go ahead even without Hamersley, sources familiar with the matter said.
In February, Chinalco agreed to buy stakes in Rio's iron ore, copper and aluminum assets and spend $7.3 billion on convertible debt in a $19.5 billion package deal that could double its Rio stake to 18 percent.
China's Minmetals recently showed Beijing's willingness to compromise for access to Australian resources when it renegotiated its takeover bid for OZ Minerals after Swan barred it from buying a prized copper and gold mine because of its proximity to a weapons-testing area.
"Obviously the amount of money they place in individual assets will be significantly different because the iron ore assets are a significant portion of Rio's operations -- as you can imagine that's been debated internally," said another source.
Rio, for its part, is giving off subtle signals that a deal revision may lurk on the near horizon.
Last month, Rio Tinto Finance (USA) Ltd sold $3.5 billion of notes in two parts, fuelling speculation it may be considering alternatives to Chinalco. And Rio's new chairman, Jan du Plessis, has said he would be prepared to scrap the Chinalco tie-up if shareholders looked certain to oppose it.
One scenario for a new deal includes Rio offering Chinalco convertible bonds worth 5 percent of the company's equity, with the remainder offered to other shareholders, the Financial Times reported last weekend.
On Thursday, Rio's head of strategy, Doug Ritchie, told reporters that the miner has not talked to Chinalco about revising the deal.
Still, the pending sale of such a big chunk of iron ore -- one of Australia's most strategic commodities -- continues to stoke opposition.
"It's of national interest, and that's what FIRB looks at when they look at these deals," said James Wilson, an analyst at DJ Carmichael.
