Somali pirates seize Dutch boat, chase U.S. ship
2009-05-07 10:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Somali pirates seized a small Dutch vessel on Thursday, a regional maritime group said, marking the latest hijacking by gangs proliferating in the region despite the presence of patrolling foreign warships.
"The crew are said to be safe. We are hearing there are between eight and 18 crew members, it's not clear yet," said Andrew Mwangura, of the Kenya-based East African Seafarers Assistance Programme.
He said the boat, which was heading westbound through the Gulf of Aden when it was seized, was the 2,575-tonne "Marathon", and that it was carrying coke fuel.
Somali pirate activity has been frenetic in recent weeks, despite an unprecedented deployment of warships from a number of nations intended to deter armed groups marauding in the Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden.
On Wednesday [irates freed a UAE-owned cargo ship on Wednesday and captured an Antigua- and Barbuda-flagged vessel the day before, but they are still holding about 20 ships with nearly 300 hostages, according to local piracy monitoring groups and the London-based International Maritime Bureau (IMB).
According to latest IMB figures, the pirates have carried out 109 attacks in the Gulf of Aden and off Somalia's coast so far this year, compared with 22 between January-May of 2008.
There have been 28 successful hijackings so far in 2009, up from eight in the first five months of 2008. Last year was the worst on record for Somali piracy with 42 boats taken.
Analysts say the presence of several dozen warships, from the United States, Europe, China, Japan and others, has had a limited success, bringing some captures but also pushing the pirates into wider zone of operations.
"Navies have had some success in their primary aim of disrupting piratical activity, and the success rate for pirate attacks has dropped from around one in three to about one in four," said Roger Middleton, of the Chatham House think tank.
All analysts agree, however, the long-term solution is to bring peace onshore to Somalia, in civil conflict since 1991.
"Naval or police action cannot provide any long-term solution to piracy in Somalia," Middleton added in a paper.
Another Somalia expert, Ken Menkhaus, concurred with that in his analysis of the piracy phenomenon.
"The Somali piracy epidemic is unquestionably an onshore crisis demanding an onshore solution," he said.
"Naval operations to interdict and apprehend pirates will help, but cannot possibly halt the daily quest of over a thousand gunmen in such vast waters when the risks are so low, rewards so high and alternatives so bleak in desolate Somalia."
