Clinton urges pressure on Russia, China over Syria
2012-07-06 06:18:00.0
Clinton urges pressure on Russia, China over Syria | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Clinton urges pressure on Russia, China over Syria
Fri, Jul 6 2012
Wed, Jul 4 2012
Tue, Jul 3 2012
Mon, Jul 2 2012
Sat, Jun 30 2012
Fri  EDT
"It is frankly not enough just to come to the Friends of the Syrian People (meeting) because I will tell you very frankly, I don't think Russia and China believe they are paying any price at all - nothing at all - for standing up on behalf of the Assad regime," Clinton said at a gathering of countries seeking to speed the departure of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
Russia and China have in the past vetoed U.N. Security Council resolutions designed to pressure Assad, who has sought to crush a rebellion against his family's 42-year rule.
In her comments, Clinton repeated the U.S. call for a Security Council resolution under Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter, which allows the council to authorize actions ranging from diplomatic and economic sanctions to military intervention.
"We should go back and ask for a resolution in the Security Council that imposes real and immediate consequences for noncompliance, including sanctions under Chapter 7," Clinton said. She also called for countries to better enforce existing bilateral sanctions on Syria.
"Let me also add that confronted with the regime's noncompliance, it is difficult to imagine how the U.N. supervision mission can fulfill its responsibilities without a Chapter 7 enforcement mechanism," she said. "It is clear unarmed observers cannot monitor a ceasefire that does not exist."
(Reporting By Arshad Mohammed; Editing by Mark Heinrich)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The US should put Hillary and Chelsea into uniforms and send them into Syria to fight. Hillary and Chelsea can join al-Qaeda that has already sent teams into Syria. The Stupidity of State was a US Stupiditor who voted for Shrub¡¯s ¡°Accomplished Mission¡± in Iraq. Now, she wants to blow the arms and legs off of American troops in Syria. Welcome to wars with explosives. I am willing to put the arms and legs of Hillary and Chelsea in danger. The US should give a medal to President Putin and President Hu for forcing the US to stay out of this debacle in Syria. I am a former Special Forces combat veteran who specialized in intelligence, but I cannot identify the goals of the players among the Syrian rebels at this time. It is idiocy that borders on treason to commit the US to fight someone else¡¯s war with no clear idea of the policies that the winners will follow. If Hillary is arrested, tried, convicted, and sentenced to die for treason, I volunteer to carry out the sentence.
Jul 06, 20126:26pm EDT--
It seems that Hilary Clinton¡¯s active role in making the US strategy shift in East Asia to make China the number one enemy of the US stems from her personal frustration that China doesn¡¯t comply with the US order in the Middle-East affairs. Does she ever think whether there is any good for the average American and for the world¡¯s people in pushing China and the US into the next cold war?
Jul 08, 20129:39am EDT--
