UPDATE 3-BofA needs $33.9 bln, eyes stock and asset sales
2009-05-07 19:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of America Corp (
), ordered by the government to find $33.9 billion of capital, said on Thursday it planned to sell assets and issue more common stock to cover the shortfall.
The capital-raising, half of which will come from the issuance of common stock, was announced after the government concluded that the largest U.S. bank faced a potential $136.6 billion of losses from loans, investments and trading in 2009 and 2010 under "more adverse" conditions.
"Our game plan is designed to get the government out of our bank as quickly as possible," Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis said on a conference call.
Lewis said he believed the government's tests overstated the bank's risks and understated its earnings potential.
He declined to affirm his goal of repaying the bank's $45 billion of government aid as soon as this year. He said the focus was "to pay it back as soon as possible," so long as debt markets improve.
Ten of the 19 banks were told to find capital. Bank of America's $33.9 billion capital raising is more than twice as much as the $13.7 billion that Wells Fargo & Co (
), deemed to have the second greatest capital need, was told to raise.
Bank of America said it plans to raise $17 billion of common equity, including through converting at less than 100 cents on the dollar some preferred shares held by private investors. The bank said this could involve issuance of 1.25 billion common shares.
It said it also plans to raise $10 billion from asset sales, including its Columbia asset management unit and First Republic Bank, and may enter into several joint ventures, including two already under consideration.
The bank also said it plans to get out of a loss-sharing agreement with the government on $118 billion of troubled assets, calling it unnecessary and too expensive.
Shares of Bank of America rose $1.24 in after-hours trading to $14.75, after closing up 82 cents at $13.51 in regular trading. Through the close, they had roughly quintupled over the last two-and-a-half months.
Bank of America also said it planned to "expeditiously" consider changes to its 18-person board of directors, which critics believe is too close to Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis.
Shareholders last week voted to oust Lewis as chairman, and he was replaced by Walter Massey, a board member and president emeritus of Morehouse College in Atlanta.
Lewis's ouster as chairman could lay the groundwork for his eventual departure from the bank he has worked at for 40 years, including the last eight as chief executive.
Massey, speaking on the call, said "our model is not broken," and Lewis later echoed that comment. (Reporting by Jonathan Stempel; Additional reporting by Elinor Comlay; Editing by Andre Grenon and Ted Kerr)
