Q+A-Who could be the next CEO at Singapore's DBS?
2009-05-07 03:30:00.0
(Reuters) - The biggest guessing game in Singapore's finance industry these days is to name the next chief executive of DBS Group (
), Southeast Asia's biggest bank.
The bank, 28 percent-owned by state investor Temasek Holdings, is looking at both internal and external candidates following the death last month of U.S.-born chief Richard Stanley.
A visionary CEO could be a shot in the arm for DBS, which is keen to expand in Asia as foreign banks scale back their operations. The bank unveils first quarter earnings on Friday.
WHO COULD BE THE MAIN CANDIDATES?
JEANETTE WONG, 47, has been head of DBS's institutional banking since last August and was CFO in 2003-08. A Singaporean, who has previously worked for JPMorgan and Citibank, she has good knowledge of corporate banking and understands DBS well. If DBS goes for an internal candidate, Wong would be top of the list.
RAJAN RAJU, 46, heads DBS's consumer banking and has headed South and Southeast Asia for the bank in the past. The Indian-born career commercial banker joined DBS in 1999 from Citibank. He could be the key man if DBS wants to expand in India, where it has received permission to open new branches.
DBS could spring a surprise and name current chairman KOH BOON HWEE, 58, as CEO. This would give internal candidates who could replace him in coming years more time to gain experience. Despite Harvard-educated Koh's corporate acumen, a lack of banking experience may be a drawback. Koh has been running DBS since Stanley was diagnosed with cancer in January.
FRANCIS ROZARIO, 56, is chief executive of the financial arm of Temasek. After spending almost three decades with Citi, India-born Rozario was hired in 2003 by Temasek to transform its majority-owned Indonesian lender Bank Danamon. He then worked for Fullerton Financial Holdings, a Temasek unit, which snapped up bank stakes in emerging markets such as China. Rozario was tipped as the next CEO during the last search in 2007-08 because of his global banking experience and M&A expertise.
MIKE DENOMA, 50, is a former global head of consumer banking at Standard Chartered (
). An American and a Wharton MBA, he also worked for Citi during the 1990s, and at consumer companies such as PepsiCo and Procter & Gamble. Credit Suisse named him an ideal candidate to take DBS to the next level.
HSIEH FU HUA, 59, whose term as the current CEO of Singapore Exchange ends in September, has also been tipped as a possible outside candidate.
WHAT DO ANALYSTS EXPECT FROM THE NEW CEO?
The new CEO must have M&A experience given future opportunities for acquisitions in Asia, should be able to energise the bank's consumer banking business, plagued by the sale of Lehman-linked financial products, and must have deep knowledge of Hong Kong and China. (Additional reporting by Kevin Lim; Editing by Neil Chatterjee)
