China lifts quarantine on Mexican flight passengers
2009-05-07 03:19:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu  EDT
The Health Ministry said the passengers who took the May 1 flight from Mexico City, which stopped in Shanghai on its way to Hong Kong, would all be released on Thursday if they had no flu-like symptoms, the Xinhua news agency said. None had by Wednesday.
One Mexican student criticized China's handling of the issue after leaving the Shanghai hotel where he had been quarantined.
"Unfortunately, I think there is a lot of ignorance about all this, and people just reacted without really knowing how can you get contaminated," Gerardo Santa Ana, who had just gone to the airport to collect a friend, told reporters.
"China reacted just really bad I think. In other countries, it hasn't been like this," he added. "It's really sad. I love China and Chinese people."
Mexico has raised its confirmed death toll from the swine flu outbreak to 42 from 29, but says the worst is over and has eased curbs on commercial and public activity.
Twenty-five Canadian students were also released from quarantine in Changchun, capital of northeast Jilin province, Xinhua said.
The students had shown no flu symptoms but were nonetheless quarantined after they arrived by plane last Saturday. Canadian Foreign Minister Lawrence Cannon signaled Ottawa's displeasure with their confinement and asked for an explanation.
Zeng Guang, chief epidemiologist of China's Centre for Disease Control, defended all quarantine measures, saying China had to be prepared for the worst.
"We should always prepare for the worst scenario while working toward the best results," Xinhua quoted him as saying.
Chinese President Hu Jintao and his U.S. counterpart, Barack Obama, discussed the flu crisis in a telephone call, Xinhua said.
"The Chinese president expressed sincere condolences over the A/H1N1 flu epidemic that has hit parts of the United States," it said.
"We are willing to keep contact with the World Health Organisation, the United States and other parties concerned, and strengthen cooperation to jointly confront this public health challenge," Hu was quoted as saying.
