HK shares up 0.79 pct on Wall St gains; CCB, Alibaba gain
2009-05-07 01:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares rose 0.79 percent at midday on Thursday to a seven-month high, gaining ground for a sixth consecutive session after strong U.S. economic news and optimism about the nation's bank stress-test results fuelled a sharp rally overnight on Wall Street.
) soared as much as 7.4 percent to a seven-month high on hopes that China's main sovereign investment fund would take up a substantial portion of an expected sale of shares owned by Bank of America (
was up 132.47 points at 16,967.04 by midday.
Turnover rose to HK$56.2 billion from midday Wednesday's HK$43.3 billion.
But some analysts expressed wariness over the market's swift rally and questioned its sustainability.
"There are wishful hopes among some investors that the economy may recover soon," said Peter Lai, a director with DBS Vickers. "The stock market has been overbought and all indicators are showing that a correction will happen soon. Investors will take any excuse to take profits."
In a sign that the stock market may be poised to fall, the relative strength index on Thursday reached 78. A level above 70 represents an overbought market, while a reading below 30 signals an oversold market.
"I don't see any fundamentals supporting the Hang Seng Index at this level," said Andrew To, sales director, Tai Fook Securities.
"From the second half of May till late June, I expect some sort of major pullback. It's time to get out of the market now. I'm not advising any of my clients to buy."
CCB shares rose as high as HK$5.10 during morning trading on hopes that China Investment Corporation may be willing to buy some of the shares that Bank of America is expected to sell in CCB, according to analysts quoted in a report by Hong Kong-based newspaper Ta Kung Pao.
Shares of CCB had fallen in the previous two sessions on expectations of a selldown in CCB H-shares owned by Bank of America as the lock-in on the American lender's 13.5 billion shares expires on Thursday.
"Market sentiment has improved substantially since then and the news that some of China's national corporations will take up a major portion of the share placement will lighten pressure on the stock," said To.
ALIBABA RISES, SINOPEC DOWN
of top mainland companies was down 0.05 percent at 9,744.90.
), Asia's top oil refiner, was down 3.6 percent at HK$6.21 after oil prices extended gains towards $57 per barrel.
China's top e-commerce company Alibaba 1688.HK rallied by as much as 6 percent in early trade after first-quarter results on Wednesday showed record customer base growth.
) was up 6.4 percent at a six-month high of HK$150, extending gains from Wednesday's session, after the bank reported a record first-quarter profit, reaping the benefits of a focus on Asia and a resilient loan book.
Stanchart's stellar performance helped another British bank, HSBC Holdings (
), shrug off news about U.S. bank stress tests results to advance 3.5 percent.
