UPDATE 2-Norske Skog plans more shutdowns after weak Q1
2009-05-07 05:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Norwegian papermaker Norske Skog (
) reported a smaller-than-expected rise in core earnings on Thursday, hit by a sharp drop in demand, and said shutdowns at its least profitable mills would continue.
Its shares plunged 7.6 percent to 15.80 crowns by 0955 GMT, against the trend of a strong Oslo bourse .OSEBX and DJ Stoxx basic materials index .SXPP.
Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) rose to 504 million crowns ($76.6 million) in the three months to the end of March from 489 million a year earlier.
Norske Skog, one of the world's biggest newsprint producers, had warned in April that results for the first quarter were significantly weaker than in the fourth quarter of 2008, but improved from the same quarter last year.
The result undershot all forecasts that ranged from 514 million to 922 million, with an average of 639 million.
"It is a weak set of numbers -- disappointing across the board," said CSFB's forest industry analyst Lars Kjellberg. "Debt is down, but generally it is tough out there, and not particularly encouraging."
Kjellberg said a steep drop in the group's Asian business -- it said first-quarter paper demand in Asia fell 20 percent from a year ago -- was "a huge negative".
"They are haemorrhaging in China," Kjellberg said.
The paper industry has struggled for more than six years to climb out of a slump, as soft demand and overcapacity have kept prices down and earnings poor. The report followed weak results from rivals Stora Enso (
The current global downturn has further eroded demand for basic materials, including paper, as print advertising has dropped steeply in the crisis.
"The result is significantly negatively impacted by the sharp drop in global demand for newsprint and magazine paper," Norske Skog said in a statement, adding that first-quarter production fell by 15 percent from the fourth quarter.
"We will be implementing measures to improve operating rates by shutting down the least profitable capacity. Both temporary and permanent measures are being considered," Chief Executive Christian Rynning-Toennesen said in the statement.
Norske Skog said it would implement a new profit enhancement programme in 2009-2010 to replace the one completed at the end of last year, with "significant" savings potential identified in wood, recovered paper and energy costs.
Capacity utilisation -- a determinant of profitability for the capital-intensive paper industry -- fell to 76 percent in the first quarter from around 90 percent in both the fourth and first quarters of 2008, Norske Skog said.
"High capacity utilisation is essential to keeping our costs at a competitive level," Rynning-Toennesen said.
Operating results were "substantially weaker" in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter of 2008 in all regions, with the exception of the group's South American business.
Net interest bearing debt was reduced with free cash flow by 1.1 billion crowns during the first quarter to 12.9 billion at end-March, and gearing rose to 1.08 from a year-end level of 1.05, the company said.
The average remaining maturity of long-term debt was extended 5.8 years during the quarter from 5.2 years at year-end, it said. ($1=6.581 Norwegian crowns) (Reporting by John Acher; editing by John Stonestreet and Mike Nesbit)
