HK shares rise for sixth day to close at 7-mth high
2009-05-07 04:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares rose 2.28 percent on Thursday to close at a seven-month high, gaining ground for a sixth consecutive session, as optimism about U.S. bank stress-test results fuelled a sharp rally in shares of heavyweight HSBC Holdings (
"It's not only liquidity that's supporting this rally, the market will be supported by fundamentals --- there's going to be a recovery in the U.S. and 8 percent growth in China," said Alex Tang, research director at Core Pacific-Yamaichi International.
But some analysts expressed wariness over the market's swift rally, as the index has jumped 52 percent from its 2009 low in early March, and questioned its sustainability.
"There are wishful hopes among some investors that the economy may recover soon," said Peter Lai, a director with DBS Vickers. "The stock market has been overbought and all indicators are showing that a correction will happen soon. Investors will take any excuse to take profits."
finished at 17,217.89, its best closing level since October last year.
In a sign that the stock market may be poised to fall, the relative strength index on Thursday reached 80. A level above 70 represents an overbought market, while a reading below 30 signals an oversold market.
"I don't see any fundamentals supporting the Hang Seng Index at this level," said Andrew To, sales director, Tai Fook Securities.
"From the second half of May till late June, I expect some sort of major pullback. It's time to get out of the market now. I'm not advising any of my clients to buy."
), which generates a part of its revenue from the United States, rose 5.6 percent to HK$65.05 -- its highest level in more than three months.
The U.S. government is due to release stress test results on Thursday. Several reports on the capital needs for 10 of the 19 banks under the government's microscope have revealed how well the industry will cope with perhaps the most severe recession since World War Two. For details, see [ID:nL6943131]
"Most of the U.S. banks have passed the hurdle. This is telling us that for the financial sector, the worst is over," Tang said. "HSBC will not have such huge provisions for its U.S. exposure."
HSBC shares have more than doubled in value since their brutal selloff early in March after the UK's largest lender made a massive cash call to shore up its balance sheet.
CCB, ALIBABA SOAR
) soared 5.1 percent to a seven-month closing high of HK$4.99 on hopes that China's main sovereign investment fund would take up a substantial portion of an expected sale of shares owned by Bank of America.
China Investment Corporation may be willing to buy some of the shares that Bank of America is expected to sell in CCB, according to analysts quoted in a report by Hong Kong-based newspaper Ta Kung Pao.
Shares of CCB had fallen in the previous two sessions on expectations of a selldown in CCB H-shares owned by Bank of America as the lock-in on the American lender's 13.5 billion shares expires on Thursday.
"Market sentiment has improved substantially since then and the news that some of China's national corporations will take up a major portion of the share placement will lighten pressure on the stock," said To.
of top mainland companies was up 1.5 percent at 9,896.93.
Shares of China's top e-commerce company Alibaba 1688.HK rallied 14.7 percent on to HK$11.74 on hopes the company would declare a dividend.
) was up 8.7 percent at a six-month high of HK$153.30, extending gains from Wednesday's session, after the bank reported a record first-quarter profit, reaping the benefits of a focus on Asia and a resilient loan book.
