UPDATE 3-Hitachi sees even bigger 2008/09 net loss
2009-05-07 02:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Hitachi Ltd (
) said it would report an even bigger than expected net loss for the last financial year due to tax costs, but it more than tripled its operating profit estimate on cost cuts and solid sales of power and industrial systems.
Already facing the biggest ever annual loss by a Japanese manufacturer, Hitachi plans to slash costs by pulling out of unprofitable businesses and closing plants while shifting resources to more stable infrastructure sectors.
Some of the cost-cutting steps have already had an impact, leading Hitachi to raise its operating profit estimate for the last financial year, but Japan's biggest industrial electronics firm expects business conditions to remain tough this year, an executive said on Thursday.
Its chip joint venture, Renesas Technology, is dragging down Hitachi's earnings and is in merger talks with domestic rival NEC Electronics (
"The economy probably won't recover soon ... and the trend of price falls has not yet reversed," Hitachi Executive Vice President Takashi Miyoshi told a briefing. "We need to continue with our efforts to reduce costs."
Hitachi said its net loss likely totalled 788 billion yen ($8 billion) for the year that ended on March 31, wider than its previous estimate of 700 billion yen, as it writes down deferred tax assets to avoid risks from possible future tax hikes.
But also said it it expected an operating profit of 127 billion yen, much higher than its earlier estimate of 40 billion yen and the consensus for 39 billion yen from a poll of 13 analysts by Thomson Reuters.
Miyoshi said demand for some products such as smaller TVs has started to show some recovery in China, but business conditions for automotive and consumer electronics sectors remained severe.
He declined to comment on earnings forecasts for the current year, but said the company would likely book large restructuring costs. Hitachi is scheduled to report earnings results and forecasts on May 12. NEC Electronics, a unit of NEC Corp (
), said it now expects to report an operating loss of 68.5 billion yen for the year that ended in March against its previous estimate of 55 billion yen.
Hitachi's shares closed up 7.3 percent at 370 yen, rising more after the announcement. They outperformed a 4.6 percent rise in the benchmark Nikkei average
. NEC Electronics ended down 0.8 percent. (Reporting by Sachi Izumi; Editing by Hugh Lawson)
