Asia Steel-China prices up 2.8 pct on demand pickup
2009-05-07 04:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices rose 2.8 percent this week in the second consecutive weekly gain, on growing recovery expectations as manufacturing data improved for the fifth straight month.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil rose 2.8 percent to around 3,310 yuan ($485.4) a tonne this week, versus 3,175/3,265 quoted last week, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphic on Chinese spot steel prices, click:
"The overall sentiment has improved in recent weeks and there are some sporadic cases of demand inquiries, which supported prices," said a Chinese steel trader.
After falling more than 40 percent from a peak in August on weak demand and heavy inventory build-up, Chinese steel prices have regained some stability in recent weeks, as demand slowly picked up, led by the construction and auto sectors which have benefited from the government's stimulus policies.
China's Purchasing Manager's Index rose to 53.5 in April in its fifth consecutive monthly gain, adding to tentative evidence from around the world that the global economy may soon be on the path to recovery. [ID:nPEK279290]
"The upturn in steel prices indicates a certain degree of recovery in demand, but we think it also reflects a curbing of supply because of many steelmakers posting red ink with prices at their current levels," Nomura analyst Y. Matsumoto said.
China, which increased steel output by 1.4 percent in the first quarter to 127 million tonnes even as global output fell by 23 percent, appears to be reining in output again to support prices, traders said.
"April steel production appears to have decreased from the average monthly level for the first quarter as the central government is now collecting feedback from steel mills to curb output," said another trader.
Although China vowed again this week to further downsize its steel and base metal capacities, risks remain, as producers have shown strong resilience to any price recovery by promptly increasing output. [ID:nSHA42721]
"We see a risk that supply-demand will deteriorate if prices start rising again. As such we see little prospect of prices continuing to head upward," said Matsumoto at Nomura.
Raising concerns over rampant output growth, a report from the official Xinhua news agency said that Shougang Group will open its new steel mill on the northern Chinese coast this month that will make 4.85 million tonnes a year. [ID:nPEK56473]
China's steel sector, whose rampant growth has been fuelled by the country's economic boom, saw its total capacity exceed 600 million tonnes in 2008, but only produced 500 million tonnes due to weakened demand.
Imports of iron ore also hit a record high for a third successive month in April, and ore stocks at Chinese ports are near record highs, which could feed into a strong rebound in steel production. [ID:nSHA205195]
In South Korea, market conditions have also improved and traders narrowed price discounts on construction steel amid expectations for demand recovery on government stimulus spending policies, traders said. ($1=6.819 Yuan) (Reporting by Miyoung Kim; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
