Hint of hope in Europe, U.S. banks may need blns
2009-05-06 16:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Slowing U.S. job losses and better news about Europe's service industries on Wednesday added to signs the global recession is easing, as investors welcomed early word on the results of Washington's "stress tests" of major banks.
U.S. private-sector job losses slowed much more than expected in April, hitting their lowest since November, according to ADP Employer Services. The report, two days before the U.S. government's broader payrolls data on Friday, showed private employers cut 491,000 jobs, versus 708,000 lost in March.
U.S. mortgage applications also rose last week, despite higher interest rates, in another indication that the U.S. economy is pulling out of free fall.
Europe's Markit index of services business activity staged its biggest one-month increase since December 2001 and companies were even more optimistic about the future.
Markit unexpectedly revised its index for April to 43.8, from March's 40.9. The rate of contraction slowed in all four of the biggest euro zone countries, but remained well below 50, the mark that divides growth from slump.
Britain's April reading hit an eight-month high of 48.7 after the biggest month-on-month rise in 10 years.
) that it needs $34 billion of capital to cushion itself in case of a deep economic downturn, roughly triple what it had been expected to need, an industry source told Reuters as the U.S. government prepared to release the results of its stress tests on the 19 largest U.S. banks.
) may need as much as $10 billion, a source said. About 10 of the 19 banks tested are expected to need capital to withstand further shocks, according to an industry source familiar with the test results.
Bank of America, which has already received $45 billion of public funds, has been at the top of lists of those believed to need more capital, as it faces significant credit losses and a controversial takeover of Merrill Lynch & Co.
Banks found to need capital could convert preferred stock, raise fresh private capital or seek government help.
The stress test results are due on Thursday, but bank stocks soared, extending a two-month rally, as investors welcomed the clarity over how well the industry will cope with the worst recession in decades.
If three-fourths or even half of the banks pass the test, then the government can focus on the few remaining banks that need federal help, said Phil Orlando, chief equity market strategist at Federated Investors in New York.
"In my mind, at least, it just means we're getting that much closer to a resolution," he said.
In New York, the Dow Jones
, S&P 500 and NASDAQ
, boosted by better-than-expected profits from France's largest bank, BNP Paribas (
"The markets are concluding that policymakers have been both astute and assertive," said Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist and head of research at Brewin Dolphin Securities in London.
China's central bank said the country's economy -- the engine of global expansion in recent years -- would see stable and fast growth, echoing one of its most influential advisers, Fang Gang.
A reminder of the far-from-robust state of Europe's economy came in news that retail sales in the 16 countries using the euro fell 0.6 percent in March, putting the figure down a record 4.2 percent year-on-year.
The European Central Bank has been pumping cash into the system to counter recession, as evidenced by a key interest rate hitting a fresh record low.
Economic growth in Asia could recover to 4.3 percent in 2010 from an estimated 1.3 percent this year, the International Monetary Fund said, although that forecast depended on monetary and fiscal conditions remaining accommodative for a while.
A European Central Bank policymaker sounded a cautious note, saying problems in banking could hold back recovery.
"It is clear that before our economies can come back on track, the situation in the financial sector should have been stabilized and that is not the case yet," Dutch central bank governor Nout Wellink said in Kuala Lumpur.
Stocks, commodities, emerging market debt and high-yielding currencies have all rallied in recent weeks as signs that the global economic slump was reaching a bottom boosted investors' appetite for riskier assets.
"The bank stress tests might rattle market confidence and the recent outbreak of optimism might be due for its own stress test," said David Watt, senior currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets in Sydney.
(Additional reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; Editing by Brian Moss and Steve Orlofsky)
