UAW vice president lambasts GM restructuring plan
2009-05-06 15:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EDT
) on Wednesday for a restructuring that would eliminate more than 20,000 union factory jobs while adding production overseas.
King, the union's vice president overseeing Ford Motor Co (
), lauded that automaker for a truck plant conversion plan that would save some jobs in Michigan, while questioning the restructuring of rivals to Ford that he did not name.
King's remarks came the day after the UAW rejected GM's restructuring plan, which includes closing North American plants and underscores how far apart the union and GM are on the basic questions of what a restructured company should look like and where it should be building vehicles.
"Across the country, (Ford Executive Chairman) Bill Ford and (Chief Executive) Alan Mulally are committed to manufacturing in the United States of America," King said in a news conference announcing the plant conversion.
King, seen as a potential successor when UAW President Ron Gettelfinger retires in 2010 at the conclusion of his current term, questioned the commitments of other automakers.
"There are some companies that want to sell cars here that they are not going to build here," King said. "There are some restructuring plans that are saying they want to take the jobs out of America and they want to build (cars) in China and Korea and Mexico rather than building them in the United States of America."
King's comments echoed a UAW letter to Congress on Tuesday urging the government to reject the latest restructuring plan, under which GM would close 16 plants.
The union's healthcare trust could own 39 percent of a restructured GM under the terms of a plan the automaker has detailed to swap about $10 billion owed to the trust fund for equity in a recapitalized company.
GM said on Tuesday that it expected to resume talks with the UAW this week on its restructuring plan and the terms of a new cost-cutting contract that would parallel deals already approved for Ford and Chrysler LLC. (Reporting by David Bailey and Soyoung Kim, editing by Gerald E. McCormick)
