FACTBOX-Retailers sees hope in the gloom at global summit
2009-05-06 08:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Retailers are experiencing the worst economic downturn in living memory, according to a straw poll of delegates at the World Retail Congress in Barcelona. But some are seeing signs that recovery is on the way.
"There is now a pervasive, persistent and pronounced improvement in the leading economic indicators in the U.S. and also in China. So I'm reasonably confident that the U.S. economy will bottom out in the next few months and the Chinese economy likewise" -- Ajay Kapur, chief global and Asia strategist at Mirae Asset.
"There are some green shoots ... My forecast is that by the end of this year or at least early next year we'll see the U.S. economy start to grow again" -- Ira Kalish, director of global research at Deloitte.
"If you look at the pronouncements from the leaders during the G20 meetings, everyone had on their agenda that they would not put up trade protectionist barriers.
"But rhetoric is rhetoric. I am not so sure that trade protectionism would not be a major issue coming forward especially when you see that even in President Obama's rescue package this 'Buy American' concept" -- William Fung, managing director of export sourcing and distribution group Li & Fung.
"About 10 to 15 percent of the world's container ships have actually been lying idle now for two or three months. Not only that, but it's against the background of another 10 to 20 percent capacity in container ships coming on.
"The only silver lining that I see ... is the fact that you (retailers) are now operating on probably unprecedented low levels of inventory and if there should be a turnaround...then perhaps our turnaround on trade will be even sharper" -- William Fung, managing director of Li & Fung.
However, he added that most suppliers were expecting a 5 to 15 percent drop in business this year.
"I think we need the green shoots to be really green and there is a real opportunity to make green shoots sustainable shoots in the year ahead" -- Lucy Neville-Rolfe, director of corporate and legal affairs at Tesco (
"The consumer is far more enquiring today, far more demanding and I think as the economy recovers there is going to be a far more demanding consumer out there" -- Andrew Jennings, managing director of retail at Woolworths South Africa (
"We're expecting between 5 and 10 percent price deflation (from suppliers in Asia)" -- William Fung, managing director of Li & Fung.
(Reporting by Mark Potter and Sarah Morris; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
