WRAPUP 1-BAT, Carlsberg offset slump with prices and buys
2009-05-06 08:42:00.0
(Reuters) - With the global slowdown hitting smokers and beer drinkers, cigarette makers and brewers like British American Tobacco and Carlsberg are turning to cost cuts and selective price rises to drive earnings through recession.
The world's No 2 cigarette group BAT (
) reported flat underlying first-quarter cigarette volumes on Wednesday, while Carlsberg (
) saw beer volumes in January-March decline 5 percent, with both relying on acquisitions to record growth.
BAT, the group behind Kent, Dunhill, Lucky Strike and Pall Mall cigarettes saw volumes dip 7 percent in Eastern Europe, surprising many analysts, due to destocking in Russia and a move to cheaper cigarette brands after excise tax rises.
These trends were forecast by analysts, but the swing was more violent than expected as smokers got a taste for illicit cheap cigarettes smuggled across national borders.
These illicit volumes grew in markets such as Poland and Hungary, driven by a combination of high European Union accession tax rises and weaker currencies, which limited the growth of BAT's biggest and most profitable cigarette brands.
The world's fourth largest brewer Carlsberg suffered from lower beer volumes across Europe but was able to hold its 2009 earnings forecast helped by the cost savings from its joint takeover of Britain's Scottish and Newcastle (S&N) last year.
Although the volume decline was worse than many analysts expected, the Copenhagen-based brewer pushed through price rises for its beer such as Tuborg, Baltika, Kronenbourg and Carlsberg to leave its first-quarter revenues largely as forecast.
But as with other brewers, north and western Europe suffered most with its underlying volumes off 8 percent. This was slightly better than Heineken's (
) fall of 9.8 percent, but the weakness cut the Danish brewer's regional underlying profits in half.
Overall figures for Carlsberg were boosted following its joint takeover of S&N with Heineken last year, a deal which gave the Danish brewer full control of its Russian joint venture and S&N's interests in France, Greece, China and Vietnam.
Eastern Europe was a strong performer for Carlsberg, and although its biggest single beer market, Russia, fell 7 percent in the first-quarter, Carlsberg outperformed and raised its share of the world's third biggest beer market to nearly 40 percent.
"Russian consumption trends could yet deteriorate but this result demonstrates Carlsberg's under appreciated operational competence, which combined with eventual Eastern European volume recovery should drive well above average earnings growth," said analyst Philip Morrisey at brokers Citi. Carlsberg shares jumped nearly 11 percent as profits matched forecasts and it reiterate its 2009 operating profit target for at least 9 billion crowns as analysts focused on cost savings from the S&N deal and operational efficiencies. There were last up 10.6 percent at 293 Danish Crowns at 1233 GMT.
Meanwhile, BAT relied on the acquisition of Turkey's Tekel and Denmark-based ST to record an overall volume rise of 7 percent to 170 billion cigarettes, which together with price rises and the weakness of the pound made Chief Executive Paul Adams confident he would see good earnings growth in 2009.
BAT saw strong first-quarter revenue growth even without the benefits of the pound's weakness, driven by price rises and acquisitions. BAT is the midst of a five-year cost cutting programme to slice 800 million pounds from its costs by 2012.
"Revenue growth remains strong at constant rates fuelled by pricing notwithstanding tough trading in Eastern Europe," said Credit Suisse analyst Rogerio Fujimori.
BAT shares edged up 3.9 percent to 16.45 pounds at 1235 GMT with the upside limited by the current attraction of cyclical stocks rather than defensive tobacco ones, analysts said. (Reporting by David Jones; Editing by Hans Peters)
