Mexico stirs to life, flu hits Sweden and Poland
2009-05-06 14:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico stirred back to normal life on Wednesday after a five-day shutdown of businesses due to the H1N1 flu virus, which has spread across Europe and claimed a second life in the United States.
Traffic clogged the Mexican capital, one of the world's biggest cities, and taco vendors worked the sidewalks again even as the government reported that the confirmed death toll from swine flu in Mexico jumped to 42. Most of the additional fatalities had died several weeks ago.
The United States now has 642 cases, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported, and is on alert after a Texan woman died this week.
In Mexico City, where some 20 million people live, security guards at a tower block checked office workers with a heat scanner to make sure they were free of fever -- one of the flu's symptoms -- when they came back to work.
"It's not time to claim victory and say, 'It's over,'" he said on a visit to a hospital in the state of Michoacan.
There have been 1,516 officially reported cases in 22 countries, the World Health Organization said in Geneva.
It confirmed more infections in Britain, Spain, Italy and Germany. If the U.N. agency detects a sustained spread within Europe -- as there has been in North America -- this could trigger the official declaration of a pandemic.
Most cases outside Mexico remain in North America, where the Texan woman who died this week in only the second death on U.S. soil. The 30-year-old had chronic health problems. A Mexican toddler also died in Texas.
"Those numbers will go up, we anticipate, and unfortunately there are likely to be more hospitalizations and more deaths," said U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.
"I have never rested so many days. It was like a forced vacation. It still feels strange because there aren't many customers," said Rosa Avila, 42, a cook at a chain of restaurants who was wearing a surgical mask.
The number of Mexicans who died from the new flu virus has jumped to 42, Health Minister Jose Angel Cordova said.
The death toll had previously been 29, but Cordova told reporters tests had come in that confirmed additional cases, mostly of people who died several weeks ago.
Earlier on Wednesday, a Chinese flight arrived in Shanghai carrying 98 Chinese who had been stranded in Mexico after flights were suspended. All appeared healthy, according to Chinese media.
For authorities worldwide, the question remained how far the virus would spread and how serious would it be. The WHO remained at alert level 5, meaning a pandemic was imminent. A level 6 alert would mean a full pandemic.
"If it spreads around the world you will see hundreds of millions of people get infected," said the WHO's Dr. Keiji Fukuda.
This would be no indication of how mild or severe the outbreak would be, but would prompt countries to activate pandemic plans, distribute antiviral drugs and antibiotics and advise on other precautions like limiting large gatherings.
Fukuda said it was important to watch the southern hemisphere, where the winter flu season is beginning.
(Additional reporting by Louise Egan and Daniel Trotta in Mexico City, Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva, Royston Chan in Shanghai; editing by Mohammad Zargham)
