Verenex investors await Libyan counter bid
2009-05-06 11:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Investors in Canada's Verenex Energy Inc. VNX.TO said on Wednesday they saw growing risks of delays in the $C499 million ($425 million) sale of the company to China or Libya.
Libya has said it will exercise its right to pre-empt a friendly C$10-a-share bid for Verenex from China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) [CNPET.UL], but Verenex in its earnings release on Tuesday said Libya had yet to make a formal offer.
Shares of Verenex were trading little changed at C$9.16 on Wednesday, indicating investors still expect a sale to happen. But some are uneasy over the lack of a formal bid from Libya, or word on Libya's consent to China's offer.
"The best thing is either the Libyan government says yes to the Chinese, or the Libyan government agrees to buy it on the same terms," a Verenex shareholder who declined to be identified said on Wednesday.
"But we have to be prepared for a situation where the downside occurs and Verenex goes back to a much lower price if it doesn't happen."
Verenex holds promising oil assets in Libya, home to Africa's largest oil reserves which has attracted a wave of interest from oil companies after the end of international sanctions.
The chairman of Libya's National Oil Corporation, Shokri Ghanem, on Wednesday reiterated that Libya would go ahead with a deal to buy Verenex without giving a timeframe.
"The procedure is not finished yet," he told Reuters on Wednesday. "I don't know, but we are buying it," he said when asked how long the process of purchasing the company would take.
In the absence of formal Libyan consent to the CNPC acquisition or a counter-bid, one investor said he thought there was a chance the Chinese could decide to walk away from the deal.
With the assumption of debt, the C$10 a share offer from CNPC is worth C$499 million, the companies said when it was announced on Feb. 26.
So far, there is no sign Libyan authorities have taken steps that buyers of listed companies usually take, such as hiring financial advisers. But that does not mean a formal bid will not arrive.
"The lack of actions speak louder than the words," said another Verenex investor. "It could all come through, but it will be dicey." (Editing by Sharon Lindores)
