UPDATE 2-CSR Q1 loss narrows, revenue tops mkt estimates
2009-05-06 08:05:00.0
(Reuters) - British Bluetooth wireless chip company CSR Plc (
CSR, which makes single-chip Bluetooth wireless devices, said it was confident of the future, helped by design wins across all customer groups in its handset business.
Pretax loss was $22.6 million for the first quarter ended April 3, compared with $44.2 million in the year-ago period.
Revenue halved to $80.6 million, in line with the company's outlook, reflecting continued weak market demand and destocking for most business units.
Four analysts on average had forecast revenue of $76.8 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
However, the company said it expected to reverse these factors going forward in the year.
"We would expect that they (gross margins) gradually return to normalised levels over the next several quarters and into 2010," Chief Financial Officer Will Gardiner told Reuters by phone. He said the normal level would broadly be mid-40 percent.
The company said during the first quarter, it saw relative strength from the handset market, but the headset market was "particularly weak".
"We do see sort of a stabilisation, which is good, specifically in the handset market," Chief Executive Joep van Beurden said by phone.
For the second quarter, CSR expects a sequential growth in revenue to between $95 million and $115 million, saying de-stocking in the handset market has now "largely ceased".
The company said it expected a significant increase in its market share in the second half of 2009 when it begins the shipment of its product BC7000, a single chip that combines Bluetooth and FM radio technologies .
"We have seen quite strong design-win traction both in Korea and in China in the first quarter, which is also going to help us further down this year," Beurden said.
Panmure Gordon & Co analyst Nick James said in a research note, "It is clear the picture for full-year 2010 continues to improve."
The Cambridge-based company, which recently agreed to buy U.S. Global Positioning System chip firm SiRF Technology SIRF.O to boost its radio chips offering, said the merger was on track with closing expected in June.
), Dell Inc (
), Motorola Inc MOT.N and Nokia (
On Wednesday, they rose as much as 3 percent, but later pared gains to trade down 1.8 percent at 280 pence at 1156 GMT on the London Stock Exchange. (Editing by Vinu Pilakkott)
