UPDATE 2-China c.bank frets over quantitative easing risks
2009-05-06 06:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Key currencies, including the dollar, could come under growing pressure because of extraordinary money-printing by central banks to counter the financial crisis, China's central bank said on Wednesday.
In its quarterly report on monetary policy, the People's Bank of China pledged an ample supply of credit to support the economy, which it said would enjoy "stable and quite fast" growth despite the current contraction in external demand.
, the 51-page report reaffirmed the central bank's long-standing commitment to keep the currency basically stable while enhancing exchange rate flexibility.
The PBOC said quantitative easing policies being pursued by the United States, Japan, Britain and Switzerland had increased the uncertainty surrounding key currency exchange rates.
"Although the dollar had appreciated against other key currencies, the Federal Reserve's announcement on March 18 of treasury bond purchases resulted in a fall in the dollar.
"As more and more economies start to implement extraordinary monetary policies like quantitative easing, risks of major currency depreciation may grow," the report said.
Firstly, QE increased the danger of global inflation, the PBOC said.
"If central banks cannot mop up the huge liquidity when economic recovery comes through, asset bubbles and inflation may once again be triggered.
"Furthermore, inflation has become a global phenomenon in recent years, and a policy mistake at one major central bank could create inflation risks for the whole world," the PBOC said, without mentioning the Fed or other central banks by name.
Massive buying of longer-term treasury bonds may keep yields low in the short term; but over time, as markets stabilise and economies gradually recover, inflation expectations will grow, interest rates will rise and, with central banks mopping up liquidity, bond prices may adjust sharply, the PBOC warned.
The impact of stimulative fiscal and monetary policies to support China's economy had begun to show results, but not enough of the burst of bank lending in the first quarter had been channelled to small and medium-sized enterprises, the PBOC said.
The ability of these firms to finance themselves had deteriorated as a result, the report said.
The fact that banks had focused on government-backed projects had delivered a swift, welcome boost to investment.
But the PBOC, showing concern about a possible deterioration in credit quality, urged lenders to carefully assess whether local governments will be in a position to repay their loans.
It suggested that lending would slow in coming months, after a 4.58 trillion yuan jump in the first quarter, as both banks and borrowers would need time to digest such a huge volume of loans.
The central bank said China's economy was still under quite serious pressure and the foundations for recovery were not yet solid.
But investment growth would remain strong, thanks to the government's stimulus, and an end to destocking would be positive for growth. Moreover, the long-term fundamentals underpinning China's growth had not changed.
The PBOC played down the risk of deflation, saying domestic economic recovery and fast credit growth would put a floor under prices. The slower pace of deterioration in the global economy also reduced the possibility of a big, sustained fall in the price level, the report said.
"Global monetary conditions are currently loose. Once confidence is restored, primary product and asset prices may see a quick rebound," the PBOC forecast. (Reporting by Zhou Xin, Langi Chiang and Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Alan Wheatley)
