REFILE-TOPWRAP 4-Hint of hope in Europe, US banks may need blns
2009-05-06 09:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Europe's service sector shrank at its slowest pace in six months in April, adding to signs the global recession is easing and cushioning markets against fears that leading U.S. banks will need to raise tens of billions of dollars.
Forecast-beating profit at France's largest bank, BNP Paribas (
), boosted sentiment in Europe, though concerns about the underlying health of the financial system persisted after a source told Reuters that regulators had informed Bank of America (
The BofA figure was triple previous reports of its needs, while a New York Times report said Citigroup (
Citigroup, whose shares were down 2.7 percent in U.S. pre-market trading, estimated on Wednesday that U.S. banks subject to stress testing by regulators would need $75 billion in total, of which BofA would eat up $33 billion. BofA shares fell 8.7 percent. [ID:nL6717358] [ID:nWNAB4147]
U.S. employment data painted a brighter picture, however, as private sector job losses slowed in April, according to a report by ADP Employer Services, hitting their lowest since November last year and surprising economists who had expected a much worse result.[ID:nN06545191]
Also on Wednesday, China's central bank said the country's economy -- the engine of global expansion in recent years -- would see stable and fast growth, echoing one of its most influential advisors, Fang Gang. [ID:nBJC000320] [ID:nBJD000755]
In Europe, a key index of services business activity staged its biggest one-month rise since December 2001 and firms were even more optimistic about the future, suggesting the worst phase of a severe recession has probably passed.[ID:nL6941085]
Markit unexpectedly revised up its index for April to 43.8, compared with March's 40.9 reading. The rate of contraction slowed in all four of the biggest euro zone countries, but the figure remained well below the 50 mark that divides growth from slump.
Britain's April reading hit an eight-month high of 48.7 after the biggest month-on-month rise in 10 years. [ID:nL6157293]
A reminder of the dire state of Europe's economy came in news that retail sales in those 16 countries using the euro fell 0.6 percent in March, to be down a record 4.2 percent year-on-year. [ID:nL6942767]
The European Central Bank has been pumping cash into the system to counter recession, as evidenced by a key interest rate hitting a fresh record low. [ID:nFAE003001]
'GOOD NEWS'
The U.S. economy remained in "a very deep hole", said top Federal Reserve official Janet Yellen, but there were signs the downturn may be easing and the recession may end in the second half of 2009. [ID:nN05517211]
"The good news is that, for the first time in a while, there is some good news to savour," said Yellen, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, pointing to recent first-quarter GDP data showing a large decline in business inventories, which many see as a precondition for recovery.
Economic growth in Asia could recover to 4.3 percent in 2010 from an estimated 1.3 percent this year, the International Monetary Fund said, though that forecast depended on monetary and fiscal conditions remaining accommodative for a while.
A European Central Bank policymaker sounded a more cautious note, saying problems in the banking sector could hold back recovery.
"It is clear that before our economies can come back on track, the situation in the financial sector should have been stabilised and that is not the case yet," Dutch central bank governor Nout Wellink said in Kuala Lumpur. [ID:nKLR84535]
Bank of America, which has already received $45 billion in public funds, had been at the top of lists of those believed to need more capital, as it faces significant credit losses and a controversial takeover of Merrill Lynch & Co.
Banks found to need capital could convert preferred stock, raise fresh private capital or seek government help.
His comments helped Wall Street's fear gauge -- the Chicago Board of Options Exchange Volatility Index .VIX -- close at its lowest level since just after Lehman Brothers collapsed in September.
Stocks, commodities, emerging market debt and high-yielding currencies have all rallied in recent weeks as signs that the global economic slump was reaching a bottom boosted investors' appetite for riskier assets.
"The bank stress tests might rattle market confidence and the recent outbreak of optimism might be due for its own stress test," said David Watt, senior currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets in Sydney.
In markets, the yen was at a five-day high against the dollar
at 1150 GMT, while U.S. stock futures DJc1 were down 0.6 percent.
were 1.4 percent higher after BNP Paribas's results and the bullish U.S. jobs data. [ID:nL6247697]
Earlier, equities markets in Asia, where Japan was closed for a holiday, saw modest falls. [ID:nL6977112] (Additional reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; editing by John Stonestreet)
