U.S. pledges ambitious actions in U.N. climate pact
2009-05-05 08:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A mountain is reflected in a bay that used to be covered by the Sheldon glacier on the Antarctic peninsula, January 14, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Alister Doyle
By Alister Doyle, Environment Correspondent
By Alister Doyle, Environment Correspondent
Tue  EDT
A submission to the United Nations outlining Washington's ideas for a treaty due to be agreed in Copenhagen in December also said many nations should outline greenhouse gas cuts both for a mid-term goal of 2020 and a long-term 2050 target.
"The United States is committed to reaching a strong international agreement in Copenhagen based on both the robust targets and ambitious actions that will be embodied in U.S. domestic law," it said.
China has recently overtaken the United States as the top emitter, ahead of Russia and India. But China's per capita emissions, mostly from burning fossil fuels, are less than a quarter of those of the United States.
President Barack Obama plans to cut U.S. emissions back to 1990 levels by 2020, a reduction of about 14 percent from 2007 emissions. The U.N. Climate Panel says rising world emissions will cause more floods, heatwaves, droughts and rising seas.
"The U.S. is keenly aware of the need for a dramatic increase in the flow of resources available to developing countries ... to address the climate challenge," the submission said.
FLOODS, DROUGHTS
Cash was needed both to help developing nations curb their emissions and to adapt to a changing climate, for instance by building flood defenses or developing drought-resistant crops.
"Resources will need to flow from a wide variety of sources, including, for example, public sources in developed and developing countries, private investment, and - in the case of mitigation - the carbon market," it said.'
The U.N. Climate Panel has said rich nations need to cut emissions by between 25 and 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 to avert the worst of climate change. Poor nations' emissions should show a "substantial deviation" below projected growth.'
The U.S. submission did not suggest targets for cuts but called for developed nations to set goals for reductions both for 2020 and beyond to mid-century. Washington wanted commitments to be legally binding, it said.
"Parties shall formulate and submit low-carbon strategies that articulate an emissions pathway to 2050," it said. Less poor developing nations should also join in setting goals.
The submission, published on the website of the U.N. Climate Change Secretariat, was made after an April 24 deadline that has also been overshot by many countries. The United States would add more ideas at a later date.
The next round of U.N. negotiations is in Bonn from June 1-12. For details of the submission, the U.N. website is:
