PEMGroup's Pang: SEC action 'fundamentally wrong'
2009-05-05 19:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Financier Danny Pang, responding for the first time to accusations he defrauded investors, said regulators were basing their claims on a disgruntled ex-employee and argued the case be dismissed.
Pang, 42, is accused in a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission civil lawsuit of defrauding Asia-based investors of hundreds of millions of dollars.
Pang, founder and ex-chief executive of Private Equity Management Group Inc and Private Equity Management LLC (the PEMGroup), also faces federal criminal charges of structuring cash transactions to avoid reporting them to the government.
He was arrested last week after voluntarily returning to the United States from a trip to China to cooperate with the investigations, his attorneys said, and has been freed on $1 million bond.
The SEC says Pang faked his resume, forged documents, pledged unrealistic returns and paid investors with cash raised from new ones, in an echo of the massive Ponzi scheme employed by confessed swindler Bernard Madoff.
In opposing the SEC's application for a preliminary injunction and appointment of a receiver for the seized assets, Pang's attorney called the government's actions "fundamentally wrong, and against the bedrock principals of our legal system.
"Mr. Pang looks forward to having the Court understand the real facts here, including the fact that PEMGroup was, and is, a real business with hundreds of millions of dollars in assets -- and that has never missed a payment to investors," attorney David Schindler of Latham & Watkins said in a statement.
In a motion to dissolve the injunction, Schindler accuses the SEC of creating "the illusion of an emergency to seize an ongoing business and to vilify (Pang) as the next Bernard Madoff."
The SEC based the injunction on a secret interview of a former PEMGroup employee who claimed Pang told him the company was running a $25 million Ponzi scheme, according to the motion.
But the SEC failed to tell the court the ex-employee had embezzled $3 million from Pang's business, had engaged in "numerous instances of sexual harassment" and was later fired and sued by PEMGroup, the motion said.
Nor did the SEC disclose that PEMGroup had not raised any money since 2008 and only from "a limited number" of Taiwanese banks, and had granted more than $100 million requests for redemption, the motion said.
Schindler argues the case should be dismissed because the SEC and the court lack jurisdiction over PEMGroup transactions between Taiwanese banks and British Virgin Island entities, or that the temporary restraining order should be lifted and the SEC forced to litigate the case as it does typical civil lawsuits.
The case is SEC vs. Private Equity Management Group, CV09-2901, U.S. District Court for the Central District of California. (Reporting by Gina Keating; Editing by Andre Grenon)
