Fears on banks' capital needs ease, UBS cautious
2009-05-05 11:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Confidence that U.S. banks' capital shortfalls will prove manageable fueled hopes on Tuesday the global slump may be easing, tempered by notes of caution sounded by some major companies and regulators.
U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke sounded more confident that a recovery was at hand than he has in recent weeks, although he said the recovery will be gradual and unemployment will remain high for a while.
"We continue to expect economic activity to bottom out, then to turn up later this year," Bernanke said in testimony to Congress' Joint Economic Committee.
), the world's top wealth manager, remained wary. The Swiss bank, which still holds billions of dollars of illiquid assets and has fared worse than rivals in the downturn, posted a first-quarter net loss of 2 billion Swiss francs ($1.76 billion) after yet more writedowns.
"The markets continue to be unsettled, and we remain cautious on the immediate outlook for UBS," the Swiss bank said. Still, resilient capital ratios mean the Swiss bank will not need to find new cash to boost its balance sheet for now.
The U.S. services sector contracted again in April, but at a lower-than-expected rate. The Institute for Supply Management said its nonmanufacturing index rose to 43.7 from 40.8 in March, raising more hopes that the world's largest economy has hit bottom and may now begin to recover. [nWEN8541]
Signs that the banking and finance sectors, where the economic rot first started, have managed to get through the worst had lifted global stocks into positive territory for the year.
U.S. stocks slipped in morning trading as the recent sharp run-up in prices tempted investors to take profits while they awaited Thursday's results of banks' "stress test.
"The market is starting to price in a recovery," said Georgina Taylor, equity strategist at Legal & General Investment Management. "With the stress tests it may be a case of 'better the devil you know' -- get them out of the way and then move on."
Kraft Foods Inc KFT.N, the largest North American food company, posted a higher-than-expected first-quarter profit, helped by price increases and cost-cutting, and stood by its 2009 earnings and revenue forecasts.
Oil slipped toward $54 after reaching its highest price of 2009, as rising equities and the hope for a recovery were countered by swelling inventories and falling demand.
Bernanke's comments echoed those of European finance ministers, who said the European Union's economy was at its low point, although it would only return to year-on-year growth in the third quarter of 2010.
At a meeting in Brussels, they said it was time to consider tightening government budgets once growth returns.
"It seems ... the recession is at its worst, but hopefully next year we'll start coming out of it," Czech Finance Minister Miroslav Kalousek, whose country holds the rotating presidency of the EU, told reporters.
In Australia, the central bank held interest rates at a record low of 3 percent as expected, saying the full effect of past stimulus had yet to be felt and pointing to signs of stabilization abroad, particularly in China, a major market for Australian commodities.
) will not trigger a new capital injection from Washington, people familiar with the situation said.
Banks were expected to be briefed later on Tuesday on the results of the stress tests before they are published on Thursday, which is shaping up to be a make-or-break day for the markets.
"Justifiable though the market recovery is, there are some huge bumps ahead. Thursday may be one of those big bumps, with the devil in the details of what U.S. banks require," said Howard Wheeldon, senior strategist at BGC Partners.
AIG is expected to post a first-quarter loss on Thursday but a source familiar with the matter said the loss would be significantly lower than AIG's record fourth-quarter loss of $61.7 billion and would not prompt a fresh injection of government capital.
(Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; Writing by Patricia Zengerle; Editing by Brian Moss)
