FOREX-Dollar rebounds vs euro ahead of ECB, stress tests
2009-05-05 11:59:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar rebounded from a one-month low against the euro on Tuesday as investors took profits ahead of a European Central Bank meeting and as worries about U.S. banks dimmed some recent optimism about recovery.
Hopes that the world has already endured the worst of the recession have boosted stock markets in recent weeks and dried up safe-haven flows into the dollar .DXY, which lost nearly 4 percent against a basket of currencies in March and April.
But investors began selling the euro after it hit a monthly high near $1.3440 amid uncertainty about Thursday's ECB meeting and results of stress tests on U.S. banks. A source told Reuters some 10 banks would be told to raise more capital. [ID:nN04395186]
"When you hear that 10 banks may need more capital, that's cause for concern, and that could put a wrench in the recent rally we've seen on Wall Street," said Matt Esteve, currency strategist at Tempus Consulting in Washington. "Everything is in limbo until we get past these two events."
after earlier hitting a one-month high at $1.3439, according to EBS. It fell 0.4 percent to 132.12 yen EURJPY=, while the dollar fell 0.1 percent to 98.82 yen
ahead of a meeting of the Reserve Bank of Australia, which markets expect will result in a decision to hold rates at 3 percent. [nSYD363232]. The New Zealand dollar added 0.9 percent to $0.5803
The moves stalled a sustained rally in stock markets and high-yield currencies driven by hopes that the worst of the world recession was over. Recent data showing improved manufacturing in Europe, China and India boosted that view.
But while there are risks, "there are legitimate grounds for optimism too, as things are not getting as bad as quickly in China and other economies," said Shaun Osborne, senior currency strategist at TD Securities in Toronto.
Some in the market said they were wary of taking on too much risk ahead of Thursday's policy announcements by the European Central Bank and the Bank of England.
The ECB is expected to cut its main interest rate to a record low 1 percent, while the BoE is seen holding rates at 0.5 percent, also a record low.
More importantly, markets want to see if the ECB suggests it will keep cutting rates or adopt "non-conventional" policy measures such as buying securities to stimulate growth.
Osborne, however, said the euro could resume its rally, possibly to $1.35 and beyond, if the ECB opts not to adopt non-standard policy.
"If there's reluctance to go down that road, it provides a window for the euro to rally," he said. (Editing by Dan Grebler)
