UPDATE 1-US hogs mostly higher as flu fears abate
2009-05-05 15:59:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. hog futures prices turned mostly higher on Tuesday as investors believed the flu-related bans on U.S. pork will be short lived, even as China blocked pork from 17 more U.S. states.
The optimism carried over to the stock market, where shares of U.S. hog and pork producer Smithfield Foods Inc (
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), hog prices were knocked sharply lower last week and again on Monday as the H1N1 flu, once called swine flu, spread among humans around the world and even to a hog herd in Canada. But by Tuesday, traders said concerns may have been exaggerated.
There have been 1,558 confirmed H1N1 cases worldwide and 27 deaths, of which 886 cases and 26 deaths, were in Mexico. The United States had one death, a young boy who was visiting Texas from Mexico.
Worries about long-term export bans were quickly dissipating among Chicago traders, who reported that Mexico was returning to normal and that nearly all of the flu cases in the United States were mild.
"They are going to be short lived," Jim Clarkson, Chicago analyst with A&A Trading, said of the export bans. "You can't die from eating pork even if it's from an infected pig."
The news that China banned pork from 17 more U.S. states, bringing the total to 36 states, drew little reaction from traders.
"China does not need pork. They have plenty of hogs," said Gilbert Goodman, a CME hog trader.
Shares of Smithfield Foods, the world's largest hog and pork producer, were up $2.66, or about 27 percent, at $12.53 in afternoon New York Stock Exchange trading.
"Barring any new developments, it does seem as if the worst of the swine flu headlines are behind us. However, we do anticipate it will take several months for pork demand to recover," Stephens Inc analyst Farha Aslam said in a research note about Smithfield.
At the CME, the lightly traded May hog futures 2LHK9 closed down 0.175 cent at 55.800 cents per lb, while the more active June 2LHM9 and July 2LHN9 hogs closed up 1.025 cents at 64.800 cents and up 1.125 at 67.775, respectively.
CME cattle futures advanced, helped by their discount to cash prices and by gains in the hogs.
"It won't be any higher, just because of where the basis is," Jim Brooks, floor manager at R.J. O'Brien, said of this week's cash cattle market.
Because June futures are so much lower than cash, Brooks said producers may sell the cash cattle at about $87 so they can take advantage of the lower futures to lift short hedges.
Feeder cattle closed higher in light trading, mainly following gains in live cattle. Some lower cash feeder cattle prices this week restricted futures' gains.
