TOPWRAP 3-Fears on banks' capital needs ease, UBS cautious
2009-05-05 07:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Confidence that U.S. banks' capital shortfalls will prove manageable fuelled hopes the global slump may be easing, though Swiss bank UBS AG (
), the world's top wealth manager, remained wary on Tuesday.
Signs that the financial sector, where the economic rot first started, is pulling through the worst lifted global stocks into positive territory for the year.
) will not trigger a new capital injection from government, people familiar with the situation said.
UBS, which still holds billions of dollars of illiquid assets and has fared worse than rivals in the downturn, posted a first-quarter net loss of 2 billion Swiss francs ($1.76 billion) on the back of yet more writedowns.
"The markets continue to be unsettled, and we remain cautious on the immediate outlook for UBS," it said on Tuesday.
Still, resilient capital ratios mean the Swiss bank will not need to find new cash to boost its balance sheet for now. [ID:nL5170687]
European finance ministers said the European Union's economy was at its low point, although it would only return to year-on-year growth in the third quarter of 2010.
At a meeting in Brussels, they said it was time to consider tightening government budgets once growth returns.
"It seems ... the recession is at its worst, but hopefully next year we'll start coming out of it," Czech Finance Minister Miroslav Kalousek, whose country holds the rotating presidency of the EU, told reporters. [ID:nL5936165]
Vice chairman of the Swiss National Bank, Philipp Hildebrand, also said economic data suggested the downturn was slowing, telling German newspaper Handelsblatt the situation was approaching a turning point. [ID:nL5486645].
In Australia, the central bank held interest rates at a record low of 3 percent as expected, saying the full effect of past stimulus had yet to be felt and pointing to signs of stabilisation abroad, particularly in China, a major market for Australian commodities. [ID:nSYD363232]
Banks are expected to be briefed later on Tuesday on the final results, ahead of publication on Thursday, which is shaping up to be a make-or-break day for the markets.
"Justifiable though the market recovery is, there are some huge bumps ahead. Thursday may be one of those big bumps, with the devil in the details of what U.S. banks require," said Howard Wheeldon, senior strategist at BGC Partners.
"The banking system can handle an awful lot of loss and be OK," JPMorgan Chase & Co (
) Chief Executive Jamie Dimon said on a conference call, adding that he agreed with legendary investor Warren Buffett who said many banks have enough earning power to make up for future losses. [ID:nN03280815]
Insurer AIG is expected to post a first-quarter loss on Thursday but a source familiar with the matter said the loss would be significantly lower than AIG's record fourth-quarter loss of $61.7 billion and would not prompt a fresh injection of government capital. [ID:nN04457837]
Bank shares were standout performers in European trading on Tuesday, with HSBC Holdings Plc (
), Standard Chartered Plc (
) gaining between 7 and 12 percent. UBS, meanwhile, gained 4 percent. (Editing by David Cowell) (Additional reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide)
