UPDATE 1-ABB braces for tough 2009 and possibly 2010
2009-05-05 06:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Swiss engineering group ABB (
) is not seeing any signs of a recovery in the economy and is bracing itself for a tough 2009 as well as a potentially difficult year in 2010, the group's head said on Tuesday.
ABB, which sells power equipment to utilities as well as to oil and gas companies, will see declining orders feed through to revenue and must bring costs in line with this development, CEO Joe Hogan said in a speech prepared for ABB's AGM.
The group, which competes with Schneider (
), is aiming to cut costs by $2 billion by 2010 after previously targeting savings of $1.3 billion.
"When will a broader recovery set in? I think the key is watching the banks for signs that they are comfortable about lending again and that their lending will spur demand," said Hogan in his first speech to shareholders since taking the helm last year.
"I haven't seen that the banks have stabilised yet in the developed world, and I think that will take a little more time," Hogan said.
By 0946 GMT, shares in the group had risen 1.4 percent to 17.84 Swiss francs, in line with a rise in the Dow Jones industrial goods and services index.SXNP.
ABB has seen orders tumble as its customers, particularly those in the construction and auto industries, hesitate about buying equipment due to the economic downturn.
ABB is expected to benefit from government stimulus packages designed to counter the slowdown, but when it posted quarterly results last month it said it could not forecast when that would start to help the group or when funding availability would improve.
ABB sees itself as well positioned to benefit as Europe and the United States replace ageing power systems, while heavy investment in China and India in power infrastructure should also boost the group.
Hogan said the group is also well placed to benefit from efforts by its customers to become more efficient as they buy products such as drives, which save energy by regulating the speed of electric motors.
"Not surprisingly, demand for these drives has soared in recent years. This is a business that is growing so fast it's been doubling in size every three to four years," Hogan said.
ABB, which had net cash of $4.8 billion at the end of the first-quarter, should also be ready to take advantage of low prices for takeover targets, Hogan said.
"Most likely we will come across opportunities to acquire assets at prices we may never see again in our lifetimes, and so we als want to be in a position to seize these chances when the time comes," Hogan said.
(Reporting by Katie Reid; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
