China slams Clinton's criticism over Syria stance
2012-07-07 04:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China rebuffed on Saturday U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's accusation that Beijing and Moscow have hindered the resolution of the crisis in Syria, saying any attempt to "slander" China was doomed to fail.
Clinton urged Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's enemies meeting in Paris on Friday to make Russia and China "pay a price" for helping him to keep power in Damascus, remarks that were among Washington's toughest yet in 16 months of revolt in Syria.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin said Clinton's comments were "totally unacceptable".
"On the Syria problem, China's fair and constructive stance and its contributions toward diplomatic efforts have attained the wide understanding and support of relevant parties in the international community," Liu said in a statement on the ministry's website.
In her comments to the Friends of Syria meeting, Clinton said the only way matters would change "is if every nation represented here directly and urgently makes it clear that Russia and China will pay a price because they are holding up progress - blockading it."
Liu reiterated Beijing's stance that its actions were in keeping with the U.N. Charter and "the norms governing international relations".
Russia hit back at Clinton's criticism on Friday, saying the Secretary of State's comments were "incorrect".
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Feeling the need for some votes? Why not just hit out at china¡­ Voters wouldn¡¯t know the difference right? Everything is china¡¯s fault?
Jul 07, 201210:23am EDT--
China, it is you who is on the wrong side of history defending dictatorships for your own gain. Nobody buys claims of ¡°impartiality.¡±
Jul 07, 201210:39am EDT--
Jul 07, 201210:41am EDT--
