Plane lands in China to pick up quarantined Mexicans
2009-05-05 04:28:00.0
(Reuters) - An AeroMexico plane arrived in Shanghai on Tuesday to repatriate dozens of Mexicans who have become pawns in a drama about how far governments should go to stifle fears that the H1N1 virus could cross their borders.
None of the 43 Mexicans that Beijing quarantined had shown symptoms of the H1N1 flu virus, prompting Mexico to accuse China of being "discriminatory."
The row has strained what had been a warming relationship but, with Beijing courting Latin America as a trade and diplomatic partner, the damage appears unlikely to last.
Mexico is considered the epicentre of the flu outbreak, which has infected more than 1,200 people in 21 countries over the past week, sparking fears of a global pandemic.
To date, 27 deaths have been officially confirmed -- 26 in Mexico and one in the United States -- though more than 100 are suspected to have died from the flu.
Other flu-affected nations also have citizens caught in China's quarantine measures.
A spokesman for the U.S. embassy in Beijing, Richard Buangan, said at least four U.S. citizens were quarantined at one point "but most of them have been released". The United States had not issued any protest over the matter, he said.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu told a news conference 25 Canadian students were also in quarantine in a northeast Chinese city, but had shown no flu symptoms.
An official with the Canadian embassy in Beijing said his government knew of the quarantine in a hotel in Changchun, but he put the number of students affected at 22.
"We've asked for clarification about the purpose of the quarantine," said the official, who spoke on condition his name was not used.
The students from the University of Montreal came to China last week for language study, according to Canadian news reports.
China has denied Mexico's charges of discrimination, saying isolation was the correct procedure. [ID:nSP475284]
China's vast population and patchy medical infrastructure make it vulnerable should the virus take hold.
However, the Mexican Embassy's spokeswoman said that even Mexicans residing outside their country were kept in quarantine.
Police closed roads to clear the way for around 28 ambulances ferrying the Mexicans, including a honeymooning couple, to the Shanghai airport, accompanied by quarantine officials in white or blue full-body protective suits.
None of those quarantined had shown any signs of being infected, the Chinese Health Ministry said, and Xinhua said six Mexican students studying in China had "volunteered to stay".
A group of Mexicans in Beijing were doing well inside a hotel where they have been confined, Xinhua said, though the air conditioning has been turned off to prevent any spread of disease despite temperatures reaching 30 degrees Celsius (86 F) outside.
They were put in the best rooms and sent fruit and flowers every day, Xinhua said, citing Deng Xiaohong, deputy director of Beijing Municipal Health Bureau.
In a further diplomatic tussle, Canada said it would pursue World Trade Organization action against China if it maintains its ban on pork and hogs from the province of Alberta [nN04406901].
China's Foreign Ministry said it was within its rights to take emergency health measures. (Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing and James Pomfret in Hong Kong; Editing by Nick Macfie)
