Q-Cells China bet to pay off in mid term
2009-05-05 05:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Q-Cells' joint venture with LDK Solar is the right strategic move to open new markets but could take years to generate serious cash for the No.1 manufacturer of solar cells.
Q-Cells in April entered a joint venture with China's LDK, one of the world's biggest makers of solar wafers, to gain a foothold in China's solar market, which is set to significantly benefit from government subsidies.
Apart from the United States, where the Obama administration has earmarked billions of dollar for renewable energy projects, China is the industry's second great hope.
"In the short term this won't have a positive impact on Q-Cells' business since there are hardly any large projects in China yet. But it is a mid-term option for the company, which could bring in some cash in 1-3 years," said Michael Tappeiner, analyst at UniCredit.
"Considering the credit crunch, the big plus regarding the joint venture is that the burden of project financing is shared by two companies."
Q-Cells generated 13.8 percent, or 172.7 million euros ($229.4 million), of 2008 sales in Asia, mainly driven by India, but expects China to pick up speed significantly. It has not given a concrete estimate.
Other experts are more optimistic about when Q-Cells will actually earn money through the joint venture, although skepticism about the Chinese market remains.
READY FOR TAKE-OFF?
"The joint venture between Q-Cells and LDK could add to Q-Cells EBIT and sales from about six months onwards, but it could take much longer depending on when the Chinese market will take off," said SES Research analyst Karsten von Blumenthal.
Dieter Ammer, the chief executive of Conergy, Germany's second-largest solar company by revenue, told Reuters last week that the visibility of the Chinese government's subsidy program is still very low.
Q-cells' share price does not give a clear picture. Its shares have outperformed the FTSE clean tech index by about 1 percent since the announcement of the joint venture. But peer SolarWorld -- which released better-than-expected results earlier on Monday -- has outperformed the index by almost 17 percent in the same period.
Under the subsidy program, the Chinese government expects the volume of installed photovoltaic power to rise to 300 megawatts by 2010, increasing to 1.8 gigawatts by 2020.
The big markets of Spain, Germany and the United States, by comparison, had combined installation capacity of 4.6 gigawatts in 2008, according to the German Solar Industry Association.
Still, China remains the world's second-largest energy user and plans to increase the share of renewable energy to 10 percent of the energy mix by 2010 and to 15 percent by 2020.
Analysts agree, however, that European producers have little chance to succeed in the Chinese solar market without a local partner, as a myriad of domestic producers can offer their cells at much cheaper prices, albeit at a lower quality.
"Q-Cells needs LDK to enter the Chinese market, while LDK needs Q-Cells to enter the European market," von Blumenthal said. "I think the joint venture was a quick reaction to the Chinese subsidy plan."
