FOREX-RBA buoys Aussie, euro slips as profits pocketed
2009-05-05 02:31:00.0
(Reuters) - The Australian dollar held near seven-month highs on the U.S. dollar and yen after its central bank kept rates steady, while the euro and sterling saw profit-taking on investor caution ahead of U.S. bank stress test results.
The Reserve Bank of Australia on Tuesday kept its benchmark cash rate on hold at a record low of 3.0 percent, helping buoy the Aussie after investors pocketed profits on its recent gains and wariness of a possible surprise cut also took the edge of it.
U.S. regulators have deemed about 10 of 19 banks will need more capital, according to a source familiar with the talks. Results of the tests are expected on Thursday. [ID:nN04400200]
"We did see a big move overnight so the market is thinking people are quite long so we'll take away some profits -- so that's one factor driving the adjustment," said Sharada Selvanathan, currency strategist at BNP Paribas in Hong Kong.
"The market is very split. We do see a lot of positive sentiment but those who are bears are using the big moves to unwind positions and to sell at these levels," Selvanathan said.
Against the yen it was flat at 73.16 yen AUDJPY=R, although down from Monday's seven-month peak of 73.57 yen.
"While risks still lie with further rate cuts, the period of big aggressive moves has come to an end, so it will now be smaller moves, dependent on the data trends," said Michael Blythe, chief economist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
, down from a two-week high at 99.57 on Monday and on a basket of currencies it rose 0.3 percent .DXY.
That improving sentiment has fuelled gains in stock markets, with better news on manufacturing in Europe, China and India and positive signs on U.S. home sales and construction on Monday stoking those hopes. [ID:nL4731565]
"It's a been a long rally. It just looks like it's starting to get a bit exhausted," said Mitul Kotecha, global head of FX strategy at Calyon in Hong Kong.
and shed 0.2 percent on the yen GBPJPY=R. (Additional report by Anirban Nag in SYDNEY; Editing by Jan Dahinten)
