UPDATE 1-Two more HK IPOs planned to raise about $1 bln
2009-05-05 05:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Two more Chinese companies are close to launching IPOs in Hong Kong, sources said on Tuesday, aiming to raise a total of about $1 billion as the public stock markets come to life here after months of weak activity.
BBMG Corp, one of China's top construction materials makers, plans to begin marketing a $500 million-$700 million Hong Kong initial public offering next week, according to sources involved in the deal.
Chinese herbal shampoo maker Bawang International also plans to list in Hong Kong, hoping to raise around $300 million through an IPO in the next few weeks, separate sources involved said. None of the sources were allowed to speak publicly about the deals because the offers have yet to trade.
Hong Kong's IPO market is returning to life, although still nowhere near the levels reached at the height of the bull market more than a year ago.
China Zhongwang Holdings priced in Hong Kong last week, the world's largest IPO so far this year. Zhongwang raised $1.3 billion, pricing its IPO toward the low end of the indicative range thanks to lower-than-expected demand from skittish retail investors.
Improving U.S. and emerging market economic data have led to a broad, global market rally. The increased risk appetite has fueled a surge in Asian stocks that has lasted for two months.
) were mandated to manage the BBMG offering, the sources said.
) was managing the Bawang offering, the sources said.
"Premarketing will begin next week," said one of the sources involved in the BBMG deal.
Beijing-based BBMG is one of the largest building materials manufacturers in China, a leading property developer and a large-scale property investment and management company, according to its website.
News of BBMG's IPO plans first surfaced last October. Most IPOs planned for the fourth-quarter of 2008 were pulled or postponed as the stock markets fell broadly toward the end of the year.
The Standard newspaper reported on BBMG's revived IPO listing plans last Monday, the same day the company said it raised 1.9 billion yuan ($278.7 million) through a UBS-led bond offering.
Bawang markets products ranging from shampoo to toothpaste, bodywash to haircare. News of its IPO plans first surfaced in February.
(Additional reporting by Michael Wei in Beijing; Editing by Chris Lewis)
