HK shares gain for 4th day but China banks weigh
2009-05-05 05:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares finished 0.3 percent firmer in a fourth session of gains on Tuesday as investors continued to buy into hopes for a global economic recovery, but consumer goods exporter Li & Fung dropped on its capital raising plan.
Chinese banks were the other big drags on the main index, slipping on expectations of a selldown in China Construction Bank (
Construction Bank shares were down 1.5 percent at HK$4.77, while top lender ICBC (
was 49.03 points higher at a six-and-a-half-month closing high of 16,430.08.
"The market may take some time to consolidate above the 16,000-point level before carrying the rally further. If we are looking at a valuation of 15 times estimated earnings in 2009, that would mean the index can climb to 17,100 points," said Philip Chan, head of research with CAF Securities
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority has been injecting money into the system as heavy offshore flows into the stock market lured in by IPOs, such as last week's public issue by China Zhongwang Holdings, have been forcing Hong Kong's pegged currency to the top end of its narrow band against the U.S. dollar.
Turnover slipped to HK$77.8 billion, compared with Monday's four-month high of HK$80.3 billion.
"The sentiment in the market is quite favourable, with more confidence in an economic recovery. But more importantly there is a lot of liquidity, making sure there is further upside to this market," said Conita Hung, head of equity markets with Delta Asia Securities.
) outperformed with a 2.8 percent jump on improving turnover on the exchange in recent weeks as foreign investors bet on a quick turnaround in China's economy. Trading fees make up nearly a fifth of the exchange operator's revenue.
But the main index was speckled with almost as many red tickers as black as some investors gave into the temptation to take profit, particularly on mainland financial and property stocks, while others turned cautious ahead of U.S. bank stress test results later this week.
About 10 of the 19 largest banks being stress tested will be instructed by regulators to raise more capital, a source familiar with official talks told Reuters on Tuesday. [ID:nN04395186]
of top mainland companies dropped 0.4 percent to 9,602.08.
) climbed 3.3 percent after crude prices hit their highest level so far this year on Monday, as investors predicted a bottoming out of the global economic slump would pave the way for a recovery in ailing energy demand.
Asia's top oil & gas producer PetroChina (
"The placement came as a surprise to the market as the company raised $500 million in September 2008," said UBS analyst Spencer Leung, while downgrading the stock to a sell rating from neutral following its recent sharp rally.
Li & Fung gained 22 percent in three sessions to Monday after the company said it may sign four outsourcing deals this year as recession-hit U.S. retailers look to cut costs. The stock finished at HK$22.05, slightly lower than its share sale price of HK$22.55.
The shares were sold at HK$$13.30, an 8.3 percent discount to the pre-deal closing price on Monday, market sources said.
