Plane lands in China to pick up quarantined Mexicans
2009-05-05 02:21:00.0
(Reuters) - An Aeromexico plane arrived in Shanghai on Tuesday to repatriate dozens of Mexicans held under forced flu quarantine, as a Chinese aircraft left for Mexico to pick up its own stranded nationals.
The 43 Mexicans, none showing symptoms of the H1N1 flu, have become pawns in a drama about how far governments should go to stifle fears that the virus could creep through their borders.
The row has strained what had been a warming relationship but, with Beijing courting Latin America as a trade and diplomatic partner, the damage appears unlikely to last.
Mexico is considered the epicentre of the flu outbreak which has killed at least 100 people and been detected in 20 countries over the past week, sparking fears of a global pandemic.
Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa accused China at the weekend of discrimination after Beijing ordered dozens of Mexicans into seclusion across the country, although only one, a man now in Hong Kong, was found to have the H1N1 flu.
China has denied the charge, saying isolation was the correct procedure. [ID:nSP475284].
However, the Mexican Embassy's spokeswoman said that even Mexicans residing outside their country were kept in quarantine.
A Chinese aircraft has already left for Mexico to pick up Chinese stranded there after China suspended scheduled, direct flights to the country, the Foreign Ministry said.
Police closed roads to the airport as ambulances drove away from the Shanghai hotel where the Mexicans, including a honeymooning couple, had been quarantined.
HUNDREDS IN HONG KONG HOTEL None of those quarantined had shown any signs of being infected, the Chinese Health Ministry said, and the state-run Xinhua news agency said six Mexican students studying in China had "volunteered to stay". It did not elaborate.
A separate group of Mexicans in Beijing were doing well inside a hotel where they have been confined, Xinhua said, though the air conditioning has been turned off to prevent any spread of disease despite temperatures reaching 30 degrees Celsius (86 F) outside.
They were put in the best rooms and sent fruit and flowers every day, Xinhua said, citing Deng Xiaohong, deputy director of Beijing Municipal Health Bureau.
In Hong Kong, some of the 300 guests and staff quarantined in a hotel where China's single confirmed H1N1 case, a 25-year-old Mexican man, had stayed, expressed frustration.
"I think it's all just a big publicity stunt to be honest," Briton Leslie Carr told Reuters. "... they're doing it out of fear rather than science."
China's vast population and patchy medical infrastructure make it vulnerable should the virus take hold.
In a further diplomatic tussle, Canada said it would pursue World Trade Organization action against China if it maintains its ban on pork and hogs from the province of Alberta. [nN04406901]
China's Commerce Ministry had no immediate response. (Writing by Ben Blanchard; Additional reporting by James Pomfret in Hong Kong; Editing by Nick Macfie and John Chalmers)
