European stocks rise, led by banks and commodities
2009-05-05 05:03:00.0
European stocks rise, led by banks and commodities | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
European stocks rise, led by banks and commodities
Tue  EDT
By 0847 GMT, the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300
"The general tone is positive so the bulls will have it today but the bears are still lurking around the corner. ... Everything is going to be dominated by what happens to the bank stress test on Thursday," said Justin Urquhart Stewart, director at Seven Investment Management.
"A lot of the stress test is designed for public consumption to try and give people confidence that the banks are going to be viable. The question is which of them is going to need capital to be able to survive," he said.
), Standard Chartered (
Banks are expected to be briefed on Tuesday on the final results, which will be published on Thursday.
"The stress test looks like it will be a lot more benign than it did (earlier) and the U.S. banks index was up sharply so we're playing a bit of catch-up," a trader said of rises in British bank stocks. UK markets were closed on Monday for a bank holiday.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was up 2.4 percent, Germany's DAX
was down 0.6 percent and France's CAC 40
XSTRATA LIFTS MINERS; ADIDAS SLUMPS ON Q1
Miners were higher. Xstrata XTA.L was up 8.7 percent after it posted a 7.7 percent rise in first-quarter production of coal, its most profitable commodity, but output of many other products declined amid weak demand and low prices. [ID:nL1173794]
), BP (
), Premier Oil (
On the downside, Adidas ADSG.DE slumped 9.5 percent after the group said its first-quarter operating profit fell nearly 80 percent to 58 million euros, worse than the average analyst forecast of 179 million in a Reuters poll. [ID:nL4292253]
), the world's fourth largest retailer, lost 5.2 percent, after it reported a worse than expected 49.3 percent slump in first-quarter underlying operating profit as currency devaluations in Eastern Europe weighed. [ID:nFAB013084]
Turning to economic news, at 1400 GMT, investors will focus on the Institute for Supply Management's April non-manufacturing index with economists in a Reuters survey forecast a reading of 42.0 versus 40.8 in March.
"As we had a stronger-than-expected manufacturing ISM on Friday there is a hope that the services sector of the economy is also going to say things are not so bad," said Jim Wood-Smith, head of research at Williams de Broe.
"I think it has scope to disappoint on the downside because the consensus is that it is going to tick up again from last November's lows. But, services arguably being later cycle has got more scope to miss on the downside," he said.
Later in the week, on Thursday investors are likely to focus on both the outcome of the Bank of England and the European Central Bank rate decision meetings, while Friday sees the release of U.S. nonfarm payrolls.
(Additional reporting by Simon Falush; Editing by Hans Peters)
