UPDATE 1-OZ Minerals CEO to resign, take Minmetals role
2009-05-05 03:57:00.0
(Reuters) - OZ Minerals (
) said its chief executive, who masterminded the sale of the world's No.2 zinc miner to a Chinese state entity, was stepping down to head Minmetals' Australian business, possibly ahead of a public stock listing.
Andrew Michelmore had been CEO at Melbourne-based OZ Minerals since the company was formed last June. He will take up his new CEO post at Minmetals in about six weeks, he told Reuters on Tuesday.
Michelmore kept creditors at bay for six months as he sought buyers following last year's crash in commodities markets that pushed his company close to bankruptcy.
The acquisition of OZ Minerals could serve as a launch pad for Minmetals to buy other mines, though the immediate focus will be to nurse OZ back to health, Michelmore said.
"Minmetals is committed to running the Australian operations and when the markets pick up we want to deliver into them," he told Reuters. "On the other hand, it's got to be financially viable. It's not sensible to run it when you're making a loss."
Beyond Australia, OZ owns a copper mine in Laos and exploration ground in Canada and Thailand.
Initially at least, the Australian businesses will be under direct control of the Chinese parent, though a public listing in Australia hasn't been ruled out, according to Michelmore.
"There are no commitments on that front, though they have mentioned that if the market picks up and opportunities are there a public listing is something they would consider."
Australia last month approved Minmetals' revised $850 million bid for mines owned by OZ, but insisted Minmetals try to keep loss-making operations open to save local jobs.
Australia's Treasurer Wayne Swan had previously rejected Minmetals' takeover bid for financially distressed OZ Minerals, saying one of OZ's main mines was too close to a weapons-testing area in Australia's outback.
An upswing in some metals prices -- copper MCU3 is up 44 percent this year, zinc MZN3 15 percent and lead MPB3 31 percent -- means most OZ mines are generating cash, Michelmore noted.
"The key to higher metals prices is China and my view's been that we'd be seeing the pick up by the start of the second half. Some of that's come through earlier, but is it sustainable? It's earlier than I thought, but we still need to be cautious."
Cutbacks of more than 1 million tonnes in world zinc production in the last year or so have helped shore up prices, though Michelmore was less sure of why copper has risen so sharply.
"We're seeing stockpiles of zinc going down, currently around 1.9 weeks of consumption," he said. "We're not certain on copper because it's hard to know how much of that stock is simply being transferred into strategic stockpiles in China."
Nickel will need to climb above $6 a pound before Minmetals will consider restarting the Avebury nickel mine, idled by OZ at the height of the commodities crash, according to Michelmore.
The Avebury mine on the Australian island of Tasmania was slated to yield 8,500 tonnes of nickel a year -- in a world market of around 1.6 million tonnes -- all going to China's Jinchuan Group under an exclusive supply pact.
But the closure of one of the world's richest nickel finds in December suggested nickel prices were in near free-fall, making it difficult for anyone in the sector to make money.
"It will take a price of at least $6 a pound on a sustainable long term basis to consider reopening Avebury," Michelmore said.
Hard hit by a drop in stainless steel production, where it's a key alloy, nickel sells for around $12,200 a tonne MNI3, or $5.55 a pound. It last sold for just above $6 a pound in early January on the London Metal Exchange, a far cry from the $23 a pound it cost in early 2007.
Part of Australia's approval of the sale of OZ was contingent on Minmetals maintaining employment at the giant Century zinc mine, which has been operating at a loss, and eventually reopening Avebury, which was shut with the loss of 189 jobs.
OZ, formed last year from a merger of two mid-tier mining houses, Oxiana and Zinifex, to diversify into different minerals, was caught between plunging commodity prices and a global debt crunch that left it owing its bankers A$1.3 billion. ($1=1.359 Australian Dollar)
