FOREX-Aussie, others retreat from highs as caution sets in
2009-05-04 23:07:00.0
(Reuters) - The Australian dollar, the euro and sterling retreated from recent highs against the dollar and yen on Tuesday as investors pocketed profits from their gains, helped by caution ahead of U.S. banks' stress test results.
The Australian dollar hovered below its latest seven-month peak against the greenback set in early trade as the market awaited a rate decision from the Reserve Bank of Australia, which was forecast to keep its cash rate at 3.0 percent.
U.S. regulators have deemed about 10 of 19 banks will need more capital, according to a source familiar with the talks. Results of the tests are expected on Thursday. [ID:nN04400200]
"We did see a big move overnight so the market is thinking people are quite long so we'll take away some profits -- so that's one factor driving the adjustment," said Sharada Selvanathan, currency strategist at BNP Paribas in Hong Kong.
It shed 0.2 percent to 73.08 yen AUDJPY=R, down from Monday's seven-month peak of 73.57 yen.
That improving sentiment has fuelled gains in stock markets and currencies expected to benefit the fastest from a recovery, with better news on manufacturing in Europe, China and India and positive signs on U.S. home sales and construction on Monday fuelling those hopes. [ID:nL4731565]
It was 0.1 percent down at 132.27 yen EURJPY=R, below a three-week high of 132.87 set on Monday.
, down from a two-week high at 99.57 on Monday.
The market is betting the central bank will keep rates steady at 3.0 percent [AU/INT]. Although the cash rate is at a record low, it is amongst the highest in the developed world, making Australian assets attractive to yield-hungry investors.
Some analysts, though, believe the global green shoots theory could see the RBA refrain from making such a commitment.
"If the economic embers are starting to reignite, we doubt that a generally hawkish RBA central governor will want to overly stoke them, particularly when he is on the record as stating that Australia is better placed to deal with the current recession than most other nations," said Josh Williamson, analyst at Citi. (Additional report by Anirban Nag in Sydney; Editing by Jan Dahinten)
