FOREX-U.S dollar hurt by a surge in risk appetite
2009-05-04 20:02:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar extended its losses on Tuesday, as a resurgence in risk appetite saw investors dump safe-haven assets and pile in to riskier trades like stocks, commodities and higher-yielding currencies.
The dollar lost ground broadly against major currencies, with its index .DXY languishing at five-week lows, as easing concerns over U.S. banks and hopes the worst in the global economy may have passed stoked a rally in stocks nTOPNEWS.
"The U.S. dollar is understandably on the backfoot as risk appetite continues to surge," said Richard Franulovich, senior currency strategist at Westpac, New York.
"The underlying resilience of risk appetite can be clearly seen in the ability of asset markets to shrug off several bearish developments including the emergence of swine flu, the bankruptcy of Chrysler and the imminent stress test results for U.S. banks."
Trading is expected to be thin in Asia, with Japan shut until Thursday for Golden Week holidays.
struck fresh seven-month and three-week highs respectively, as investors grew confident about a recovery in the global economy.
On Monday, investors cheered a 3.2 percent jump in pending U.S. home sales in March and the first increase in construction spending since September.
The upbeat U.S. data followed better news on manufacturing in Europe, China and India, supporting the view that the deep economic slump may have bottomed out. [ID:nL4731565].
, having risen two cents on Monday, while the dollar even slipped on the yen
, another safe-haven currency, to 98.82 yen.
The Aussie rose to a fresh seven-month peak of $0.7419, from $0.7394 late in New York on Monday, while the New Zealand dollar advanced to $0.5767 from around $0.5739 in the previous session.
The Aussie, which has gained over 4 percent in the past two weeks, will be in focus ahead of an interest rate decision by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA).
The market is betting the central bank will keep rates steady at 3.0 percent [AU/INT]. Although, the cash rate is at a record low, it is amongst the highest in the developed world, making Australian assets attractive to yield-hungry investors.
The announcement is due at 0430 GMT, and there is an outside chance the RBA might pledge to keep rates low for an extended period as some other central banks have.
Some analysts, though, believe the global green shoots theory could see the RBA refrain from making such a commitment.
"If the economic embers are starting to reignite, we doubt that a generally hawkish RBA central governor will want to overly stoke them, particularly when he is on the record as stating that Australia is better placed to deal with the current recession than most other nations," said Josh Williamson, analyst at Citi. (Reporting by Anirban Nag, editing by Wayne Cole)
