FOREX-Dollar falls, safety bid wanes on economic hopes
2009-05-04 14:31:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar fell against major currencies on Monday as a rally in U.S. stocks and hopes that the worst of the global economic crisis could be over eroded the greenback's safe-haven appeal.
The euro rose to a one-month high above $1.34 after positive news on U.S. home sales and construction boosted investor appetite for risk. That helped it erase losses seen after European Central Bank council member Axel Weber said Germany won't resume growth until the second half of 2010.
"The worst is probably behind us. And that's certainly part of the reason why we're seeing this broad-based rally in equities and money moving out of the safety of U.S. dollars into riskier currencies," said Kathy Lien, director of currency research at GFT Forex in New York.
Thin trading volume has exacerbated currency moves, with Britain and Japan shuttered for holidays, analysts said.
In early afternoon New York trading, the euro rose 1 percent at $1.3392
, near a $1.3425 session peak and well off the day's low at $1.3212.
It also added 0.8 percent to 132.54 yen EURJPY=, near a three-week high, while the dollar was down 0.1 percent at 98.98 yen
while the Australian dollar, boasting the highest interest rates among developed currencies, traded near a seven-month high against the greenback at $0.7384
Investors were cheered by a 3.2 percent jump in pending U.S. home sales in March and the first increase in construction spending since September. That followed better news on manufacturing in Europe, China and India, supporting the view that the deepest economic slump in decades may have bottomed out. See [ID:nL4731565].
"The core view today is one of an incremental shift toward recovery," said Andrew Wilkinson, senior market analyst at Interactive Brokers Group in Greenwich, Connecticut.
Despite a recovery in risk appetite, analysts said currency investors will face risks before the week is out. While worries have faded about stress tests showing some big banks need more capital, investors remain wary of Thursday's ECB policy meeting.
The central bank of the 16-country euro zone is expected to cut interest rates to 1 percent and possibly announce further steps, such as buying securities, to stimulate lending and growth. Central banks in Britain, Norway and Australia also meet this week.
"ECB officials have been candid in talking about their differences in public, and Thursday is really D-Day for them," said UBS currency strategist Brian Kim.
He said any indication that the bank will follow the U.S. Federal Reserve and others and embrace quantitative easing -- the process of flooding a banking system with money to boost lending -- would likely weigh on the euro. (Additional reporting by Steven C. Johnson; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
