Global data points to recession easing
2009-05-04 16:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Better news on manufacturing in Europe, China and India, and positive signs on U.S. home sales and construction raised hopes on Monday that the deepest economic slump in decades may have bottomed out.
Manufacturing in Europe declined at its slowest pace in six months, and grew in China and India in April, while pending sales of existing U.S. homes rose unexpectedly in March and U.S. construction spending rose a slim 0.3 percent the same month, its first increase since September.
"While overall activity is still contracting, it now appears as if the pace of contraction is diminishing, and at some point later this year, activity will bottom out and begin expanding again," Richmond Federal Reserve President Jeffrey Lacker said in a speech to business leaders.
European and U.S. shares rose -- Wall Street's leading indexes .N jumped 2.5 percent or more as investors bet the government's "stress tests" won't be bad for banks and hoped the housing data meant the recession is ending. The S&P 500 topped the psychologically important 900 level for the first time since early January.
index of top European shares had ended up 1.5 percent, its highest close since January 12, with oil and gas and industrial engineering among the top sectoral gainers.
Fears of a deadly flu epidemic also eased, cheering investors. Mexico's peso currency soared and its stocks jumped after the government of the country hit worst by the flu said the worst of the illness had passed.
Oil prices rose to their highest close of the year, above $54 a barrel, on hopes an easing of the recession will pave the way for a recover in world energy demand.
'MOST WIDESPREAD RECESSION'
"The European economy is in the midst of its deepest and most widespread recession in the post-war era," Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquin Almunia said after the Commission revised down its forecasts.
"But the ambitious measures taken by governments and central banks in these exceptional circumstances are expected to put a floor under the fall in economic activity this year and enable a recovery next year," Almunia said in a statement.
The China and India PMI data helped push Asian stocks to seven-month highs, also supported by the positive U.S. data.
President Barack Obama's administration said it does not see a need to ask the U.S. Congress for more money to support banks. Spokesman Robert Gibbs said there would be banks that will need more capital, but the administration would expect them to raise that on their own.
Elsewhere, a reshaping of Europe's car industry moved closer as Fiat (
) sought official German support for a plan to take over General Motors' <GM.N > European operations just four days after clinching a deal with Chrysler.
A series of global PMI surveys -- which record changes in items such as output, orders, employment, inventories and prices -- suggested the world economy may be past the worst.
Markit's Final Eurozone Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index of around 3,000 companies rose to 36.8 in April, its highest level since October. It was, however, the 11th consecutive month below the 50 mark, which divides growth from contraction.
"It is still clearly recessionary but it can be said quite safely that the worst is behind us both in terms of industrial decline and of GDP," said Marco Valli at Unicredit.
The U.S. National Association of Realtors said pending sales of previously owned homes rose 3.2 percent in March, the second straight month with a gain, suggesting a moderation in the housing slump. A Commerce Department report showed construction spending rose 0.3 percent in March, its first increase in six months.
Hong Kong-based brokerage CLSA's China Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) rose to 50.1 in April from 44.8 in March, the first time since July 2008 the seasonally-adjusted index climbed above 50.
In India, the ABN AMRO Bank purchasing managers' index rose to 53.3 from March's 49.5, its highest in seven months.
(Reporting by Reuters correspondents worldwide; Writing by Patricia Zengerle; Editing by Brian Moss and Steve Orlofsky)
