Deep downturn may hurt supply chain, delay rebound
2009-05-04 14:09:00.0
Deep downturn may hurt supply chain, delay rebound | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Deep downturn may hurt supply chain, delay rebound
The Delphi Flint East assembly plant is seen in this file photo in Flint, Michigan June 22, 2007. The global recession may be so deep that it is destroying manufacturers and other companies in the supply chain at too fast a pace for the damage to be repaired quickly. Credit: Reuters/Rebecca Cook
Mon  EDT
That could hamper an eventual recovery and trigger inflationary pressures, some experts warn.
"There has been widespread decimation of production capacity," said Paul Bingham, managing director of world trade and transportation markets at IHS Global Insight. "There is no question that this destruction will become an impediment to recovery."
Bingham and others maintain that factories may have been lost forever rather than simply mothballed, as they might have been in a less fearsome downturn, and that labor may also have been driven from particular geographical areas because of the lack of jobs.
The time it will take to bring all this back together, particularly for more advanced goods, will likely cause bottlenecks and price increases as demand overwhelms supply in any upturn.
The U.S. economy -- the world's largest and the long-standing driver of global economic growth thanks to the voracious appetite of the American consumer -- has been in recession since December 2007.
The U.S. downturn has taken a toll on production in China, where many of the goods Americans buy are produced. Industrial output grew at a rate of 3.8 percent in February, which was a record low, before rebounding to 8.3 percent in March.
According to Panjiva, which collects information on suppliers and manufacturers using customs and other data, the number of active foreign manufacturers exporting to the United States totaled 120,000 in March, 26 percent below the peak of 162,000 foreign manufacturers in July 2007 and more than 15 percent below March 2008.
Although the March number was a 1.7 percent improvement over the 118,000 foreign suppliers in February, the number of Chinese manufacturers shrank 3 percent.
Panjiva -- whose customers include home-improvement chain Home Depot Inc -- has created a watch list of significant suppliers at risk. Under Panjiva's methodology, a significant supplier is defined as one with 10 or more shipments a year. To get on the watch list, a significant supplier has to have experienced a 50 percent decline in shipments in the past three months.
"On a basic level, the greatest threat companies on the watch list pose is that these factories could go out of business," said Panjiva Chief Executive Officer Josh Green. "It could mean you are no longer able to deliver to your customers because a critical link in your chain has disappeared," he added.
Those missing links cannot be swiftly replaced and the more that disappear, the more manufacturing capacity is removed from the supply chain, said IHS Global Insight's Bingham.
"Once you close down those factories you can't just turn them on again overnight," he said. "It takes time to bring capacity back online, which will slow recovery."
"So the longer this downturn lasts, the harder it's going to be to get out of it," he added.
Panjiva's Green said in some low-skilled industries -- such as textiles -- capacity is easily replaced. But it is difficult for businesses requiring heavy machinery or high-skilled jobs.
"The more forward-thinking retailers we're talking to are anticipating supply problems because of this when the recovery comes," he said.
James Pressler, international economist at Northern Trust, said that China has relied on migrant workers on its industrialized east coast, many of whom have been sent home as there is no work for them. Once that labor pool is scattered, it is hard to reassemble, he said.
"Labor flexibility is going to be a problem in China when demand picks up," he said.
Some, however, argue that supply can quickly respond to demand in the modern era of the globalized economy.
"The dynamics of the supply chain are in a constant evolutionary state," said Douglas Stotlar, chief executive of trucking and logistics company Con-way Inc. "It does not take long for supply to respond to demand."
And Uri Dadush, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and former director of international trade for the World Bank, said he thinks concerns over the global supply chain are overblown.
"Some factories might disappear, but the Chinese will be able to ramp up relatively fast if they need to," he said.
Perhaps the biggest threat might be a rise in protectionism, which has already shown signs of increasing during the recession.
Kurt Kuehn, the chief financial officer of the world's largest package delivery company, United Parcel Service Inc, said that gaps in the supply chain should be "marginal" and "temporary," provided trade barriers aren't being erected around the world.
"Unless protectionism takes hold, the supply chain will remain vibrant," he said. "Global trade will help the recovery. We should remember that protectionism exacerbated the Great Depression" of the 1930s.
