US hogs tumble on concerns over Canada pigs
2009-05-04 00:02:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. hog futures fell on Monday in a rocky start to a second week of business mired by the H1N1 flu virus that has sparked meat import bans and infected more than 1,000 people in 20 countries.
The drop in hog futures was sparked by the first case during the current swine flu outbreak of the virus being detected in a herd of pigs. The pigs, located in Canada, were infected by a person who had been to Mexico.
"I think it was an overreaction to the Canadian story," said Chicago Mercantile Exchange hog trader James Burns.
"We opened lower and subsequently broke pretty hard and now we are starting to see some commercial and speculative buying coming in here," he added.
Hog futures were battered last week as up to 20 countries imposed bans on U.S. hogs, pork or other meats from some U.S. states or the entire country as the flu spread globally.
The National Pork Producers Council, a trade promotion group, predicted the bans on U.S. pork could be lifted soon.
Mexico, where the disease was first detected, has asked the World Health Organization to investigate the trade bans by countries that include Russia and China.
MF Global Research analyst Rich Feltes wrote in a note to clients on Monday that "our sources indicated that retailers slowed pork orders last week, taking a 'wait and see' posture on whether domestic pork demand was indeed damaged.
"There has still been no transmittal from pigs or pork to humans, so the battle is not lost, but a continuation of 'wait and see' ordering could put more pressure on markets."
U.S. hog dealers said it could be weeks before the cash market turns around. Before the flu outbreak, hog prices had started to trend seasonally higher as pork demand improved during spring grilling season while hogs typically gain weight at a slower rate in warmer weather.
But the flu reversed that course. Meat packers are cutting production in response to the pork imports. Saturday's hog slaughter was about 63 percent lower than a year ago, according to the U.S. Agriculture Department.
With less hogs going to slaughter, prices will likely decline further, the dealers said.
At 10:42 a.m. CDT (1542 GMT), May hogs 2LHK9 were down 2.550 cents at 55.925 cents per lb and actively traded June 2LHM9 was down 1.050 cents at 64.525. (Reporting by Jerry Bieszk and Michael Hirtzer; Writing by K.T. Arasu; Editing by Christian Wiessner)
