Accor eyes hotel acquisitions amid downturn
2009-05-04 07:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon  EDT
), Europe's largest hotelier, plans to set aside 100 million euros ($132.8 million) a year to buy hotels put up for sale as a result of the global downturn, the group's chief financial officer said on Sunday.
Jacques Stern also said that revenues from Accor's hotels, which range from the budget Ibis to luxury Sofitel brands, would be similar in the second quarter to the first.
"In Q1 we were down 8 percent like-for-like growth. We will definitely have some margin decrease. Q2 will be more or less the same," Jacques Stern told Reuters in an interview.
In April, the French group posted a 9.6 percent drop in first-quarter sales, as weakening economies hurt demand for its hotels, and said it will make deeper cuts to renovation budgets than planned.
Accor and its rivals have suffered as the global downturn forces multinational companies to tighten their belts, hitting the hotel, travel and property industries hard.
"In terms of development capex (capital expenditure), we could dedicate an amount of 400 million euros a year to the expansion and within this envelope we will commit around 100 million euros for hotel acquisitions," Stern told Reuters.
"It will depend on opportunity in the market," Stern said, adding the company is prepared to wait for deals to be thrown up by the downturn.
Stern said he did not see any recovery in the global hotel market, adding that it was too early to call the bottom.
The United States remained in a "bad" position, although there were signs of a stabilization. "The (U.S.) market is down around 12 percent for economy hotels, 15 percent for mid-scale and between 20 and 25 percent for upscale hotels in terms of negative revPAR (revenue per available room). It's not worsening, it's stabilization," he said.
In Europe, the situation was a little bit better as budget hotels such as Accor's Ibis brand were showing resilience, he said.
Accor is gearing up to open around 30,000 rooms this year, with more than 40 percent in Asia Pacific, Stern said.
"Despite the crisis which is also touching this continent long-term demand will remain it is a priority for the group," he said.
Accor has about 25 Ibis hotels in China and plans to open 20 more in 2009. "The pace of development for China for Ibis will be around 10 new units per year in the next years," said Stern.
"At a time when it's very difficult to go to the market and do debt raising it'll be good to have that for the future to continue the expansion plans we launched a few years ago," he said.
Stern said Accor's financial position was solid with debt below 1.1 billion euros and unused committed credit lines of 2.1 billion euros. "So we have the financial capability to move if we want."
Shares in Accor, whose top shareholders Eurazeo (EURA.PA) and U.S. investment fund Colony Capital together own over 30 percent of the group, have fallen 8 percent so far this year.
(Reporting by Tamara Walid; Editing by Erica Billingham)
