PREVIEW-Russia and debt in focus in Carlsberg's Q1
2009-05-04 10:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Performance on Carlsberg's (
) key Russian market, along with plans to cut debt, will be in focus when the world's fourth-biggest brewer opens its books on its first quarter this week.
Carlsberg is seen doubling group operating profits after buying last year half of Scottish & Newcastle's (S&N) assets including Russia's leading brewer Baltika.
The group, which brews Tuborg, Holsten, Baltika and Kronenbourg beers as well as its own brand, has been hard hit by uncertainty in Russia, its most important growth market.
Its overall market share in Russia, which accounts for about half of group operating profits, was 38.3 percent in 2008.
"We expect that Carlsberg got relatively well through a challenging first quarter on the Russian market," Sydbank analyst Morten Imsgard said in a note.
He said Russian beer drinkers had probably -- as in 2008 -- chosen Carlsberg's premium brand segment over cheaper beer.
North and western Europe account for roughly 60 percent of Carlsberg's sales but growth on these markets has stagnated.
Stig Nymann, analyst at Gudme Raaschou, expected Carlsberg to have gained market share in Russia in the quarter.
"Carlsberg is expanding by cultivating new regions. There may be more growth in these new regions than in Moscow and St. Petersburg which have been hit hard by the crisis," Nymann said.
"If the Russian market looks OK, and if they say they are in control of the process to bring down debt, then those will probably be the main points in the earnings report."
The world's second-fastest growing beer market behind China in 2002-2007 fell 1 percent in 2008.
Beer consumption has traditionally been seen as relatively resilient to economic downturns, but conditions have become dire also for brewers in the current global crisis, and many -- including Carlsberg -- are cutting costs.
Heineken and Carlsberg, which jointly bought Scottish & Newcastle for 7.8 billion pounds, pledged in February to slash debt, costs and spending ahead of a recession-hit 2009.
Carlsberg sees net interest-bearing debt to EBITDA ratio of around 3 at the end of 2009, down from 3.8 at the end of 2008.
Analysts will also focus on its hard-hit British and French markets. But the first quarter is the year's slowest for breweries. Sluggish sales early in the year could be countered by a warm summer.
The mean forecast in a Reuters poll is for Carlsberg to post first-quarter operating profits of 785 million Danish crowns ($140 million), compared with 388 million in Q1 2008. Jyske Bank analyst Jens Thomsen said that increase was solely due to the S&N acquisition. [ID:nLU886657]
), the world No. 2 brewer which brews Miller Lite, Peroni and Grolsch, sold less beer than expected in the first three months of 2009 as economic conditions worsened and demand fell in most of its markets, it said last month. [ID:nLF155405]
Third-biggest brewer Heineken, which brews under its own name and 'Amstel', suffered a bigger-than-expected drop in volume of beer shipped in the quarter and the impact and duration of the downturn remained unclear, it said in April. [ID:nLL709350]
The world's largest brewer is Anheuser-Busch InBev INTB.BR, brewer of Stella Artois, Beck's and Budweiser.
Carlsberg's full-year 2009 forecast is for operating profits to rise 12 percent to 9 billion crowns while analysts see a 8.6-billion profit. (Additional reporting by Anna Ringstrom; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter) ($1=5.626 Danish Crown)
