Investors may sweeten offer for China's Hurray
2009-05-04 07:07:00.0
(Reuters) - A Chinese investor group said on Monday it may sweeten its offer to acquire ringtone provider Hurray Holding Co Ltd HRAY.O if there is a rival bidder, but urged the U.S.-listed firm to be more responsive and transparent.
"If there's another bidder who offers a better price, we're willing to revise our purchase conditions," Jacky Tung, who led the group Best Prospect Overseas Ltd, said in a telephone interview.
"Hurray is a valuable platform we could use to consolidate the media industry," said Tung, also founder and president of closely-held Joy Media Group.
Best Prospect, however, could choose to walk away, if Hurray does not immediately start constructive talks or disclose any other existing offers, Hung said in a public letter on Monday. "If we do not hear from you promptly, we reserve the right to withdraw our offer. In that event, you could be responsible for the potential losses of your shareholders," Tung said in the letter.
On April 24, Best Prospect offered to buy a 51 percent stake in Hurray for $3.50 per American Depository Share, more than double the stock's closing price of $1.45 on that day. But requests for further discussions and due diligence had been denied without explanation, according to the letter.
Hurray shares have jumped 37 percent to $1.98 since the offer was submitted, giving it a market capitalisation of $43 million. The gap between the offer price and the market price reflects investor concerns that the deal might collapse.
Meanwhile, Chinese media reported on April 30 that Hurray was in exclusive talks with another potential buyer, despite the fact that Best Prospect had been discussing the offer with Hurray for six months, it said.
Hurray acknowledged on April 29 that it had received Best Prospect's offer, but said that the company was evaluating various strategic alternatives to maximise shareholder value.
"Frankly, we're discouraged with the lack of transparency and disclosure from the board on the matter of exploring strategic alternatives," Tung said in the letter.
"In our view, the lack of transparency and rejection of a competitive process damage shareholder value for no apparent benefit."
Hurray, which was spun off from network service provider UTStarcom Inc (
), owns Chinese independent record labels Huayi Brothers Music, Freeland Music, New Run Entertainment, Secular Bird and Seed Music Group. The Beijing-based firm also organises concerts.
Hurray posted a net loss of $12 million in 2008, as revenues fell 10.9 percent to $54 million.
