Thai tech firms hire more staff on improved outlook
2009-05-04 05:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Electronics companies in Thailand have started hiring staff again due to tentative signs of a recovery in the global economy and improving orders from clients, especially in China, industry experts said on Monday.
Hard disk drive maker Western Digital Corp WDC.N, for example, has taken on 3,000 workers over the past month, bringing its workforce to about 31,000, Sampan Silapanad, president of the Electronics and Computer Employers' Association, told Reuters.
"The new recruitment is to help offset staff that left over the past six or seven months. When the crisis started, some companies cut overtime shift to save costs, causing many staff to lose income, and forcing them to leave," Sampan said.
The association groups more than 50 leading electronic parts suppliers, including Thai units of Western Digital and Seagate Technology (
) as well as Thailand's leading integrated circuit packager, Hana Microelectronics HANA.BK.
"I don't want to be too positive. Let's say they cut 7,000 last year and are now hiring 3,000. There are still 4,000 missing," he said.
About 30,000 electronics workers in Thailand have lost their jobs since late last year as global producers acted to cut costs and reduce staff in response to weaker demand.
Thailand is a big Southeast Asian manufacturing base for hard disk drives, with Seagate, Hitachi Global Storage Technologies and Western Digital all having production plants here.
The second-half outlook was bright on expectations that the global electronics sector would hit bottom and there would then be sustained demand for electronics products such as smartphones and personal computers, Sampan said.
"Electronic goods are essential to people now," he said.
Kattiya Kraikan, chairman of the electronics sector of the Federation of Thai Industries, shared that view, adding that the improved outlook was mainly due to rising orders from China and fellow southeast Asian countries.
Clients started placing orders in January after scaling them back late last year, and some plants had begun overtime shifts to make sure they could deliver products on time because clients placed orders with a short delivery time, Kattiya said.
"The electronics sector has shown positive signs in the past two months. It's positive when compared to January. Compared to the same period last year, export figures are still negative," Kattiya said.
Shipments of electronics products were 26 percent lower in March than a year earlier, still a slight improvement compared with the fall of 32 percent in February and 40 percent in January, he said. [ID:nBKK139365]
Despite signs of a global recovery, Sampan expressed concern about political instability in Thailand after last month's violence in Bangkok and in the resort of Pattaya, where a high-profile Asian summit meeting had to be cancelled.
"When the global crisis is over, we have to make sure our country has no political crisis. Will orders or investment come back to Thailand if our problems have not been resolved?" he asked. ($1 = 35.20 Baht) (Reporting by Khettiya Jittapong; Editing by Alan Raybould)
