South African Markets - Factors to watch on May 4
2009-05-04 02:18:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Monday.
Asian stocks punched to a seven-month peak on Monday, fuelled by confidence the global economy is recovering faster than expected and on a further jump in Taiwanese shares on hopes for an influx of Chinese investment.
Taiwan's benchmark TAIEX index
soared 6 percent, taking gains to 13 percent in just two days as investors see a wide-reaching deal coming later in the year as spurring heavy Chinese investment in the island, especially in financial firms. [ID:nLU957268]
For a story, double click on [ID:nL4457984]
South African stocks gained for the second day on Thursday, boosted by higher world markets and another local interest rate cut, while the rand surged to a new 7-month high against the dollar.
rose 0.8 percent to 18,514.32 points, led by miners on firmer base metal prices and with stocks worldwide at three-month peak. The broader All-share index
added 0.8 percent to 20,647.03 points.
South African markets were closed on Friday for the Workers Day holiday. For Thursday's South African financial markets closing report, double click on [ID:nLU979282]
Africa's biggest cement maker, Pretoria Portland Cement (PPC) (
), expects headline earnings per share for the six months to end March to be between 75-90 percent lower, it said on Monday.
), Africa's biggest mobile operator by subscribers, is expected to release an update on subscriber numbers.
Gold rose half a percent on Monday on a weaker U.S. dollar and light Chinese buying, but rising stock markets could curb gains, while platinum dropped on worries about slumping demand for autocatalysts.
Spot gold XAU= was quoted at $891.00 an ounce, up $5.20 from New York's notional close. Gold has fallen 11 percent since spiking to an 11-month high above $1,000 in February on profit taking, lower oil prices and gains in stocks markets.
For the latest precious metals report, double click on [GOL/]
The U.S. factory sector contracted further in April, but at a slower pace, while consumers reported feeling more confident about the economy last month than at any time since September when Lehman Brothers collapsed, paralyzing the global financial system. For details, see [ID:nN01402214]
For the New York stock market report, double click on [.N]
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- Mboweni looks east for growth: demand from China, India will shield S.Africa, says central bank governor
