UK's Hague says Syria talks very difficult
2012-06-30 04:03:00.0
UK's Hague says Syria talks very difficult | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
UK's Hague says Syria talks "very difficult"
Fri, Jun 29 2012
Fri, Jun 29 2012
Fri, Jun 29 2012
Thu, Jun 28 2012
Thu, Jun 28 2012
British Foreign Minister William Hague answers questions of the media as he arrives for the meeting of the Action Group on Syria at the United Nations European headquarters in Geneva, June 30, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Valentin Flauraud
Sat  EDT
"There is an opportunity for the international community to be much stronger and act more robustly but we can only do it with the agreement of Russia and China," he told reporters as he arrived for the talks at the United Nations in Geneva.
Foreign ministers from Western powers and Arab countries are attending a meeting convened by international mediator Kofi Annan in Geneva to try forge a common strategy to end the 16 month-old conflict in Syria but differences over the fate of Syria's President Bashar al-Assad may thwart them.
"It has always been our view that a stable future for Syria, a stable political process means Assad leaving power as part of an agreement on transitional process," Hague said.
Russia, Assad's main ally, insists that any transition plan must not be imposed on Syria by foreign powers.
French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius, arriving for the talks due to start at 0900 GMT, said: "It is absolutely essential that the violence stops and that a political transition can begin. Kofi Annan made reasonable propositions and I hope that they will be upheld and that's the point of today's discussions."
(Reporting by Tom Miles, Stephanie Nebehay and Emma Farge; Editing by Angus MacSwan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Russia¡¯s adamant refusal to replace current Syrian government might have a strong economic flavor. Moscow fears that a new western-inclined leader would support the construction of gigantic gas pipeline from Saudi to Europe via Syria, thus diminishing Russian economic bargaining power. (vzc1943)
Jul 01, 20129:54pm EDT--
