China holds Mexicans over flu fears -embassy
2009-05-03 06:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese authorities are confining over 50 Mexicans to hotels and other sites, fearing the spread of the H1N1 flu, an official at the Mexican embassy in Beijing said on Sunday, adding only one had symptoms of the flu.
Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa on Saturday criticised Beijing, saying "Mexican citizens showing no signs at all of being ill have been isolated under unacceptable conditions."
Of the more than 100 suspected deaths from the new H1N1 virus that have emerged in Mexico, 19 had been confirmed. Mexico had already scaled back from its original estimate of 176 suspected deaths.
Mexico's ambassador to Beijing, Jorge Guajardo, went to the Guo Men Hotel in the capital where over 10 Mexicans have been held, but was not allowed to see to them, said the embassy official. She spoke on condition of anonymity.
The confined Mexicans -- mostly business people and tourists, many in transit to other countries -- are being held in hotels and other sites across several parts of China, including Hong Kong, said the embassy official.
Around 35 are in Shanghai, six in the far southern city of Guangzhou, and six in Hong Kong, she said.
"All of them have no symptoms," said the official, adding that the exception was a Mexican man under quarantine in Hong Kong who was found to have the H1N1 virus.
"These are discriminatory measures, without foundation...The Foreign Ministry recommends avoiding travelling to China until these measures are corrected," Mexican Foreign Minister Espinosa said on Saturday.
Espinosa also condemned China, Argentina, Peru, Ecuador and Cuba for suspending flights from Mexico due to the flu outbreak. Mexico traditionally has had good ties with all of those nations.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry had no immediate response to Espinosa's criticism or to the Embassy's claims.
But a spokesman for the Shanghai city government, Chen Xiwei, said the steps were justified under World Health Organisation guidelines and were within the law.
"These recent measures are taken in accordance with our country's laws and regulations," Chen told a news conference.
China's vast population and patchy medical infrastructure makes it particularly vulnerable should the virus take hold and propagate.
Beijing city officials moved 15 people who recently had "close contact" with the H1N1 virus from a local hospital to the Guo Men Hotel on Saturday night for a week under medical observation, after they showed no symptoms of the flu, Xinhua news agency reported on Sunday.
Many of the confined Mexicans were on that same flight to Shanghai, but others had reached China on flights from Los Angeles, Newark and Vancouver, said the embassy official.
