PRESS DIGEST - British business press - May 2
2009-05-01 22:38:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
UK'S BIGGEST CAR DEALER CONDEMNS SCRAPPAGE SCHEME AS INEFFECTUAL
), the UK's biggest car dealership, has dealt a blow to the government's attempts to boost the severely weakened sector after dismissing the proposed scrappage incentive scheme, in which drivers of cars over ten years old would be given 1,000 pounds to scrap them and buy new ones, as ineffectual. Trevor Finn, the group's chief executive, said of the scheme which is to be implemented on May 12, "It's not enough to make a material difference to customer behaviour". His concerns have also been shared by other industry figures, with Alistair Beveridge, of Zolfo Cooper, saying that carmakers would find it very difficult to offer 1,000 pounds on top of existing incentives and that it was more probable that the sum would be replace existing offers.
Vincent Tchenguiz has increased pressure on Bramdean Alternatives, Nicola Horlick's flagship investment trust, after calling on Friday for the entire board to be ousted. The property tycoon, who owns almost 29 percent of the fund, said that more than half of BA's investors backed his plan to sack the board. The surprise move comes just one day after the trust announced that it had been approached from an undisclosed party concerning a takeover. Mr Tchenguiz wants to install Jonathan Carr, a veteran investment trust executive, as chairman of the group.
Adwalker has warned that it would go bankrupt unless its directors continued to defer their salaries and other creditors gave it more time to pay its bills. The company, a provider of "walking-billboard" screen advertising, is set to launch a trial with a leading multinational but said that there was no certainty that a deal would go through. It added that it has entered advanced stages of discussions with shopping centre owners in the United States and Ireland.
CALL TO VETO RIO'S CHINALCO DEAL
) with Chinalco has taken a new turn after the head of Australia's opposition Liberal Party called on the country's government to veto the 19.5 billion dollars investment by the Chinese state-controlled group in the miner. Malcolm Turnbull, who accused prime minister Kevin Rudd of being fixated on China, said the tie-up presents a conflict of interest as the Chinese government would be both a major investor and a customer. Shareholders are also opposed to the deal which involves selling Chinalco $12.3 billion in asset stakes and $7.2 billion in convertible notes.
) has trumpeted signs of recovery after announcing a better-than-expected 16.1 percent rise in first-quarter profits to 21.6 million pounds before amortisation and tax. Alan Brown, chief executive, said, "I think we can see a way round the corner." He highlighted a turnaround at City Link, Rentokil's parcel delivery division, which is expected to return to profit within the following 18 months. First-quarter sales grew by 9.8 percent to 635 million pounds but declined 1.2 percent after adjusting for currency gains.
SWINE FLU 'WILL NOT HIT' GENUS
Genus, the pig and cattle genetics groups which has suffered a turbulent week on the stock market in the wake of the swine flu outbreak, reassured shareholders on Friday that the disease will not affect its business. The company, led by Richard Wood, said in a statement that none of its pure-line animals is infected with influenza as they are kept under strict bio-security regimes in the U.S. and Canada. It added that it expected "no material impact" from the swine flu on its earnings.
Domino's Pizza (buy)
EasyJet's (
) Jeff Carr has been appointed as FirstGroup's (
) new finance director. The company said Mr Carr, whose working background includes senior roles at AB Foods and Reckitt Benckiser (
), was expected to join in the following months. It also announced the departure of Dean Finch, the group's chief operating officer, who is becoming chief executive of Tube Lines, the company responsible for the Jubilee, Northern and Piccadilly lines in London. EasyJet said it would begin immediately the search for Mr Carr's successor.
The crucial end-of-April deadline to resolve the dispute between the UK's largest mobile phone operators over the delivery of broadband services to every household in the country has been breached as it is understood that one of the major groups is still at odds with its competitors. Communication minister Lord Carter, who is to complete his plan for "Digital Britain" in June, had appointed the consultant Kip Meek to act as a government arbitrator between the operators. The row focuses on the unwillingness of Vodafone (
) and O2 to share their most lucrative broadband spectrum with rivals Orange, T-Mobile and 3. A spokesperson for the Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform said the discussions with the industry were ongoing and played down the significance of missing the deadline.
), the owner of Penguin and the Financial Times Group, issued a cheerful note for the start of 2009, saying that revenues rose by 26 percent to one billion pounds in the first three months of the year. The company said on Friday it hoped new titles by Jamie Oliver, Eoin Colfer and Nick Hornby would assist its book-publishing arm ride through the economic slowdown. Content subscription and digital revenues at the FT Group grew well despite "very tough" conditions, but advertising, which accounted for 16 percent of Pearson's newspaper division revenue and three per cent of all company earnings, deteriorated.
Chancellor Alistair Darling, who has been criticised for raising the top rate of income tax to 50 percent, has suffered a fresh blow after publishing and conference group Informa (
) unveiled plans to shift its tax facilities out of the UK to avoid "double taxation" on intellectual property. The group, whose titles include Lloyd's List and Routledge academic books, said it would create a new parent company that will be UK-listed, but incorporated in Jersey and tax resident in Switzerland. Informa also announced a two-for-five capital raising of 242 million pounds in a bid to cut its debt to 900 million pounds by the end of the year.
OFT TELLS ASHLEY'S SPORTS DIRECT IT MUST SELL SHOPS IN FIVE TOWNS
) has been told by the Office of Fair Trading that it must sell shops in five towns as a result of competition concerns. The watchdog's ruling comes after Mike Ashley's retail chain acquired 31 JJB stores in a series of deals completed over a two-year period. The outlets will have to be sold to a buyer approved by the OFT, while the sales will have to be finalised by a deadline set by the watchdog. The towns where the chain must sell stores will not be announced until June, following a period of consultation.
WATERSTONE'S TO AXE 650 JOBS IN MOVE TO BURTON
Up to 650 jobs are to be lost at Waterstone's as part of a new cost-cutting drive which will see the book chain moving to a new distribution centre in Burton-on-Trent. The company, which owns more than 300 stores and employs 4,500 people, said the redundancies were essential despite significant attempts "to minimise the effects of the changes". Waterstone's is expected to report annual profits of about 58 million pounds at the end of June, a considerable drop compared to four years ago when it made more than 130 million pounds.
