Mexico reacts angrily to China flu measures
2009-05-02 21:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sat  EDT
Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa also condemned China and four Latin American countries for restricting flights from Mexico, the epicenter of an H1N1 flu outbreak that the World Health Organization fears may become a global pandemic.
At a news conference, Espinosa criticized authorities in Hong Kong for quarantining the Metropark Hotel on Friday after test results showed the 25-year-old Mexican guest was infected with the virus.
"We are especially worried about China, where Mexican citizens showing no signs at all of being ill, have been isolated, under unacceptable conditions," Espinosa said.
"These are discriminatory measures, without foundation ... The Foreign Ministry recommends avoiding traveling to China until these measures are corrected," Espinosa said.
She also condemned China as well as Argentina, Peru, Ecuador and Cuba for suspending flights from Mexico due to the flu outbreak. Mexico traditionally has had good ties with all of those nations.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry had no immediate response to Espinosa's criticism.
Passengers who caught the same flights to Shanghai and onward as the Mexican remain isolated and under medical observation in Beijing, Shanghai and other mainland Chinese cities, the Xinhua news agency reported late on Saturday.
China Southern Airlines will send a charter plane to Mexico on Sunday to pick up about 120 Chinese passengers stranded after regular direct flights were suspended, Xinhua reported.
The new flu has been found in 18 countries, although Mexico accounts for the biggest number of deaths.
Mexican authorities, however, say they hope the outbreak is stabilizing and have cut back the suspected death toll to up to 101 from a previous 176.
Espinosa's criticism of China followed an announcement on Friday by the Chinese ambassador in Mexico that his country had sent $3 million in medical supplies to the Latin American country to help fight the epidemic.
"International cooperation is indispensable," Espinosa said. She thanked countries who had sent aid but said Mexico would protest any discriminatory measures against its citizens arising from the flu alert.
(Reporting by Adriana Barrera; Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing; Writing by Pascal Fletcher; Editing by Paul Simao and Dean Yates)
