Lower Mexico flu death toll heartens nervous world
2009-05-02 01:48:00.0
(Reuters) - In a glint of good news for a world rattled by the threat of a flu pandemic, new laboratory data showed fewer people have died in Mexico than first thought from a deadly new influenza strain.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention agreed the outbreak may not be as severe as it looked a few days ago, citing many mild cases that were not immediately noticed.
For Mexicans -- who are spending a second weekend stuck indoors with stores and businesses shuttered across the country and the capital, Mexico City, devoid of its lively restaurants, bars, cinemas and museums -- the data is cheering.
"For now it's unpredictable, we don't have that information," Cordova said late on Friday, noting epidemics can peak again after an initial spurt in infections drops off.
"We need more days to see how it behaves and whether there is really a sustained decline so we can conclude that it's going down," he said.
On Friday, China suspended flights to Mexico after Hong Kong authorities confirmed a Mexican man who traveled through the mainland is infected with the new flu strain.
Hong Kong, on China's southeast coast, is experienced in handling sporadic outbreaks of H5N1 avian flu, as well as SARS in 2003, which killed 299 people.
ANTIVIRAL DEMAND UP, PANAMA CATCHES RUNAWAY
Various European countries, and even South Korea, have confirmed cases of the flu virus.
The United States has been hit with 145 cases in 22 states, sending demand shooting up for antiviral medicine and prompting preventative measures such as a Boston University dropping handshakes for graduating students accepting diplomas.
In Panama, police detained an American who ran away from a hospital that was testing him for the swine flu. [nN01331730]
Almost all infections outside Mexico have been mild, however, with only a handful needing hospital treatment. The only death in another country has been a Mexican toddler who was taken to the United States before he fell sick.
Mexico has released a confusing soup of flu data in recent days but public hospitals have noted a steady drop in patients turning up with fevers, suggesting the infection rate may be declining as the nation dons face masks and hand gel.
"There are very few deaths worldwide," said Marcelo Musi, a salesman shopping for vegetables in Mexico City, where residents weary of masks, hand sanitizer and frightening headlines clutched at signs of an end to the crisis.
"If there are no more cases, they say things will get better," said Musi.
President Felipe Calderon ordered non-essential businesses to close for five days from Friday, extending a three-day holiday weekend over Monday and Tuesday. [nN01340553]
Analysts say the move will dent already negative economic growth this year as it pinches businesses, but inspectors will fine or forcibly close companies that defy the order.
Countless families were devastated at having their long weekend ruined. Young couples, children and the elderly were mainly stuck indoors as restaurants, bars, playgrounds and parks that hold outdoor "cumbia" dances all stayed closed.
Cordova said that out of 159 files on suspected flu deaths, tests showed 58 died of other causes. He said 16 deaths are confirmed as caused by the H1N1 flu and 85 are being tested. (Additional reporting by Louise Egan and Anahi Rama; Editing by Doina Chiacu)
