FOREX-Dollar down vs euro, up vs yen as sentiment firms
2009-05-01 08:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar rose to a two-week high against the yen on Friday but fell against the euro and perceived higher-risk currencies as investors bet the worst is past for the recession-hit global economy.
Currencies regarded as higher risk such as the Australian dollar benefited strongly, and a rise in U.S. stock futures also helped sentiment SPc1.
Trading was thin and relatively volatile, however, with most European markets closed due to the May Day holiday.
"As global equities recover and more optimistic economic indicators roll out, more people will say get into equities before others and as that happens they will move out of low-risk assets," said Sacha Tihanyi, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto.
In early New York trade, the dollar gained 0.8 percent to 99.33 yen
, having hit a two-week high around 99.58 yen, while the euro rose 1.3 percent against the yen to 132.01 yen, after also touching a two-week high of 132.35 yen EURJPY=R.
, while the Canadian dollar was also firmer, with the U.S. dollar down 0.7 percent at C$1.1855
Investors were encouraged by data overnight showing that Chinese manufacturing gained further momentum in April as well as by Friday's better-than-expected UK manufacturing survey.
"The antipodean currencies are amongst the top performers bolstered in part by encouraging PMI data out of China and in part by relatively high yields as market participants place money in (those) currencies over the holiday period," said Brown Brothers Harriman in a note to clients.
For the time being, the market ignored news that could dent risk appetite, but investors remained cautious.
While investors perceived U.S. automaker Chrysler filing for bankruptcy as positive for risk taking by removing one uncertainty, it has intensified concerns about the fate of other U.S. automakers. [ID:nSP457891]
Next week's release of the results of U.S. stress tests on banks is another unknown.
A source familiar with administration talks said the stress tests announcement -- originally scheduled for Monday -- had been pushed back, possibly to May 6, and that officials are leaning towards results of individual banks rather than summary results. [ID:nN30527288]
Sentiment also remains vulnerable to any news that may hint at a flu pandemic that would be severe enough to dent global economic recovery as Mexico began shutting down parts of its economy to slow the spread of the virus. [nFLU] (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer in London; Editing by James Dalgleish)
