WHO sees shift to H1N1 vaccine production in weeks
2009-05-01 13:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Some drug makers will shift within a few weeks to producing pandemic flu vaccines against the new strain that has emerged around the world, a senior World Health Organization (WHO) official said on Friday
Marie-Paule Kieny, WHO director of the initiative for vaccine research, said the U.N. agency was discussing with drug companies if, and when, to stop making seasonal flu vaccine and start making one for the new Influenza A H1N1 strain.
The seed strain, or starting material for the new virus which is being grown at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and other laboratories, will be given to manufacturers by mid- to late-May, she said.
"We have no doubt making a successful vaccine is possible within a reasonably short period of time," Kieny told a news conference.
"It is too much of a gamble over public health to say well, let's see if it really becomes severe," she said.
Worldwide, 13 countries have confirmed cases of the H1N1 virus, widely known as swine flu, that has killed as many as 176 people, all but one in Mexico. The WHO says laboratory-confirmed tests show 331 cases in 11 countries, including 10 deaths.
At least 20 companies make flu vaccines, including Sanofi-Aventis, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Baxter International, Australia's CSL and nasal spray maker MedImmune, now part of AstraZeneca.
The WHO was talking to drug makers in Brazil, China and Hungary, in addition to the largest companies, Kieny said.
Current production capacity would translate into about 1-2 billion doses a year of a pandemic vaccine, Kieny said. This compared with some 700 million doses for seasonal flu, which combines three viral strains in one shot.
Kieny said the seasonal vaccine now in production was not effective against the new strain, according to the current scientific consensus.
"Unfortunately, there will not be enough capacity to produce enough vaccine for the world population, this must be quite clear," she said. "So there will need to be prioritization for the highest risk groups."
Many drug makers' order books were "already pretty full," having previously promised pandemic vaccines to certain governments in the event of a pandemic, according to Kieny.
But the WHO had received assurances from drug makers that a proportion will be earmarked for the Geneva-based agency to distribute to developing countries deemed most needy, she said.
Drug makers will have a choice between using two seed strains: One grown using a technique known as reverse genetics, which will be under patent, and the other using normal reassortment of the viruses which is not, she said.
One option to stretch supplies is to use an additive, known as an adjuvant, to increase the body's immune response and reduce the amount of active ingredient, or antigen, needed in each shot.
Several companies are working on this approach, including Glaxo, which believes its novel adjuvant technology could make a significant contribution to reducing the amount of antigen needed in each shot.
