CORRECTED - GLOBAL MARKETS-Flat in holiday trade, data eyed
2009-05-01 05:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Global markets were flat on Friday in subdued holiday weekend trading after growing hopes of a global economic recovery propelled shares over 11 percent in the previous month.
"Expect a thin trading session today as traders trim their positions ahead of the bank holiday on Monday ... Investors will ask whether the recent gains are sustainable," said Manoj Ladwa, a senior trader at ETX Capital in London.
The MSCI world equity index .MIWD00000PUS, which ended April with the biggest monthly gain in its 20-year history, was down 0.02 percent by 0920 GMT.
eased 0.1 percent after hitting their highest in over four momths in the previous session while emerging shares .MSCIEF were 0.02 percent firmer, hovering at their highest since mid-October. A hopeful note sounded by the Federal Reserve on the hard-hit U.S. economy helped investors overcome fears over the economic impact of the spread of influenza A, widely known as swine flu.
Investors took note of U.S. auto giant Chrysler's bankruptcy filing on Thursday but also focused on cheerier economic news, including a smaller-than-expected drop in South Korean exports in April [ID:nSEO371627] and a monthly survey of Chinese manufacturing suggesting an improving outlook. [ID:nPEK279290]
Optimism that the global downturn may have seen its worst was also spurred by the fall in the number of U.S. jobless claims, which indicated that the pace of layoffs was easing. [ID:nN30506091]
However, April factory survey figures expected from the U.S. Institute for Supply Management (ISM) at 1400 GMT will provide further clues to the health of the world's biggest economy while the release of results of U.S. stress tests on banks next week will reveal the state of the global financial system.
Growing investor appetite for higher-yielding assets kept up the pressure on the dollar, pushing the unit 0.1 percent lower against a basket of major currencies .DXY.
U.S. crude oil CLc1 stayed above $50 a barrel, reversing previous session gains while emerging sovereign market spreads 11EMJ traded 1 basis points wider at 530 bps above U.S. Treasuries. (Reporting by Sebastian Tong; editing by Stephen Nisbet)
