UPDATE 3-South Korea April exports add to economy hopes
2009-05-01 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korean exports in April fell less than expected and export earnings per day rose for the third month in a row, the latest signs that the global economic slump that drove Korea to the edge of recession may be easing.
Exports from Asia's fourth-largest economy slid 19.0 percent in April from a year earlier and imports fell 35.6 percent, data showed on Friday. Both falls were smaller than expectations for a 23.2 percent loss in exports and a 36.3 percent fall in imports.
"The monthly growth (in exports value per working day) is pretty impressive because I had expected a decline for April. The data adds to the latest hopeful signals," said Oh Suk-tae, an economist at Citigroup.
The rolling three-month growth in exports also surged to a record 44.4 percent in April after snapping a five-month losing streak in March, indicating South Korean shipments were recovering as swiftly as they had collapsed since late 2008.
JPMorgan Chase economist Lim Ji-won said its calculation showed South Korean exports in April grew a seasonally adjusted 7.9 percent from March, led by a jump in shipments of computer chips and steel and petrochemical products.
South Korea is the world's first major exporting economy to report trade figures each month and so gives the first clues on the state of global demand.
Growing optimism about the economy's turnaround has persuaded analysts and investors to bet South Korean interest rates have hit their bottom after an aggressive 325-basis-point rate cut in six steps to a record low of 2.0 percent.
The economy shrank in the fourth quarter, but grew marginally in the first quarter, avoiding a recession defined as two consecutive quarters of economic contraction.
Annual inflation in April fell to a 14-month low of 3.6 percent, in line with expectations and down from 3.9 percent in March, data from the National Statistical Office showed on Friday. [ID:nSEV000700]
The exports earnings marked a third consecutive monthly gain since they touched $1.0 billion in January. Still, the latest figure of $1.28 billion remains below the near $1.7 billion a month seen before the financial crisis blew up last September.
The ministry doesn't release a break-down of the figures by destination until later in May.
Chinese industry data on Friday showed the manufacturing sector gained further momentum in April, a positive sign for South Korean exporters. [ID:nPEK279290]
South Korea sells more than a fifth of its exports to China, although most of the goods are processed and then re-exported to global markets.
The steeper decline in Korea's imports than exports on a combination of weak commodities prices and sluggish domestic demand generated a record $6.02 billion trade surplus for the country, offering some support to the won
. (Additional reporting by Seo Eun-kyung; Editing by Neil Fullick)
