Latin America on roller coaster over crisis, flu
2009-05-01 14:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Less than one year ago, investors were debating whether Latin America's economies were overheating and government officials were confidently predicting the U.S. credit crisis would not affect the region.
These days, several economies in the region are slipping into recession, and inflationary pressures have turned into concerns about deflation. Global demand and prices for the region's commodities exports, which fueled its latest boom, have plunged.
And in Latin America's second-biggest economy Mexico, an outbreak of what has been dubbed swine flu has started to weigh on the region's economic outlook.
Will Latin America lose ground it has gained in the last few years? Will the current crisis alter the political tone of the region? What investment opportunities will pop up as Latin America tries to bounce back from the global downturn?
These and other themes will be tackled by more than 70 executives, analysts and government officials at the Reuters Latin American Investment Summit next week. It takes place in 15 cities, including in the United States and Europe.
"The collapse of export markets, in particular in North America and Europe, and then the collapse of commodity prices in China and the demand for natural resources ... it has been an extremely difficult time for Latin America," said Theodore Moran of Georgetown University.
Nicolas Eyzaguirre, director of Western Hemisphere affairs for the International Monetary Fund, said last week that Latin America may recover more quickly than the industrialized world.
"The region has been able to create more countercyclical policies than at any other time in its history," he said of fiscal stimulus programs that governments are implementing.
In its most recent global outlook, the IMF said it expects Latin America's economy to contract 1.5 percent this year on low commodities prices and lower capital flows, but projected a modest recovery of 1.6 percent in 2010.
Mexico's flu outbreak, which has been blamed for at least 150 deaths, is making public health experts worry about a pandemic. Countries like Peru and Argentina have banned flights from Mexico.
In a nation where tourism is a major pillar of the economy, airline companies could be hurt and the government has told people to stay away from bars, restaurants and even workplaces.
Olivier Blanchard, chief economist at the IMF, said the economic fallout from the epidemic could be "drastic" in some countries.
"We are navigating through unexplored waters in the international financial system," Mexican Finance Minister Augustin Carstens said on Thursday.
(Additional reporting by Ruben Ramirez in Washington and Luis Rojas Mena and Pablo Garibian in Mexico City; Writing by Terry Wade, Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
