FEATURE-Canada banks target immigrants for retail growth
2009-04-30 17:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Anna Mateus banks with CIBC because her dad does. Chiao-Chih Liang likes BMO because they speak Mandarin at his branch, but his friends prefer Scotiabank because it's nearby. Magda Guzman likes Royal Bank for her business, but her husband chose TD because it's open late.
Recent arrivals in Canada have become an appealing target for Canada's big banks as they seek to expand the safe and reliable money-maker that is retail banking. The renewed push to win new customers among the country's fastest-growing population segment comes a time when the sector is clinging more tightly than ever to its conservative business instincts.
Amid regular reports of investment losses, bad loans and myriad risks in the global financial world, little seems safer to bank executives than that old-fashioned staple of banking -- checking and savings accounts for consumers.
With their much-needed deposits, tidy profits from fees and foot-in-the-door access to clients, new bank accounts are key to growth for Canadian banks, and strategists in marbled head offices are scrambling to lure the nation's new arrivals.
"You can't be short-sighted" about immigrants, said Rania Llewellyn, vice-president of the one-year-old multicultural banking division at Bank of Nova Scotia (
), Canada's third-largest bank.
A Kuwait native who came to Canada as a student, Llewellyn heads Scotia's one-year-old multicultural banking division, a small warren of rooms dominated by a huge Mexican sombrero and a cricket jersey emblazoned with Scotia's orange logo.
Her long-term approach sums up Canada's warm approach to immigrants, who make up two-thirds of population growth.
"While they may have comparatively less wealth, newcomers are often very good savers and are dedicated to building that wealth," said Michael Mulvey, marketing professor at the Telfer School of Management in Ottawa.
Forty percent of new arrivals come from Asia -- mostly China -- and South Asia, including India and Pakistan. While Scotiabank already has retail branches throughout Latin America, its immigrant outreach is focused on Asians.
The World Economic Forum last year ranked Canada's banking system as the world's soundest, and many envy the banks for their solid deposit base.
Shifting even further into retail banking -- which generates about 45 percent to 70 percent of the Canadian banks' income -- and away from the risky trading and investment banking is helping bolster balance sheets.
While the fees generated by bank accounts are nice, and interest income on mortgages, credit cards and business loans are lovely, what the banks truly covet is the money new clients put in their savings accounts.
"What all the banks really want are deposits," said Mario Mendonca, banking analyst at Genuity Capital. "Because of this crisis ... the cost to borrow for banks has gone dramatically higher. Deposits are a very cheap way of funding loan growth."
Canada's highly educated economic migrants are an obvious source of fresh funds -- especially since most Canadian-born customers chose their banks years ago.
"They wouldn't have made this effort unless they thought it was very important," Mendonca said.
The question is how Canada's big five banks differentiate themselves. Royal Bank of Canada (
) already lead retail banking in Canada with huge branch networks and trust companies. Targeting new Canadians offers one way for competitors to play some catch-up, but competition is stiff.
Mendonca said all five banks are in the game, but he thinks two may be slightly ahead.
"The two banks that talk about it the most are TD and (Scotiabank) -- they are the ones who give me the feeling that they are most in tune with immigrant populations," he said.
CIBC, or Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (
), has teamed up with Toronto's YMCA to offer financial literacy courses to newcomers, and boasts of opening a Toronto branch this week where eight languages are spoken.
), or BMO, Adrian Cheung flits to China as the bank's director of multicultural markets to open branches and train staff, determined to win immigrant customers before they even set foot in Canada.
"People can open accounts in China before they come ... so everything is already set up when they arrive," Cheung explained over dim sum in Toronto's vibrant Chinatown. (Reporting by Andrea Hopkins; editing by Frank McGurty)
