China M&A set to boost resurgent Taiwan stocks
2009-04-30 11:32:00.0
(Reuters) - China's biggest investment in a Taiwanese company has sparked hopes of more deals in the months ahead and offers further ammunition for Taiwan, one of the best performing global equity markets so far this year.
Investors bet the island will profit from improving ties with China's resilient economy after years of hostility between the former Cold War rivals.
"We'll definitely see more Chinese investors coming to Taiwan," said Chang Chi-sheng, a fund manager at Uni-President Asset Management.
"Any more M&As will definitely include a premium on the traded price, and keeping that in mind, any investment target could possibly see its stock price climb quite a lot."
On Wednesday, China Mobile (
), China's top telecoms carrier, said it would buy 12 percent of Taiwan's third-largest telecom operator Far EasTone (
Chinese companies have so far invested only about $170 million in Taiwanese firms since 1997, according to data from Thomson Reuters.
The agreements are the latest sign of warming ties under the year-old administration of Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou, who ran for office promising to improve the economy through closer ties with the mainland.
"The news on Chinese investment showed that it's not just a confidence boost but will actually bring more money to Taiwan," said Robert Hsieh, a vice president of Shin Kong Investment Trust.
Taiwanese markets could however quickly run out of steam and go into a downward retreat if China-Taiwan relations start to cool off or even worsen, as sometimes happens in the volatile relationship.
The mobile tie-up -- the first of its kind between Taiwan and a mainland China telecoms firms -- will facilitate China Mobile's expansion on the mainland, Hong Kong and Taiwan, and help it provide more comprehensive services.
On the same day, Taiwan's No.2 contract chip maker, UMC (
), said it would acquire its China-based peer Hejian for $285 million to tap robust demand on the mainland.
Taiwan's benchmark TAIEX
jumped 7 percent on Thursday, boosting gains to more than 30 percent since early March and so far this year, making it the world's best-performing market open to foreign investors.
The only stronger performers, both in China, are closed to most overseas investment.
Gary Chia, greater China co-head at Yuanta Securities, said the deals further reinforce a return of confidence to the market, which is increasingly seen as a China play.
"I'd say the foreign institutional investors are catching up to Taiwan being too significant to ignore," he said.
So far this month, foreign institutional investors have bought more than T$60 billion ($1.8 billion) worth of Taiwanese shares, on track to post their largest monthly purchase since Feb 2008, when the stock market rallied ahead of the presidential election.
On a broader basis, foreign fund net inflows reached $1.9 billion in March, a level not seen since March 2008.
(Additional reporting by Gina Chang, Ralph Jennings and Kelvin Soh; Editing by Anshuman Daga)
