UPDATE 2-Valero delays two Gulf Coast hydrocracker projects
2009-04-30 15:38:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
(Updates with CEO comments on demand, prices, carbon regulation, refinery run cuts, paragraphs 6-15)
SAN ANTONIO, April 30
) has delayed two Gulf Coast refinery hydrocracker construction projects by a year due to the recession, the company's CEO said on Thursday.
"We're still reducing our capital spending," Valero CEO William R. Klesse told reporters on the sidelines of the company's annual meeting.
"We're looking to defer projects because frankly these are very uncertain times. The economy is very weak," Klesse said. "We think there'll be a recovery here but we're trying to make sure our resources, our people and our capital (are appropriate)."
Valero's St. Charles, Louisiana, hydrocracker project is now slated for completion in 2012, while its Port Arthur, Texas hydrocracker project is now slated for completion in 2011, Klesse said. Both were 50,000 barrel-per-day projects.
The leading U.S. refiner will also put on indefinite hold a project to construct a coke gasification unit at its Port Arthur refinery, he said.
Total capital spending this year is targeted for $2.5 billion, down from $3.2 billion last year, Klesse told shareholders.
Gasoline demand this summer may be stronger than the industry feared as lower prices make summer driving more affordable, but Klesse said just achieving last summer's level would be good.
Valero refineries will continue to run "in the low 80s" and 85 percent of capacity because demand is weak, Klesse said.
"It makes no sense to run all out," he told reporters on the sidelines. "We try to optimize and make a little money."
On the political front, proposed carbon regulation threatens to hobble U.S. companies without insuring companies in other nations face the same requirements, Klesse said.
Independent refiners like Valero, who sell fuel but are buyers not producers of crude oil, are more vulnerable than integrated oil companies, he said.
"We will abide by the law but will everyone? Can you tell me they're going to do that in China or India?" he said.
If a U.S. program is imposed, it should be federal rather than state-by-state because that would be fairer to all concerned, Klesse said.
He also has argued for a plan that covers all industries, not just energy, and gives companies like Valero credit for steps already taken to reduce carbon emissions. (Reporting by Bruce Nichols; Editing by David Gregorio)
