UPDATE 3-Costs hit Mexico's Televisa, but cable shines
2009-04-30 13:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexican broadcaster Televisa posted a 7.2 percent drop in first-quarter net profit Thursday, hit by higher legal and debt servicing costs, but its cable television business saw sizzling sales growth.
) said it earned 978 million pesos ($69 million), down from 1.054 billion pesos a year earlier.
Analysts' average forecast was 1.056 billion pesos, according to a Reuters poll.
Televisa's financing costs increased sharply in the period as the company had to pay higher interest on long-term debt. It also had equity losses in La Sexta, the Spanish television channel in which it holds a 40 percent stake.
The company also paid more to lawyers representing it in a long-standing legal battle with U.S. partner Univision. Most of the differences between the two have been settled, but they remain at odds over a smaller U.S. Internet distribution rights case.
First-quarter revenue was 11.4 billion pesos, up 19 percent and driven by its cable and satellite television units, which now contribute more to overall sales than Televisa's core broadcast television business.
The fast-paced growth of Televisa's cable unit, Cablevision (
), which last year absorbed operations from a rival, was responsible for a 110 percent jump in this segment's sales in the quarter.
Its satellite operation, SKY, posted a nearly 11 percent increase in sales.
Televisa's core operation, broadcast television, had more modest revenue growth of 4.1 percent.
Alfonso de Angoitia, Televisa's executive vice president, said the flu outbreak -- which has killed up to 176 people in Mexico -- will hit some units.
"We may experience a slowdown in our gaming business ... and we may also experience a decrease in magazine circulation," Angoitia told analysts during a conference call on Thursday.
"However, we don't expect at this point that any of our core businesses will be directly impacted by the flu," he stressed.
President Felipe Calderon urged people to stay home through May 5 in a first-ever economic shutdown to contain the virus, which has also spread to other countries.
Schools, cinemas, movie theaters, restaurants and other gathering centers have been asked to close for the next few days.
Jose Baston, president of television and content, also told analysts that Televisa is producing a third season of a popular soap opera in Chinese for China audiences, and has kicked off production of another series.
Televisa shares fell 1.27 percent to 43.40 pesos. On the New York Stock Exchange, the stock fell 3 percent to $15.57 early Thursday afternoon.
($1 = 14.21 pesos as of end March) (Reporting by Cyntia Barrera Diaz; Editing by Richard Chang)
