Golf-Fewer tournaments but China retains the big events
2009-04-30 05:59:00.0
Track China's Leaders
BEIJING, April 30
Thu  EDT
BEIJING, April 30
Even before the dark clouds of the global financial downturn started to appear on the horizon, China was already shedding major golf tournaments from its sporting calendar.
In 2007, the mainland hosted five tournaments co-sanctioned by the European Tour with prize money totalling $17.55 million.
"In four years we have created what the players have called the Asian major," Giles Morgan, global head of sponsorship at HSBC, told Reuters.
The $1 million TCL Classic in Hainan Island, title sponsored by the Chinese electronics manufacturer, was first to disappear from the schedule in 2008 and the $2.3 million Asian Open followed suit for this season.
German car manufacturer BMW, who started the Asian Open, said the Tomson Shanghai Golf Club venue was being modified and cancelled for 2009 rather move their seven-year-old event elsewhere.
The $2.2 China Open, the oldest professional event in China, celebrated its 15th edition in Beijing earlier this month with the support of founding sponsors Volvo, the Swedish carmaker.
The other two tournaments that remain are the $5.5 million World Cup of Golf, sponsored by Swiss watchmakers Omega and its Mission Hills venue, and the HSBC Champions, which will have a boosted prize purse of $7 million this November.
The elevation of the Champions to World Golf Championship (WGC) status, however, means new qualification criteria and as few as four Chinese players are likely to tee off alongside world number one Tiger Woods in November.
With the two-man China team for the World Cup likely to be among the four in the Champions field, that means just a handful of Chinese will have a chance of winning any of the $12.5 million up for grabs at the two biggest events in their country.
With the broader Asian contingent also reduced at the HSBC Champions this year, it raises questions about how beneficial the big tournaments are in developing golf in the region.
Both HSBC and Omega do, however, finance the growth of golf closer to the grassroots of the game in conjunction with the governing China Golf Association (CGA).
Omega, despite cutting back its sponsorship this year, continues to back the professional China Tour, while HSBC runs a junior golf programme with the CGA.
"With the HSBC Champions and junior golf programme, we have both the very elite of the game and the very bottom," said Morgan.
"China is the fastest growing market in the world and an economic superpower and my belief is that strategic sponsorship will continue to grow," he said. "Where you may see some sponsors not continuing is if sponsors are not being strategic.
"If they haven't thought through what their objectives are before the sponsorship, and they can't then show a return of investment, then it follows that sponsorship may be culled." (Editing by Alastair Himmer. To query or comment on this story email sportsfeedback@thomsonreuters.com)
