HIGHLIGHTS 3-BOJ Shirakawa:JGB buying level appropriate for now
2009-04-30 05:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of Japan Governor Masaaki Shirakawa said on Thursday the central bank would not rule out any policy option to help the economy, but signalled there was no need to increase its long-term government bond buying for now.
In a half-yearly economic and price outlook report issued on Thursday, the central bank slashed its forecasts and warned of a deeper contraction and deflation, but also said it saw signs the global economy was stabilising. It kept interest rates on hold at 0.1 percent and held off on any new policy initiatives.
"The BOJ is buying long-term government bonds to achieve its monetary policy goal, which is to realise sustained economic growth with price stability. From this perspective, we are buying bonds at the current level.
"Trust in monetary policy will be lost if the BOJ buys government bonds for purposes other than monetary policy, such as to monetise government debt, or even if markets view our bond buying as aimed at monetising debt. That will have a negative impact on long-term interest rates."
Asked if there is room to review, or implement more flexibly, the BOJ's self-imposed rule of capping its government bond holdings to the level of yen notes in circulation: "In implementing monetary policy we will carefully examine economic and price conditions without any preset ideas in mind. I believe it's wrong to rule out in advance any policy option and that it's equally wrong to say the BOJ will adopt a certain measure for sure. I think the board members all agree ...
"The key here is how much long-term government bonds we should purchase to smoothly operate monetary policy. At present, we think the current purchase amount is most appropriate."
JAPAN'S ECONOMY
"We will start to see the impact of fiscal stimulus not only in Japan, but in China and other countries from the second half of this year ...
"Our economy has been through quite a shock, so it will take time before things return to normal."
"We do not think Japan is at risk of falling into a deflationary spiral. The economy can recover and achieve sustainable growth under stable prices. We may see larger falls in core consumer prices when compared with the previous year because oil and commodity prices were very high last year. Still, we do not think there is a big risk of a deflationary spiral."
"Apart from whether it is appropriate to use the expression 'May crisis', we're closely watching how corporate finance and financial markets may develop around the time when companies report their earnings.
"Looking at the current state of corporate finance, interest rates on CP issuance have fallen further and some companies have started issuing single-A corporate bonds, which had been stopped until recently, thanks to policy steps taken by the BOJ and the government.
"As such, corporate funding conditions are improving moderately. Still, we are aware that corporate finance remains in severe condition as investors are increasingly becoming selective, on top of a worsening of corporate earnings...
"We'll keep an eye on developments of corporate financing from now on ...
"But losses at the financial institutions can be absorbed fully with their own capital. We judge that stability in Japan's financial system overall has not been hurt.
"Given sharp fluctuations in the economy and finance, we'll closely watch how the economy and financial market trends may affect operations at financial institutions and their financial intermediation functions."
"We want to monitor the potential impact very closely, but as of now we have no data showing that swine flu is having a negative impact on the Japanese economy. This could be a negative for production if swine flu were to spread further, but this is something we have to watch for." (Reporting by Leika Kihara and Tetsushi Kajimoto; Editing by Michael Watson)
