BUY OR SELL-Can China demand fuel energy majors' profits?
2009-04-30 04:54:00.0
(Reuters) - China's energy majors produced mixed quarterly results this week as a sharp fall in crude oil prices hit profits at producers PetroChina (
), but fuelled an earnings surge at refiner Sinopec (
PetroChina, the world's second-most valuable oil and gas producer after Exxon Mobil (
), posted its worst result in two years and CNOOC (
) said its revenue fell 42 percent, while earnings at Sinopec (
With oil prices having more than halved from a year ago, the key question for investors in China energy is whether a recovery in China's fuel demand can offset that decline in crude prices?
Shares of PetroChina and Sinopec trade at around 9 times estimated 2009 profit, well below Exxon Mobil's average 16.4 times, suggesting investors are concerned that Beijing may cap fuel prices again if oil prices rebound, analysts say.
Nicholas Yeo, fund manager with Aberdeen Asset Management, which manages Asian assets worth over $20 billion, owns shares in PetroChina and CNOOC, but not Sinopec.
"Sinopec's not stable because of the government policy," Yeo said. "There's still the government national service element we don't like. Even though there's reform, we don't know how long it'll last."
PetroChina and Sinopec were forced to take losses at their refining operations last year as they had to supply fuel at low prices set by a government wary of inflationary pressures, even when crude prices hit a record $147 per barrel in July.
But Beijing's new fuel-pricing regime, which started in January, guarantees higher profit margins for refiners.
With negative inflation in China, analysts say there is little chance of state intervention in fuel pricing in the short term, which should benefit oil producers and refiners.
Instead, they see more room for China's energy stocks to rally, adding that firms' exposure to the world's second-largest energy user after the United States could provide protection against falling oil prices. Already, there are signs of a recovery in fuel demand as inventories shrank at end-March.
"Investors look at them as the best of both worlds -- they are China plays and oil plays," said Gordon Kwan, head of energy research at Mirae Asset Securities. "The second quarter will be much better for them."
"China's 4 trillion yuan stimulus has created a boom in the automobile industry. That would lead to more oil demand," he added.
BUY CNOOC, SELL PETROCHINA
Winson Fong, a fund manager at SG Asset Management with assets of $2 billion, said China's energy stocks are safe bets for investors, adding they prefer CNOOC for its strong production targets, and Sinopec for its direct benefits from Beijing's pricing reforms and low crude prices.
"PetroChina's caught in the middle," Fong said. "Depending on your views, in either case (oil prices go up or down), you don't bet on PetroChina."
PetroChina, which has reduced its 2009 production targets, does not have the same potential as CNOOC because of its ageing oil fields and high cost structure, said Brynjar Bustnes, a JP Morgan analyst.
"The market is positive on CNOOC's operational structure," Bustnes said. "It's one of the best upstream companies fundamentally, in terms of growth production and cost control." (Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
