U.S. welcomes China's IT move, opens steel probe
2009-04-29 19:38:00.0
(Reuters) - China's decision on Wednesday to eliminate testing requirements that threatened sales of U.S. information technology products was a step in the right direction, U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said.
But even as Kirk praised China, the Commerce Department agreed separately to launch an investigation that could lead to new U.S. duties on Chinese-made steel pipe used in oil production.
The twin actions reflects the complexity U.S.-China trade relations, where some U.S. companies are battling to get their products into China and other U.S. companies are pressing to keep Chinese goods out of the United States.
U.S. companies that make routers, smartcards, secure database software, firewalls and nine other information technology products have been concerned about the impact of proposed Chinese government testing and certification requirements on their sales.
"I welcome China's announcement today that it has eliminated Information Security testing and certification mandates for information technology products used in the commercial marketplace," Kirk said.
"China's action is a step in the right direction, reflecting its acknowledgment that mandated information security certification schemes rules are not appropriate for commercial information technology products," he said.
The United States remains very concerned about China's plan to mandate on May 1, 2010, testing and certification rules for information technology products bought by the Chinese government, Kirk said.
They want anti-dumping duties of about 37 percent to 99 percent on the goods, as well as additional countervailing duties to offset the alleged subsidies.
Chinese Commerce Minister Chen Deming, in an interview on CNBC's "Street Signs" on Wednesday, expressed concern about the rising number of U.S. anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigations against China, as well as U.S. challenges against China at the World Trade Organization.
"Over the past few months, we have seen the number of trade defenses of the United States towards China have been on the rise," Chen said, according to a transcript of the interview.
He also took a jab at recent "Buy American" legislation requiring a slate of new public works projects to use only U.S.-made steel, iron and other goods.
U.S.-China business and investment deals this week worth about $17.8 billion show "it is not the Americans themselves who are buying American, but the Chinese people also buying American," Chen said. (Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Xavier Briand)
