Asia Steel-China prices edge up but log 4pct fall in April
2009-04-30 02:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices edged up this week, after sliding 4 percent last week, as five-month low prices raised hopes for production cutbacks in the world's top producer.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil rose 0.9 percent to around 3,220 yuan ($471.9) a tonne this week, versus 3,150/3,230 quoted last week, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
Steel prices dropped 4 percent in April, adding to a 6 percent drop in the first quarter, as production increased steadily, exceeding meagre demand growth and causing inventory levels to soar to record highs.
For a graphic on Chinese spot steel prices, click:
"There's been little change from the demand side, which remains weak in general, and expectations for tighter supply are keeping prices stable," said a Chinese steel trader.
With prices of most steel products at or below production costs, expectations have grown that mills would increase production cutbacks in the coming months to halt further declines in prices, traders and analysts said.
"The current steel price is at the cash-cost level and has started triggering production cuts again. We believe this may be the bottom of the current inventory cycle and expect improved pricing by mid-2009," Credit Suisse analysts said on Wednesday.
Falling prices pushed nearly half of major Chinese steel mills into the red last month, and losses were expected to expand this month, Wu Xichun, honorary chairman of China Iron and Steel Association, said last week.
), China's top steelmaker, kept its June prices for major steel products unchanged, after two consecutive cuts in April and May, amid growing market hopes that prices will probably not weaken much further after slipping to a five-month low last week. [ID:nSHA371010]
"The market is regaining some stability. We think Baosteel's move to cut prices for only some products reflects this market environment," said Y. Matsumoto, a Nomura Securities analyst.
Echoing such market views, an executive from Hebei Iron and Steel Group said on Tuesday prices would remain stable in the current quarter, although an immediate demand recovery was not expected. [ID:nBJD000731]
Chinese steel demand is seen dropping 5 percent this year, still much better than the global 15 percent drop forecast by the World Steel Association this week, which would be the steepest fall since the World War Two. [ID:nLR431360]
In South Korea, Hyundai Steel (
), the country's second-largest steelmaker, predicted on Wednesday its sales volume would rise 18 percent in the second quarter from the first quarter, driven by trader restocking and solid demand from state infrastructure projects. [ID:nSEO333803]
"Shipments of construction steel are seen rising slightly as distributor inventories have fallen to low levels and demand from public works is set to rise. But private sector demand is likely to continue to remain weak," it said.
Japan, however, continued to remain the most affected by the current downturn, with Nippon Steel (
), the world's No.2 steelmaker, warning on Tuesday it would continue to reduce output by 45 percent in the current quarter, although it expected output to recover in the second half. [ID:nT17028] ($1=6.823 Yuan) (Reporting by Miyoung Kim; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
