UPDATE 2-TSMC sees Q2 upturn, raises semi mkt sales f'cast
2009-04-30 04:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Top contract chipmaker TSMC (
) predicted strong growth in second-quarter sales and margins as tech demand gathers speed, prompting the company to raise its forecast on global semiconductor sales.
The chip foundry market, dominated by TSMC (
), UMC (
) and Chartered CSMF.SI, was bottoming out from the sector's slump on a pick-up in demand for computers, cellphones and flat-screen TVs due partly to China's stimulus package.
) forecast robust growth in wafer shipments, TSMC Chief Executive Officer Rick Tsai said on Thursday sales in the global semiconductor market would fall by about 20 percent this year.
That was smaller than a 30 percent annual drop he estimated three months ago, though he said the foundry market would still underperform the overall semiconductor market.
"Not just China, we are also seeing the U.S. and Europe markets hit a bottom," said John Chiu, vice president of Taiwan's Fuh Hwa Securities Investment Trust.
"Orders may keep improving through June and July, but whether that trend will continue to September will depend on back-to-school demand."
After reporting its weakest quarterly profit in nearly 8 years in the first quarter, TSMC said it expects its second-quarter sales to rise to T$71-T$74 billion from the first quarter's T$39.5 billion.
TSMC said its second-quarter gross profit margin should be 43.5-45.5 percent, higher than the 18.9 percent in the previous three months, with its operating profit margin coming in between 30.5-32.5 percent, versus the first quarter's slim 3.1 percent.
"We are seeing very strong growth in our revenue," Tsai told an investor conference. "We believe the second half should be better than the first half. However, it's still a difficult year for the industry and for us."
Globally, Tsai predicted unit shipments of electronics products, including computers, mobiles and other consumer gadgets, would decline about 10 percent this year from 2008.
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co Ltd, which counts U.S. Texas Instruments TXN.N and Nvidia (
) among major clients, booked a January-March net profit of T$1.56 billion ($47 million), down 95 percent from a year ago, but above a consensus T$1.2 billion forecast of six analysts surveyed by Reuters.
For an earnings Graphic, click:
TSMC's capital spending this year would be about $1.5 billion, compared with last year's $1.88 billion. It said a large portion of this year's budget will be used to boost production of chips using advanced technology later this year.
On the same day, Japan's Fujitsu Ltd (
On Wednesday, UMC said it was aiming to return to profit in the current second quarter as wafer shipments more than double from those in January-March. [ID:nTP130150]
TSMC shares surged 7 percent to their highest close in seven months on Thursday. UMC shares also went limit up, in line with the main TAIEX index
