US hog market starts to recover from flu sell-off
2009-04-29 15:12:00.0
(Reuters) - The battered U.S. hog market showed signs of recovery Wednesday from a two-day sell-off fueled by fears that the spread of the deadly swine flu would hurt global economies and decimate demand for pork.
Even though the disease has not been detected in hogs, investors drove hog futures down by the daily 3-cent-a-lb trading limit the past two days at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
At the CME, where U.S. cattle and hog prices are set daily, hog contracts for June and later delivery closed higher Wednesday on ideas that current flu-related bans on U.S. meat will be short-lived, possibly lasting 30 to 60 days.
"I think in the hog market people are saying two limit-down days is enough," Jim Clarkson, Chicago analyst at A&A Trading, said on Wednesday.
Until this week, CME hog futures prices have been much higher than the underlying cash markets, partly due to active pork exports which could be undermined by the flu outbreaks, traders said.
"The big (price) premium we built in, partly because of exports, we are in the process of taking off," said Gilbert Goodman, a hog trader at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. "In Mexico, they are basically closed down and that is lost demand."
In all, 13 countries have banned pork or meat from U.S. states that have had human cases of the flu. Included in that list are China and Russia, which have been important buyers of U.S. meat but have lately been working to increase their own meat production.
Mexico, where the flu originated, is still buying U.S. meat, but Chicago traders said the amount it buys may decline as the flu outbreaks keep consumers there at home and away from stores and restaurants.
"To date, we have not experienced any export sales cancellations due to this situation, however, it remains premature for us to say how it will affect future export orders," Tyson Foods Inc (
), the largest U.S. meat company and producer of beef, pork and chicken, said in a statement on Wednesday.
The flu is believed to have killed up to 159 people in Mexico since the first cases were reported last week. A 23-month-old Mexican child died in Texas, the first death in the United States from the new virus.
Chicago hog futures fell on Monday and Tuesday as more cases of the swine flu were reported in the United States and around the world. Since Friday, the May contract has dropped nearly 11 percent in price.
On Wednesday, the CME May hog contract 2LHK9 closed down 2.850 cents, or 4.5 percent, at 60.450 cents per lb, while the more actively trade June contract 2LHM9 rose 0.450 cent, or 0.68 percent, at 66.750 cents.
"The concerns are that 'swine' flu could reduce U.S. pork exports, that U.S. consumers could reduce pork consumption and, more broadly, that the flu could cause a slowing of world economic growth, which would reduce demand for food products in general," Chris Hurt, economist at Purdue University, said in a statement on Wednesday.
"This couldn't get much worse for the pork industry. You have countries starting to follow the lead of Russia and China by limiting their import of our pork," Hurt said. (Editing by Jim Marshall)
