Romney would get tough on China: Portman
2012-06-26 16:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney would move aggressively to open up more foreign markets for U.S. exports, while getting tougher with China on its trade and currency practices, Senator Rob Portman said on Tuesday.
In contrast, Romney has taken "a sensible approach on trade, which is to be much more aggressive on the export side, but also with a mature trading partner like China, making it clear that we're going to have rules that we all live by," Portman said at the Reuters Washington Summit.
Portman, who served as U.S. trade representative and then White House budget director under former President George W. Bush, faulted Obama for being "the first president since Franklin Delano Roosevelt not to ask for the ability to negotiate trade-opening agreements."
"I've talked to Romney about this ... He's for immediately changing our trade policy to access the 95 percent of consumers that live outside of our borders by being aggressive on trade openings. He'd get trade promotion authority from Congress and then begin serious negotiations to open up markets."
Trade promotion authority, which is also known as "fast-track" trade legislation, allows the White House to negotiate trade deals that it can submit to Congress for a straight up-or-down vote without any amendments.
Romney would balance his push for more free trade agreements with a tough trade enforcement agenda, focusing especially on China, Portman said.
He defended Romney's pledge to crack down on China's currency practices by quickly declaring them a currency manipulator, even though that worries some business groups who fear it would provoke Beijing to retaliate.
"I think it put pressure on the Chinese to do the right thing" and allow their currency to rise more quickly in value against the U.S. dollar, Portman said.
China's undervalued exchange rate makes Chinese exports cheaper than they should be in world markets, while boosting the price of U.S. goods in China, Portman said.
"It's simply unfair. They've obviously done very well in terms of the U.S. market and all we're saying is play by the rules," Portman said. Last year, Portman voted for a bill that would treat undervalued currencies as a subsidy under U.S. trade law and allow the imposition of countervailing duties.
Both Obama campaign and administration officials responded to the criticism, noting U.S. exports are up 36 percent since early 2009 and on track to meet Obama's goal of doubling annual exports to more than $3 trillion by the end of 2014. Obama also created a new interagency enforcement center to go after China and other countries that violate global trade rules, they said.
"Mitt Romney has already made clear he'd stand with China instead of American workers, investing in companies that were outsourcing pioneers and criticizing the President for enforcing trade laws against China," campaign spokesman Ben LaBolt said.
The last point referred to a line in Romney's 2010 book "No Apology: The Case for American Greatness," where the candidate criticized Obama for imposing tariffs on Chinese tires to stop a surge in imports. The September 2009 decision was controversial, but later deemed legal by the World Trade Organization.
"President Obama's action to defend American tire companies from foreign competition may make good politics by repaying unions for their support of his campaign, but it is decidedly bad for the nation and our workers. Protectionism stifles productivity," Romney said in the book.
However, it is unpopular with labor groups - key Obama supporters - because they believe trade deals encourage U.S. companies to move jobs overseas.
Even without the authority, the Obama administration is pursuing a free trade agreement known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) with 10 other nations in the Asia-Pacific region.
Those negotiations date back to the last years of the Bush administration, although Obama relaunched the talks in 2010 after an extensive review.
"Bilateral (trade agreements are) where you make the progress and we're not doing anything," Portman said.
Carol Guthrie, a spokeswoman for Kirk's office, pushed back on that point, saying "all of the TPP partners are expressly committed to a high-standard agreement that tackles old issues in new ways, and addresses new issues creatively. The Obama administration has insisted on nothing less from day one."
Still, Obama has not launched any bilateral free trade agreements since taking office in 2009, and only sent Bush-era free trade pacts with South Korea, Colombia and Panama to Congress in 2011 after negotiating a number of changes to make the agreements more acceptable to Democrats.
Portman said Romney would likely pursue a bilateral free trade agenda much like Bush, who negotiated free trade deals with Australia, Bahrain, Chile, Colombia, South Korea, Morocco, Oman, Peru, Singapore and Panama.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Anthony Boadle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Words are one thing but actions are another, and Romney¡¯s past actions with his private-equity firm, which he is using as an example of why he would be a good president, show that he WANTS to out source or ship jobs overseas. How can anyone trust what Romney says? I can not think of one major policy issue that he has not completely changed stances on in his political career.
Jun 26, 20121:56pm EDT--
Oh yeah! Romney would get tough on China by outsourcing more US jobs to China and India. What a hypocritical b¡êstard. Hope his plane crashes with him and his vile offspring in it!
Jun 26, 20122:38pm EDT--
Hilarious. As USAPrag said¡­Romney would encourage open trade by out-sourcing more jobs? And he¡¯d ¡®get tough¡¯ by labeling China a currency manipulator, which I think, um, a LOT of people in DC in positions of power have said in the past five years. Talk is cheap. Neither he nor anyone else has any legit ability to ¡®force¡¯ China to do anything, and as they hold a lot of our debt, he¡¯d be wise to watch his mouth. But, cheap talk can win an election, so¡­
Jun 26, 20124:17pm EDT--
