UPDATE 2-MOVES-Deutsche Bank, FBL, PwC, Aspen
2009-04-29 16:08:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Wednesday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The bank announced Timothy Fischer was named managing director in global credit trading, in its Global Markets division, based in New York. Fischer was previously Lehman Brothers' co-head of high yield trading for North America.
The life insurer named James Hohmann its chief executive, to succeed James Noyce immediately. Hohmann was recently president and CEO of Allstate Financial.
The tax and assurance firm said Perry Mandarino joined its U.S. Restructuring and Recovery practice as partner. Mandarino, who will serve on the leadership team, was previously senior managing director of Traxi, LLC.
The insurer appointed Pater O'Flinn to the board of directors as non-executive, and as chair of the corporate governance and nominating committee. O'Flinn was formerly co-chairman of LeBoeuf, Lamb, Green & MacRae LLP.
The private equity investment advisory firm named Kiran Rao as a principal, where he will be involved in all aspects of fund due diligence and portfolio monitoring.
Prior to joining Grove Street Advisors, Rao was a principal at the Boston Consulting Group, where he was a senior member of BCG's health care and corporate development practice areas.
Macquarie Capital named Antony Isaacs to head its equity capital markets (ECM) team in Europe. Most recently head of UK ECM at Credit Suisse, Isaacs has more than 15 years of experience in capital markets.
European pension fund consultant hired Santiago Pinson and Nathalie Sims to its London-based investment management team. They will focus on researching and selecting equity investments for Cardano's clients
The fund manager named Nancy McNally to the newly created role of senior vice president, business development, for North America.
McNally joins from Clay Finlay, an international equity specialist, where she was principal, sales and consultant relations for three years.
Thomas Wong joins as head of Asia Pacific Energy Equity Research, with primary stock coverage of oil companies in China and Japan. Wong joins from Och Ziff Capital Management Group (
Francois Perol, the head of the merged Banque Populaire/Caisse d'Epargne bank, has offered Laurent Mignon the post of chief executive at the company's Natixis (
) unit, a source close to the matter said. [ID:nWEA9072]
The asset management and custody bank plans to grow its asset management business in Asia and has started hiring staff for a China venture that may begin operations as early as August, a senior company official said. [ID: nSIN336850]
Burt spent three years working in corporate finance at Bridgewell and Landsbanki, where he began to specialise in real estate. In 2008 he moved into equity research at Landsbanki as an analyst covering the U.K. real estate sector before transitioning to Teathers.
) where he held various leadership roles, most recently as director within the wealth business.
The bank's Chairman and Chief Executive Laurent Goutard will step down as of Sept. 10 to take a new position within the bank's mother group of Societe Generale (
) in France, Komercni said. [ID:nPRA002526]
The wealth fund made an internal announcement to its staff that Hu Bing, who was mainly responsible for CIC's fixed income investment and trading desk, had been appointed the new head of CIC's Private Equity Department, said the sources with direct knowledge of the matter. [ID:nHKG188158] (Compiled by Isheeta Sanghi in Bangalore and Jonathan Spicer in New York)
