China dairy recalls hundreds of cartons of tainted milk
2012-06-27 23:57:00.0
(Reuters) - A Chinese dairy company has recalled hundreds of cartons of milk after a mechanical error tainted the batch with alkaline water, the latest blow to China's scandal-plagued dairy industry.
The recall comes just weeks after China's top-selling dairy firm, Inner Mongolia Yili Industrial Group Co, pulled six months' worth of infant formula from shelves due to mercury contamination.
China's milk industry is struggling to restore consumer confidence after a series of scandals, the worst of which was in 2008 when milk and infant formula laced with the industrial chemical melamine killed at least six children and made nearly 300,000 ill.
In the latest incident, the Bright Dairy & Food Co., called Guangming in Chinese, posted a recall notice on its website after customers complained online of bad smelling and discolored liquid in the company's 950 ml cartons (about a quarter gallon) of Ubest milk, state media reported on Thursday.
A seconds-long mechanical delay during routine maintenance at one of its Shanghai factories caused a "small amount" of alkaline cleaning solution to be flushed into 300 cartons of milk produced on Monday, the company's notice said.
"We deeply apologize for any impact this has had on our customers. From today on, we will strictly strengthen relevant management procedures," it said, thanking media and customers for their "supervision".
The country is notorious for its food safety woes, with frequent news reports of fake cooking oil, tainted milk and even watermelons that explode from absorbing too much fertilizer.
(Reporting by Michael Martina and Sabrina Mao; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 28, 20121:09am EDT--
It sounds to me like they have fouled their environment so badly, that they can¡¯t prevent it from entering the food supply. Just as your tag line says, ¡°China struggles to deep milk safe¡± If it¡¯s a struggle to test products they sell to the public how can they consider themselves advanced? If a company produces a product for public consumption, TEST IT!! EVERY TIME!! What¡¯s so hard about that?
Jun 28, 20122:00am EDT--
