U.S. to highlight China cooperation at ASEAN forum
2012-06-27 18:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States will stress "engagement and cooperation" with China at security talks next month in Southeast Asia where nations are wary of getting caught in superpower rivalry, a senior U.S. official said on Wednesday.
Kurt Campbell, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said the United States and China would unveil new cooperative initiatives at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum in Cambodia.
The two powers will announce plans to work together on humanitarian disaster relief and wildlife protection -- uncontroversial projects that reflect "our strong determination that we want to work with China," Campbell told the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank.
"We will have areas of differences, we will have areas where we will naturally compete, but it will be important to send a very clear message...that we want to build a strong, durable partnership with China," he added.
In 2010, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton voiced U.S. support for ASEAN's efforts at finding a multilateral solution to disputes over conflicting claims in the South China Sea that pit several Southeast Asian states against China.
Clinton's overtures drew a positive response from several Southeast Asian countries, prompting comments against "small countries" by Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi.
China's strident assertion of its territorial claims, underscored by a series of incidents between Chinese vessels and those of Vietnam and the Philippines, drove those countries to seek closer security ties with the United States.
Campbell did not give details on the new U.S.-China initiatives, calling them products of a multi-year effort by Washington and Beijing that he suggested would help quell Southeast Asian countries' fears that they may get caught between any struggle for power and influence in the region.
The United States will also discuss its plans to ease economic sanctions on Myanmar in response to recent political reforms in that long-isolated member of ASEAN, Campbell said.
(Reporting by Lauren French; Editing by Andrew Hay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good luck with that. Someone in charge in China appears to have lost their mind when it comes to claiming Vietnamese waters as China¡¯s.
Jun 27, 20127:23pm EDT--
When there is oil and gas reserves involved, All party¡¯s involved resemble a lion kill, They tear the heck out of each other until the strongest emerge with the meat. Unless the energy can be divided within reason this situation could become hostile very easily!.
Jun 27, 20127:53pm EDT--
Jun 28, 20122:06am EDT--
