UPDATE 1-Rosneft ups dividend 20 pct, eyes new directors
2009-04-29 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia's largest oil firm, state-run Rosneft (
), will increase its 2008 dividend by 20 percent, it said on Wednesday, in spite of suggestions by some government officials that state firms should trim payouts.
The increase in dividend come on the back of a 72 percent rise in net profit in 2008 [ID:nL4458637], although they fell sharply in the final quarter because of a collapse in global oil prices.
The increase in dividends to 1.92 roubles per share is in line with the move by Russia's No. 2 oil firm and top private producer, LUKOIL (
), which said this month it would raise its payment to shareholders by 19 percent in spite of a $1.6 billion net loss in the fourth quarter.
Rosneft's total payout would amount to 20.3 billion roubles ($605.1 million).
The company also confirmed that Vladimir Bogdanov, the general director of Russia's No. 4 oil firm, privately owned Surgut (
), was among the candidates to the board of Rosneft to be elected at a general meeting on June 19.
Reports about the possible inclusion of Bogdanov, an oil industry veteran, to the list of Rosneft's board candidates have revived old rumours that the two companies may merge. Both companies have denied they are considering a tie-up.
Surgut has accumulated a cash pile of over $20 billion, while Rosneft is one of Russia's most indebted companies, with obligations of over $20 billion.
Other new candidates to the board include the head of Russian pipeline monopoly Transneft, Nikolai Tokarev, who alongside Rosneft head Sergei Bogdanchikov helped clinched a $25 billion oil-for-loan deal with China this year.
Under the deal, Russia would supply China with oil for 20 years via a new pipeline, while China would lend $10 billion to Transneft and $15 billion to Rosneft.
Rosneft said deliveries to China will begin in January 2011, with Rosneft sending 9 million tonnes of crude and Transneft selling the remaining 6 million.
As Transneft does not produce crude, Rosneft said it has signed a deal to sell it 6 million tonnes of oil per year for resale to China to help Transneft raise the money.
Crude will be delivered to the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) or its affiliate at a price based on market quotes for Russian crude oil at the Kozmino terminal on the Pacific or the Baltic Sea terminal Primorsk, Rosneft said.
"The value, cost and duration of the loan are unprecedented not only for Russian corporate borrowers but also for the global capital markets in general," Rosneft said in a statement.
Shares in Rosneft were up around 1 percent at 1040 GMT to 165.23 roubles, slightly above the broader market .
(Reporting by Dmitry Zhdannikov; editing by Simon Jessop)
