UPDATE 2-Sinopec sees strong H1 on cheaper crude, reforms
2009-04-29 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Top Asian oil refiner Sinopec Corp (
) said its first-half earnings would rise at least 50 percent as falling crude oil prices and China's fuel-pricing reforms offset weak demand.
), the world's second-largest refining company after Exxon Mobil (
), rose by as much as 5.4 percent on Wednesday, outperforming a 2.6 percent gain on Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng Index
The state-owned refiner's fortunes have shifted in recent months after crude prices dropped sharply and Beijing moved to hike fuel prices, guaranteeing higher profit margins.
But Sinopec now faces growing competition from smaller, independent refineries, shrinking profits from its marketing division.
"The fall in oil prices and the new NDRC (National Development and Reform Commission) pricing scheme has made it more profitable to be marketing fuel in China," said JP Morgan analyst Brynjar Bustnes.
In contrast, PetroChina Co Ltd (
), the world's second-biggest oil and gas producer, posted a 35 percent drop in quarterly earnings this week, its worst result in two years, while earnings at Europe's top energy groups Royal Dutch Shell Plc (
Crude prices CLc1 hovered at an average $43 a barrel in January-March, down about 56 percent from a year ago.
Although Sinopec's steep 12 percent fall in first-quarter fuel sales showed demand in the world's second-largest energy consumer remained weak, analysts say there are signs of a recovery this month.
"It's already come back to a certain degree," Bustnes said. "I expect overall fuel demand in China to be up slightly from last year, based on the recovery in the auto sector. That would boost demand for oil," he said.
However, Sinopec's Chief Financial Officer Dai Houliang said he was optimistic about the economic outlook in China, adding that the government's 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) stimulus package would prop up demand for fuel in the nation.
"We are happy to see that there are signs of a recovery in China, but the economic situation globally also contributes to uncertainty for us," Dai said on a conference call.
For most of last year, Sinopec was forced to take losses at its refining operations as it had to supply fuel at low prices set by a government wary of inflationary pressures, even when crude prices hit a record $147 per barrel in July.
Beijing's fuel pricing regime, which came into effect in January, entails a 5 percent margin for refineries and a much fatter sales profit.
Sinopec's profit margins from marketing fell to 350 yuan per tonne in the first quarter from 550 yuan a year earlier, Bustnes said.
Sinopec shares have risen 24 percent this year, outperforming PetroChina, which fell 2.5 percent, and a 17 percent gain in shares of offshore oil specialist CNOOC (
