BNY Mellon begins hiring for China funds JV
2009-04-29 03:40:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed  EDT
) plans to grow its asset management business in Asia and has started hiring staff for a China venture that may begin operations as early as August, a senior company official said.
"Regulators have already given us verbal approval to hire and set up office space. This is ongoing now," BNY Mellon Asset Management Asia Pacific CEO David Jiang told Reuters in an interview on Wednesday.
BNY Mellon, which manages roughly $1 trillion in assets, said in November 2007 it was planning to sent up a funds venture with China's Western Securities. The venture will raise money from Chinese investors for investments in domestic markets.
BNY Mellon's China funds venture is the latest in a string of overseas companies trying to tap into savings of China's burgeoning middle class.
So far, more than 30 foreign institutions including American International Group (
), AXA (
) have entered China's fund management industry.
The joint venture currently has around 8 people in Beijing and Shanghai, and is expected to have 40 staff by the end of this year, said Hong Kong-based Jiang, who was in Singapore for an industry conference.
BNY Mellon, which has been relatively unscathed by the financial crisis, plans to grow its presence in Asia to tap opportunities that will arise as other international banks cut staff and close offices, its officials have said previously. IDnT167483
Its main businesses are asset management and securities services, which involves providing custody and back-office operations for other financial institutions. The U.S. bank has custodial assets of around $20 trillion.
In the case of asset management, the planned expansion involved growing not only in China but also India and Taiwan, Jiang said. Malaysia was also interesting because of its niche in Islamic banking.
Jiang described India as a "tier one" market which BNY Mellon was keen to enter, adding the firm was open to fund management joint ventures with Indian partners as well as organic expansion.
"For Taiwan, we are looking at putting people on the ground within the next two years," he said.
