China coal,power fued dissolving;supply stable-NDRC
2009-04-29 03:27:00.0
(Reuters) - A confrontation in China between major power companies and coal mines over pricing has been partially resolved and coal supplies to power plants have not been disrupted, a government report showed late Tuesday.
The eased tensions could could signal against a sustained overseas buying binge by the world's largest coal producer and consumer, which forecast rising pressure from excess supply. China's coal imports rose 21 percent year on year in the first quarter, while exports fell 28 percent.
Power companies have been playing up their overseas coal purchases in past months, in an apparent effort to pressure domestic miners into lower prices.
China's top five power generating groups, the parents of GD Power Development Co Ltd (
), Datang International Power Generation Co Ltd (
), China Power International (
), Huadian Power (
), did not reach any deals with domestic miners in annual supply talks in December, 2008, as they insisted on price cuts, while the miners called for increases.
Most industries and enterprises signed coal-supply contracts during the annual talks, and the volumes not settled by the top five power companies and coal miners accounted for less than 20 percent of China's coal consumption by power plants, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) said in a report on its website (www.ndrc.gov.cn).
Coal shipments were normal and supplies to power plants were steady as both sides had taken flexible measures, including trading via middlemen, signing quarterly or monthly deals and paying in advance, the commission said.
), China's top coal miner, on Tuesday said that by the end of last month it had signed all domestic long-term coal sales contracts for this year, with price for seaborne 5,500 kcal/kg thermal coal rising to 540 yuan per tonne.
China is facing an increasing coal surplus with about 700 million-800 million tonnes of coal production capacity expected to come on line in the next two or three years. Capacity rose by over 200 million tonnes per year in the past six years, according to the commission.
Some regions and coal mines continued to expand production this year despite weakening demand, while the use of the international market to influence domestic supply and demand narrowed due to price and policy restrictions, the commission added, without elaborating.
Nearly half of China's annual coal output is burned by coal-fired power and heat plants, which generate 80 percent of China's electricity output.
China's top five power groups own nearly 45 percent of China's total power generating capacity.
(Reporting by Jim Bai and Chen Aizhu, Editing by Chris Lewis)
