China lets Taiwan attend world health meeting
2009-04-29 02:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China is to allow Taiwan to attend the annual U.N.-sponsored World Health Assembly in May, the island's health minister said on Wednesday, a further sign of warming ties between the political rivals.
Taiwan, a self-ruled island that Beijing considers its own, can be an observer at the World Health Organisation's (WHO) assembly under the name "Chinese Taipei", Yeh Ching-chuan told reporters as he displayed an invitation letter from the WHO.
The move comes as both sides seek to keep out a new swine flu virus that has killed 159 people in Mexico and been officially confirmed in the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Britain, Israel and Spain.
"This arrangement shows our consistent good intentions to doing good, practical things for Taiwan compatriots, and sincerity at promoting cross-Strait relations and peaceful development," Chinese Health Ministry spokesman Mao Qunan was quoted as saying by the official Xinhua news agency.
Beijing, backed by about 170 diplomatic allies, including the world's most powerful nations, compared with Taiwan's 23, normally blocks the island from joining international organisations that require statehood as a prerequisite.
Relations between Taiwan and China have improved since the island's China-friendly president, Ma Ying-jeou, took office last May, with top negotiators on both sides holding meetings and signing a series of deals to boost trade ties.
Ma welcomed the decision to let Taiwan attend the health assembly, saying it was a question of basic human rights.
"Joining WHO activities isn't just a simple political matter," he said. "It's more a matter of human rights and 23 million Taiwan people's health human rights shouldn't be ignored."
China has claimed sovereignty over Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong's Communists won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists fled to the island. Beijing has vowed to bring Taiwan under its rule, by force if necessary. (Reporting by Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Nick Macfie)
