UPDATE 2-Brazil's Mantega: No plans for new tax cuts
2009-04-28 18:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil has no plans to implement new tax cuts or extend existing tax breaks for the automobile industry because consumer confidence is returning, Finance Minister Guido Mantega said on Tuesday.
But Latin America's largest economy is negotiating with other South American countries to provide credit lines for importers of Brazilian goods, Mantega said, adding Uruguay may follow Argentina to benefit from such agreements.
"The government has already taken the necessary measures to activate the economy," Mantega told Reuters in New York. "We don't foresee new tax breaks."
Brasilia also "does not believe it is necessary" to extend tax breaks for the auto industry because car sales in March were already higher than a year earlier, he said.
"Consumers are gaining confidence as they remain employed. And we're going to create more jobs in Brazil this year than in 2008," he said.
Brazil reduced consumer taxes on new cars in December for a three-month period and then renewed the measure until the end of June. The move provided key support to the country's large automobile industry -- a major employer -- which has been among the worst hit by the global financial crisis.
Mantega said that Brazil's economy still needed looser monetary policy and "proper conditions" are in place for further interest rate cuts.
Inflation expectations are below the government's mid-range target of 4.5 percent and, according to the minister, economic growth is currently between zero to 2.0 percent, which gives room for more interest rate cuts.
Brazil's central bank on Wednesday is expected to reduce its benchmark interest rate by 100 basis points to a record low of 10.25 percent, according to a Reuters poll.
Brazil's economy is due to grow at an annualized rate of 3-4 percent in the fourth quarter of this year, Mantega reiterated, a forecast that many economists say is optimistic. The International Monetary Fund expects the economy to shrink by 1.3 percent in 2009.
In a move to create demand for its goods abroad, Brazil plans to extend to more South American countries its so-called CCR credit line that smooths the settlement of trade payments.
Last week Brazil increased that line with Argentina to $1.5 billion from $120 million and, according to Mantega, there are ongoing discussions with Uruguay.
Despite an expected fall in Brazil's exports, a recent recovery in the price of commodities will likely allow the Brazilian currency, the real BRBY, to remain at a "balanced" level this year, which would help exporters, Mantega said.
Mantega reiterated Brazil's call on developed countries to clean up their banks, warning the economic crisis might become a depression if toxic assets are not flushed out.
"Brazil and all developing countries which are not responsible for the crisis are paying the price for the slow resolution of these problems," Mantega said, conceding that a bank nationalization program would be a big political challenge for the new Obama administration.
Governments around the world must also meet their promises to provide more money to the IMF so it can give extra support to emerging economies hit by the crisis, Mantega said.
Brazil, Russia, India and China are willing to commit money to the fund but only once it gives emerging nations greater voice in the running of the institution, he said. For details, see [ID:nN28331247]. (Additional reporting by Vivianne Rodrigues, Manuela Badawy, William Schomberg; editing by Leslie Adler)
