No free riders so far in re-regulation drive
2009-04-28 18:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Fear of failing to tackle the financial crisis and top level political commitment keep countries singing from the same regulatory hymn sheet for now, but the real test of will has not yet come.
In the past, countries have been tempted to drag their feet or simply ignore any globally agreed rules, for example the United States on Basel II bank regulation, creating a patchwork of rules that can lead to unfair advantages.
The deal, thrashed out earlier this month, is specific about the need to avoid regulatory arbitrage or when one country opts for a lighter touch in a bid to lure more business.
The G20 nations, particularly the United States and the 27-nation European Union with leading economies such as Germany, France and Britain, are still at the stage of drafting and adopting new rules.
"Taking forward regulatory proposals in one area which creates opportunities for regulatory arbitrage is not going to be effective in addressing the risks we are trying to address," Hector Sants, chief executive of Britain's Financial Services Authority, said at the Reuters Global Financial Regulation Summit.
"It's too early to say whether these clear and vital aspirations are going to be consistently delivered. There is always the risk they won't," Sants said.
The G20 agreed to turn the Financial Stability Forum, an informal grouping of rich industrial nations, into the Financial Stability Board with all countries in the G20 as members.
"How you find people who have the ability and guts to say 'actually, there are problems here' is extraordinarily difficult," said Michael Foot, a former senior official at Britain's Financial Services Authority.
The FSB, overseeing colleges of supervisors set up to check that major global banks are not overly risky, won't be enough. "Colleges of supervisors can be a way of delaying things," Foot said.
But Angela Knight, chief executive of the British Bankers' Association, which represents Europe's biggest banking concentration, said the G20 have put "the right people around the table."
The broader membership of the FSB and the Basel Committee, which drafts global principles on bank capital, now includes new economies like China, India and Brazil, which was appropriate and would help avert regulatory arbitrage.
She said an idea mooted by Adair Turner, chairman of Britain's FSA, to blacklist jurisdictions that won't cooperate in regulatory issues - similar to an OECD blacklist on uncooperative tax havens - could be considered.
"Banks go to where the business is. There is not going to be some race to operate out of a regulatory environment that is notably poor. One has to accept there will be different legal frameworks," Knight said.
In the EU, a reform of financial supervision plans is expected to give a new pan-EU body binding powers over a national supervisor that fails to apply the bloc's financial rules properly.
And Eddy Wymeersch, chairman of the Committee of European Securities Regulators, said regulators have the option, which he himself has used, of asking a bank operating in too lax a jurisdiction to withdraw its business.
"So why not apply a similar regime elsewhere? If you see a problem, talk to the bank. I see some of the banks withdrawing from some eastern, non-EU states," Wymeersch said.
The International Organization of Securities Commissions, a grouping of over 100 national market supervisors, is also beefing up enforcement of the high principles it adopts.
"We are certainly keen to improve our implementation, it's a common message out of the G20," IOSCO Secretary General Greg Tanzer told the Reuters summit.
"I think IOSCO, Basel, and a range of other organizations including the FSB are going to focus very much on implementation in coming years, particularly issues from the systemic risk perspective," Tanzer said.
In the end, a truly global drive to re-regulate will hinge on political and not just supervisory will.
"Inevitably, if the fear starts to fade, the great temptation would be for regulators to shift things where there is a national discretion in favor of that country," said Foot.
