UPDATE 2-Vestas Q1 tops forecast; to issue shares, cut jobs
2009-04-28 09:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Vestas (
), the world's biggest maker of wind turbines, posted a better than expected rise in first-quarter profits and announced a billion-dollar share offer on Tuesday but will cut 1,900 jobs as it shifts production to its U.S. and China markets.
The Danish firm, whose global market share is around 20 percent, is riding the surge in demand for renewable energy but has also been hit by the financial crisis as some wind park developers struggle to secure financing.
"Vestas is raising capital for acquisitions, said Christian Nagstrup, analyst at Jyske Bank. "Also, the raised capital can be used as a buffer in case of declining markets."
"The proceeds will be used to further strengthen Vestas's capital resources, especially to position Vestas to quickly and efficiently exploit the opportunities offered by the credit crisis in a technology-based industry," the firm said.
Based upon the share's closing price of 329 Danish crowns on April 27 the company would raise around 6.1 billion crowns ($1.1 billion) if the offer is fully taken up.
The shares were down 0.3 percent at 328 crowns at 1342 GMT, when the Copenhagen market index
Vestas made a first-quarter operating profit of 76 million euros ($99 million), up from 34 million in the same period last year and ahead of the average market forecast of 54 million given in a Reuters poll of analysts.
Sales surged 59 percent to 1.1 billion euros, also topping expectations. The order backlog was 4.9 billion at March 31.
"It's a strong set of numbers and good operational performance -- better than the street had expected. Raising capital in this environment makes good strategic sense," said Barclays Capital analyst Rupesh Madlani.
Chief Executive Ditlev Engel told CNBC Vestas still hadn't seen any cancellations in its order backlog and market sentiment was picking up in the United States and in China, where the company has been setting up local production plants.
He said that while credit institutions were more diligent about what projects they finance, stimulus packages in the U.S. were on the other hand starting to have an impact. "There's still quite a lot of activity out there." [ID:nDKT002473]
"During the past six months the wind power industry has suffered from a funding crisis -- not a demand crisis," it said.
"The projects that will help Vestas meet its forecast for 2009 are currently only awaiting funding; everything else is in place," Vestas said, adding that it expected to sign "significant contracts" in the coming months.
Tom Plinston, analyst at Collins Stewart said: "Everyone expected Q1 to be very solid because of order inventory from Q4. Those numbers are ahead of even their toughest competitors."
"Maintaining guidance, they are asking for a pretty big leap of faith," he added. Rival Nordex NDXGk.DE last week affirmed guidance for 10-15 pct 2009 sales growth. [ID:nLL131869].
The 1,900 job cuts -- roughly 9 percent of its total workforce -- would come mainly in Britain and Denmark, it said.
"As Vestas no longer believes that the North European markets in the years ahead will be able to absorb the capacity released, as a result of the U.S. expansion (in production), Vestas is unfortunately compelled to reduce production capacity in Northern Europe," it said.
Sydbank analyst Jacob Pedersen said the numbers, and positive tone from the firm, outweighed share dilution concerns.
"They must have quite substantial orders on hand," he said. "But there`s still the uncertainty some projects won`t get financing in time to make it into the 2009 accounts," he said.
Following the planned lay-offs Vestas and its suppliers would still have factory capacity to manufacture, ship and install 10,000 megawatts (MW) in 2010, Vestas said.
Vestas competes with Spain's Gamesa (
), India's Suzlon Energy (
). ($1 = 0.7683 euros) ($1 = 5.722 Danish crowns) (Additional reporting by Martin Dahl; Editing by Greg Mahlich)
