UPDATE 2-US hogs prices fall as flu hits travel, trade
2009-04-28 17:54:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. hog prices fell sharply for the second consecutive day at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange on Tuesday as several countries banned pork imports from a number of U.S. states where mild cases of swine flu were confirmed.
Also, investors worried that disruption in travel, trade, and consumer shopping habits due to the flu will hurt meat sales here and in key export markets.
"The food industry is impacted by travel. After 9/11, we had significantly less traveling going on and the restaurants were impacted," said Jim Robb, economist at the Livestock Marketing Information Center.
Some airlines and tourism companies said they would restrict trips to Mexico, where 149 people have died. [ID:nLS803449]
Chicago Mercantile Exchange hog futures for June delivery 2LHM9 closed down 2.70 cents, or 3.42 percent, at 66.300 cents per lb on Tuesday. The June hogs closed down the 3 cent per lb daily limit on Monday.
Live cattle futures closed mixed, and traders said the lower hog market and trade restrictions on pork due to the flu outbreaks prompted selling.
A number of countries, including China and Russia, have banned U.S. pork from states such as Texas, Kansas, and California, where cases were reported. The victims are recovering and the bans were expected to be temporary.
"We don't think we're going to get into something that's protracted here. We think that these restrictions are misguided and they're going to be short lived," said Nick Giordano, vice president and counsel for international trade policy at the National Pork Producers Council.
Despite its name, swine flu is not transmitted by hogs or pork and the meat is safe to eat. The flu is spread person to person.
The extent of the flu's long-term impact on livestock and equity markets will depend on how widespread the outbreak becomes, said Doug Harper, analyst with Brock Associates.
"Most of the weakness is psychological in nature. You can't get it from eating pork," he said of the livestock markets' reaction to the disease.
Shares of major meat companies closed higher on Tuesday, but had not rebounded fully from Monday's sharp losses. In Chicago, there was talk that meat sales have already been hurt.
"A lot of pork packers have had orders canceled to Mexico," said Pat Lynch, a livestock trader at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
) the largest U.S. hog and pork producer and part-owner of a Mexican hog production facility, closed higher on Tuesday but had not fully pared Monday's sharp losses.
Smithfield said the flu was not present in hogs or employees at any of its worldwide operations, including its joint venture in Mexico. [ID:nWNAB9564]
In New York Stock Exchange trading Smithfield's shares closed up 40 cents, or 4.42 pct, at $9.44. Shares of Tyson Foods Inc (
), the No. 2 U.S. pork producer, closed up 14 cents, or 1.41 pct, at $10.10. (Additional reporting by Christopher Doering; Editing by Marguerita Choy)
