UPDATE 5-Nippon Steel sees zero profit this year after Q4 loss
2009-04-28 11:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Nippon Steel Corp (
), the world's second-biggest steelmaker, forecast zero profit this financial year, citing sluggish car demand and an uncertain outlook after swinging to its first quarterly loss in five years.
Smaller rival Sumitomo Metal Industries Ltd 5405.T also forecast that it would post no recurring profit in the financial year to March 2010 as global demand wilts, steelmakers face pressure to cut prices and talks with miners on key raw material price are deadlocked.
The outlook was little better in China, the world's largest steelmaking country, despite signs that the number three global economy may be poised for an earlier recovery from the worldwide downturn than other major economies.
), China's biggest steelmaker, said on Tuesday its net profit was 89 million yuan ($13 million) in January-March, down 98 percent from a year earlier and well below a projection of 350 million yuan by five analysts polled by Reuters.
The company forecast a similarly dismal result for the first half as well, as the weakened steel market had not yet improved.
The downbeat forecasts disappointed some investors, who were betting on an output recovery after news that steelmakers would make smaller-than-expected cuts in car-use steel prices, boosting their shares to six-months highs this month.
"The forecast for zero profit was negative," said an executive officer at a Japanese asset management firm who asked not to be identified.
"After a rally in April, many investors had envisioned a production recovery scenario."
"Steelmakers will continue to face tough times," said Yoku Ihara, manager of the information department at Retela Crea Securities. "Inventory reductions may end sometime in the first half of this financial year, but the recovery in demand is likely to be slow."
Shares of Nippon Steel closed down 5.2 percent after the results, while those of Sumitomo Metal slid 7.5 percent. Tokyo's iron and steel subindex .ISTEL.T fell 6.1 percent.
Nippon Steel said it would continue to reduce output by 45 percent in April-June, which is the first quarter of the 2009 financial year, but expects output and earnings to recover in the second half, helping make up an expected first-quarter loss.
"The market outlook is still cloudy, but we hope to generate a full-year profit on a recovery in the second half," Shinichi Taniguchi, executive vice president at Nippon Steel, told a news conference, adding that zero profit was a tentative forecast.
He said high coal costs carried over from the previous year would weigh on its earnings in the first quarter, but government stimulus steps would help prop up demand in the second half.
Japanese steelmakers had been expected to face a steeper slide in profits than Asian rivals this year as they rely heavily on demand from automakers, which want cheaper steel. The yen's strength, which reduces returns on export sales, is also hurting.
Nippon Steel, which competes with Japan's JFE Holdings Inc (
), South Korea's POSCO (
) and China's Baosteel (
), said it expects to break even on a recurring basis, which is before tax and exceptional items.
The company, a big supplier to household names such as Panasonic Corp (
), booked a 74.3 billion yen recurring loss in January-March against a 129.45 billion yen profit a year earlier.
Sumitomo Metal Industries eked out a 2.9 billion yen recurring profit in the fourth quarter, down 96 percent from a year earlier.
JFE, the world's third-biggest steelmaker, last week reported an 83 percent slide in quarterly profit to 20 billion yen. It gave no profit forecasts for the year ahead. [ID:nT146831]
POSCO, the world's No. 4 steelmaker, this month said its quarterly profit fell 71 percent to 373 billion won. [ID:nSEO4545] (Reporting by Yuko Inoue; Editing by Hugh Lawson and David Cowell)
