RPT-UPDATE 2-Wynn sees some stabilization in Las Vegas
2009-04-28 13:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Steve Wynn, chairman and chief executive at Wynn Resorts Ltd, (
) sees "a little bit of stabilization" in Las Vegas, where the global recession has pushed revenue down about 20 percent.
Speaking on Tuesday at the Milken Institute Global Conference, Wynn said visitors to Las Vegas were still spending less and room rates were lower, but the percentage of occupied hotel rooms was back up in the 90s.
"The booking window has gotten longer. It had shortened radically," he said. "I see Las Vegas continuing to be a resort destination for the world."
In December, Wynn Resorts opened the $2.3 billion, 2,000-room Encore, adjacent to Wynn Las Vegas, the company's first luxury casino hotel on the Las Vegas Strip. Wynn Resorts also owns and operates a casino resort in China's Macau.
"There has been a stop to the drop. It could resume, but it was going the other way in September, October, November, December, January, February and March," Wynn said.
Wynn said there was no certainty about when the economy would turn around, but he said he was confident that consumers would eventually revert to their old habits, including visits to Las Vegas, which he called "the playground of America."
"People like going to Las Vegas, or Disneyland," he said. "They like staying home." He attributed the appeal of domestic vacations to "bad news abroad" and airline ticket prices.
), Las Vegas Sands Corp (
) and Harrah's Entertainment [HAMLEH.UL] have come close to defaulting on their debt as they grappled with the recession and tight credit.
To raise cash, MGM has already sold its Treasure Island resort on the Las Vegas Strip and has said it would accept offers on its other properties.
Wynn said his company would be open to acquiring certain MGM properties, depending on the price, but he emphasized that "it would be inaccurate to say a deal is in the works."
He said he expects CityCenter, the Las Vegas Strip multi-tower joint venture of MGM and Dubai World, to begin opening later this year.
But Wynn questioned the viability of CityCenter's premise that such a concentration of buildings and people could create the kind of buzz that would translate into high revenue for casinos and retailers.
"It is a radical idea," Wynn said. "At the moment, I have more questions than answers about that project."
Wynn shares were down 1.2 percent at $37.03 on Tuesday afternoon on the Nasdaq, well-off its 52-week high of $119.74 reached on Aug. 11. (Reporting by Deena Beasley, editing by Leslie Gevirtz)
