UPDATE 2-Nalco 1st-qtr net earnings fall
2009-04-28 18:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Nalco Holding Co NLC.N reported lower net first-quarter earnings hurt by a strong U.S. dollar and a decline in sales across all segments and said that it expects currency headwinds to continue.
Nalco, which provides water treatment services and chemicals to the petrochemical sector, said it expects a sequential improvement in second-quarter earnings.
"An example of that would be China," Fyrwald said. "Some plants that were shutdown at the end of last year and through Chinese New Year came back online toward the end of the quarter."
Fyrwald said the company had seen increased activity in other areas, like petrochemicals, as a number of facilities started up again after lengthy shut downs.
The paper segment, which saw the biggest percentage revenue decline in the first quarter, is expected to remain challenged in Europe, see some stabilization in North America and rebound in Asia, Fyrwald said.
He also said that Nalco's energy segment remained under pricing pressure, along with other companies in the sector.
Net income attributable to the company fell to $23.2 million, or 17 cents a share, for the first quarter, compared with $29.2 million, or 20 cents a share, a year earlier.
Currency translation effects reduced reported sales by 8.3 percent, the company said.
"Apart from the dollar, the other biggest issue was the fall off in industrial activity and bankruptcies of many companies," Fyrwald said.
Analysts, on average, had expected earnings of 19 cents a share, before special items, on revenue of $930.1 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
Shares of the company closed down 5.5 percent at $14.56 on Tuesday on the New York Stock Exchange. The stock, which is up 34 percent so far this year, has traded in a range of $7.80 to $26.28 in the past 52 weeks.
Nalco trades at about 12.5 times its estimated 2009 earnings per share, while the S&P Specialty Chemicals Sub-Industry Index .GSPCHMC trades at about 16 times, according to Reuters data. (Reporting by Hezron Selvi, editing by Leslie Gevirtz)
