UPDATE 1-China Eastern sees chance of profitability in '09
2009-04-28 05:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Loss-making China Eastern Airlines Corp (
), one of the country's top three airlines, may return to the black this year due to a pick-up in the domestic air travel market, a senior company executive said on Tuesday.
After years of double-digit growth, China's airlines face strong headwinds this year as the global financial crisis weighs on air travel, pushing the industry deep into the red.
But the market has resumed its normal growth pattern, as Beijing's aggressive stimulus package to bolster economic growth lifted consumer confidence and boosted air travel.
"We have a chance to significantly cut our losses this year. We may even strive for profitability," Luo Zhuping, China Eastern's board secretary, told a briefing.
The carrier was saddled with a 13.9 billion yuan ($2.04 billion) net loss in 2008, compared with a 603.96 million yuan net profit in 2007, company data showed. [ID:nSHA21260]
To cut costs, the carrier may consider scrapping its previous order for 9 Boeing 787 Dreamliners, which has been delayed by the manufacturer, if the international travel market remains sluggish, he said.
"The timing of the delivery of the 787 could be an issue and our planning department is looking at it now. There is a chance that we would scrap the order. It all depends on the timing," Luo said.
It has already cancelled leasing contracts for seven Boeing single-aisle 737 jets, he added.
China Eastern had in February won shareholders' approval for an unprecedented 7 billion yuan cash injection from the government, more than doubling the amount its peer China Southern Airlines (
But the carrier, which ended 2008 with a net debt per share of 2.38 yuan, needs more aid from the government.
"The big challenge we are facing now is that our debts still way exceed our assets even after the cash injection. We are applying for more," he added.
China Eastern, the only top three domestic carriers left outside any global industry alliance, is in talks to join the SkyTeam alliance and an announcement could be made in June, Luo said.
"We had promised Singapore Airlines that we will not join any alliance before our equity tie came through. Now that the deal seems out of the question, it's time for us to move on," he said.
) and its majority owner Temasek Holdings [TEM.UL], but the $920 million deal was vetoed by its minority shareholders earlier last year.
When asked about the government-brokered merger between China Eastern and smaller Shanghai Air, which stay in the red for the second straight year in 2008, Luo said no major progress had been made so far. ($1=6.825 Yuan)
