FACTBOX-How countries are defending against swine flu
2009-04-27 21:47:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
-- Middle East countries should monitor travelers arriving from the United States and Mexico for signs of the virus but it was not necessary to impose quarantine on them all, the World Health Organization said.
AUSTRIA -- Under a 2005 contingency plan Austria has stocks of antiviral drugs sufficient to treat 4 million people (half the population), and has secured production capacity for prophylactic vaccines for the entire population. It has also stockpiled 8 million protective masks.
CZECH REPUBLIC -- The country has stocks of 2 million doses of Tamiflu, enough to treat a fifth of the population.
FRANCE -- Reinforced checks at airports, especially for people returning from Mexico. France has a stock of more than 30 million antiviral treatments, composed of 24 million doses of Tamiflu and 9 million doses of Relenza. Advises nationals against nonessential travel to Mexico.
GERMANY -- A note about swine flu danger in Mexico has been posted on Health Ministry's website.
ITALY - Pamphlets are being handed out to passengers at Rome's international airport but there are no restrictions on travel. Italy has 10 million doses of Zanamivir (Relenza) and 60,000 doses of Tamiflu as well as enough powder of Tamiflu to make 30 million doses.
RUSSIA -- Aircraft stewards arriving from the Americas have been instructed to warn about passengers with flu-like symptoms. Planes, on which cases are suspected, should be taxied to special zones and passengers and crews examined by medics.
-- Imposed curbs on meat imports from Mexico, a number of U.S. states and the Caribbean.
SPAIN -- Distributing leaflets to passengers arriving from Mexico, advising them to report to a health center if they suffer symptoms. Spain has a stock of 10 million doses of Tamiflu. Flights to Mexico were being equipped with face masks and gloves.
-- In Panama, airport officials are screening the around 40 flights a day from Mexico. Health officials in El Salvador at the borders with Guatemala and Honduras are watching for flu cases. Nicaragua's health ministry declared a health alert.
ARGENTINA -- Urged crew members and passengers on flights from Mexico to advise immediately if they have any flu-like symptoms. It is also asking people who have traveled to Mexico recently and feel sick, to inform a doctor.
CHILE -- To scan all passengers arriving by plane from Mexico and the United States. It has also warned against travel to Mexico and the U.S., and border officials are on alert to monitor passengers arriving by land with flu-like symptoms.
COLOMBIA -- Increased monitoring and preventative controls at hospitals, ports and Bogota's main airport, especially for people arriving from Mexico City, Texas and California.
MEXICO -- Closed gyms, courts to prevent spreading contagion. Some companies tell staff to work from home. Starbucks closes 10 stores in Mexico City.
SINGAPORE -- Urged citizens to limit their travel to affected areas such as Mexico and the United States,
SOUTH KOREA -- Stepped up quarantine and safety checks on travelers arriving from the U.S. and Mexico, as well as pork imports from those countries. An emergency quarantine system is in place, with simple tests conducted on people arriving with flu symptoms at airports.
