UPDATE 1-Shenhua Energy Q1 net up 17 pct, warns of rising costs
2009-04-28 05:45:00.0
(Reuters) - China Shenhua Energy Co (
), the world's most valuable coal producer, posted a 17.2 percent rise in first-quarter earnings, fuelled by a surge in coal output, but it warned of rising costs in the coming quarters.
China's coal miners have been grappling with weaker prices as slackening industrial activity crimped coal demand in the first quarter. But analysts have turned positive on the sector as coal stocks decline and power demand ticks up in the world's second-largest energy user after the United States.
"The low level of coal inventories will be sustained in the next two to three months so, in the near term, pricing pressure for coal should be limited," BNP Paribas analyst Kathryn Ding said.
Coal inventories at China's largest coal terminal, Qinhuangdao, fell to 3.54 million tonnes in the seven weeks ending April 11, the lowest level seen in the past three years, as smaller coal mines shut down across the country, Ding said.
But Shenhua warned of rising costs as the unit cost of materials, fuel and power increased.
The unit production cost of self-produced coal from its coal segment was expected to continue to rise for the next three quarters of 2009 and could be higher than the average unit production cost of self-produced coal in 2008, Shenhua said in a statement on Tuesday.
The unit production cost of self-produced coal rose 25.1 percent to 92.6 yuan per tonne in the first quarter, compared with a year earlier.
Across the sector, analysts expressed favour for Shenhua because it has locked in 80 percent of its turnover from contract sales, giving it higher earnings visibility versus rivals, such as Yanzhou Coal (
), that are more exposed to the spot market.
Contract coal prices were expected to rise 5-8 percent in 2009, Ding said.
Shenhua, which produces thermal coal to fuel China's power plants, records gross margins of 45-50 percent, higher than China Coal Energy's (
) 30 percent, because Shenhua runs its own railway network to transport its coal, Ding added.
Still, Shenhua's outlook is clouded by a deadlock in negotiations over annual coal prices between China's miners and the top five power producers, including Huaneng Power (
), which started late last year.
Sales to China's major electricity providers accounted for 14 percent of Shenhua's total sales in 2008.
Shenhua's January-March net profit came to 7.94 billion yuan ($1.16 billion) versus 6.77 billion yuan a year earlier.
The weighted average price for coal sales was 396.8 yuan per tonne in the first quarter, compared with 345.1 yuan per tonne a year earlier.
Shares in Shenhua gained 6.5 percent in January-March, underperforming Yanzhou, which rallied 53 percent, and China Coal, which rose 34 percent. The benchmark Hang Seng Index
