WRAPUP 12-Flu kills 149 in Mexico, world closer to pandemic
2009-04-27 19:03:00.0
(Reuters) - A new virus has killed up to 149 people in Mexico and the World Health Organization moved closer on Monday to declaring it the first flu pandemic in 40 years as more people were infected in the United States and Europe.
The WHO raised its pandemic alert level for the swine flu virus to phase 4, indicating a significantly increased risk of a pandemic, a global outbreak of a serious disease. [ID:nLR776132]
The last such outbreak, a "Hong Kong" flu pandemic in 1968, killed about 1 million people. [ID:nN24440477]]
Although the new flu strain has so far killed people only in Mexico, there were more than 40 confirmed cases in the United States, including 20 at a New York City school where eight cases were already identified. [ID:nN27539441]
In Mexico City, fearful Christians paraded a centuries-old statue of Jesus, believed to protect against disease, through the streets for the first time in more than a century.
The swine flu is not caught from eating pig meat products, but several countries imposed import bans on pork from the United States. Stocks in companies such as airlines were also hit as investors worried about the impact on travel.
Most of the those who died were between 20 and 50 years of age, an ominous sign because a hallmark of past pandemics has been the high rate of fatalities among healthy young adults.
Worldwide, seasonal flu kills between 250,000 and 500,000 people in an average year but the new strain worries experts because it spreads rapidly between humans and there is no vaccine for it.
Flu fears hit U.S. airline stocks hard as investors worried that the travel industry would suffer. Shares prices for UAL Corp UAUA.O, the parent of United Airlines, shed 14 percent, while Continental Airlines Inc CAL.N lost 16 percent.
Other travel and leisure stocks such as Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways (
) and British Airways BAY.L fell sharply, whereas makers of drugs and vaccines, such as Roche (
), were higher. [ID:nLR144642]
But his condition, like that of the cases in the United States and six in Canada, was not serious. Spain had 26 suspected cases under observation, health officials said.
In the first confirmed cases in Britain, Scotland's health minister said two people tested positive for swine flu and were being treated under isolation near Glasgow. [ID:nLAL002214]
Suspected cases were also reported in France, Norway, Germany, Sweden and Israel.
Large numbers of Mexicans made it to work in the capital despite the flu outbreak. Traffic in the city of 20 million was brisk as workers, many in surgical masks, packed buses.
"I preferred to come by car instead of public transport because I didn't want to be in contact with so many people," said 25-year-old graphic designer Andres Beltran. (Additional reporting by Jonathan Lynn and Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva, Maggie Fox, Emily Kaiser and Lesley Wroughton in Washington, Helen Popper and Miguel Gutierrez in Mexico City; Editing by Kieran Murray and Chris Wilson)
