South African Markets - Factors to watch on April 28
2009-04-28 01:41:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Tuesday.
Asian stocks slipped for a second day on Tuesday on worries about the potential economic fallout from the swine virus outbreak, even as investor reaction remained limited due to uncertainty about the full impact.
More countries have reported cases of the flu, and countries such as Australia and South Korea were testing for the virus. The World Health Organization raised its alert level to be a step closer to declaring the first flu pandemic in 40 years.
But so far the deaths have not spread beyond Mexico, where the outbreak began and 149 people were killed. [nFLU]
For a story, double click on [ID:nLS732132]
South Africa's veteran Finance Minister Trevor Manuel will continue to have a cabinet-level role in government after last week's elections, a senior official in the ruling African National Congress said on Monday.
ANC Treasurer General Mathews Phosa, a former lawyer and ally of new South African President Jacob Zuma, said the final decision on Manuel's future would be made in the next two weeks.
For a story, double click on [ID:nLR764835]
For an analysis on Trevor Manuel, double click on [ID:nLR661355]
South African markets surged higher on Friday, bolstered by stronger global stocks and metals prices, while a peaceful election and widely expected outcome eased lingering political concerns.
Stocks jumped nearly two percent, led by miners, adding to an almost three percent leap on Thursday, while the rand hit a 6-1/2 month high against the dollar.
gained 1.88 percent to 18,601.76 points, while the All-share index
rose 1.74 percent to 20,675.13 points.
For Friday's South African financial markets closing report, double click on [ID:nLO969551]
Gold dipped below $900 on Tuesday, off a near four-week high hit the previous day, after the dollar gained against the euro and speculative buying sparked by fears of a global flu pandemic receded.
Investors shifted their attention to a Federal Reserve meeting at a time when the U.S. economy has shown some signs of improvement. Falling oil prices also prompted investors to lock in profit after gold's recent rally. [O/R]
Gold XAU= was at $899.35 an ounce, down $7.40 from New York's notional close, the first time it has fallen below $900 since Thursday. It jumped to its highest since early April at $918.25 on Monday.
For the latest precious metals report, double click on [GOL/]
U.S. stocks fell on Monday on concerns the spreading of a new strain of flu could dampen optimism about the economy, overshadowing a sweeping overhaul of General Motors Corp and gains in biotechnology stocks.
For the New York stock market report, double click on [.N]
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- S.Africa takes anti-dumping action against China, Malaysia
- Manuel, communists feature in analysts' cabinet dream teams
- Call for global action on Madiba's birthday (Reporting by Serena Chaudhry)
