FACTBOX: Measures in Asia against swine flu
2009-04-28 04:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Asia, a continent that has battled deadly viruses such as the H5N1 bird flu and SARS in recent years, has been taking steps to ward off the new swine flu virus.
JAPAN -- Central government has Tamiflu stockpile for about 22.5 million, and Relenza stockpile for about 2.68 million people, for combined stock which would cover nearly 20 percent of population. Local governments have own stockpiles but figures not available. Checking passengers from Mexico, Canada and the United States at international airports.
HONG KONG -- Media reports that Hong Kong authorities have 20 million doses of Tamiflu and other anti-flu medication. Steps up port health protection measures, and sets up temperature screening machines at all checkpoints.
TAIWAN -- Current supplies of swine flu treatment to cover 10 percent of Taiwan's 23 million population. More than one million facemasks for emergency use.
MALAYSIA - Tamiflu stockpile covering more than 2 million of the 27-million strong population. Does not have stockpile of personnel protection equipment such as face masks for general population yet, but has a supply for health staff who will be dealing with crisis.
THAILAND - Government has 320,000 sets of Tamiflu stockpiled. GPO, state-owned drug maker, can produce one million capsules of generic Tamiflu if needed. Temperature screening checkpoints at international airports in Bangkok, Chiang Mai, Phuket.
CHINA -- Authorities tell hospitals to swiftly report any suspected cases of swine flu, and the official press is vowing fast public disclosure of any cases.
VIETNAM -- Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam's largest city of more than 8 million people, has stocks of Tamiflu enough for 1 million people.
SINGAPORE -- Thermal scanners at airport and isolation units at hospitals, where staff at some emergency departments are wearing full protective clothing.
BANGLADESH - Travelers, particularly those coming from countries already hit by recent outbreak, to be screened.
INDIA -- Has stockpiled one million Tamiflu doses which cover more than 142,000 people. Government has requested another one million doses which it expects to receive within 7-10 days. Government to step up surveillance at international airports and ports.
ASEAN -- Has 500,000 courses of antivirals stockpiled in Singapore and another 500,000 distributed among ASEAN member states. ASEAN also has stockpile of personal protective equipment but it did not give details.
Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Taiwan, South Korea, Singapore. Japan advised Japanese currently in Mexico to consider returning home soon and has suspended visa waivers for Mexicans.
(Reporting by Asian bureaux; Editing Valerie Lee)
