PetroChina offers fresh evidence of oil destocking
2009-04-28 02:32:00.0
Track China's Leaders
BEIJING, April 28
Tue  EDT
BEIJING, April 28
) has slashed crude output and refinery throughput in the first quarter to drain heavy inventories, setting the stage for a possible production recovery soon.
PetroChina reported early on Tuesday a 5.7 percent cut in first-quarter crude output over a year earlier, a 14.6 percent drop in refinery production and a 2.8 percent cut in fuel sales, fresh evidence that the second-largest Chinese refiner has been drawing down stocks by cutting production faster. [ID:nHKG324288]
The fall in crude output is deeper than the oil major's forecast last month of a 4.4 percent cut for the whole of 2009; while the throughput slump compared with an annual target to lower runs by 1.4 percent.
"Companies have built up very high inventories from the fourth quarter last year, starting with refined oil products, then crude. The first quarter has been a major destocking period," said Liu Keyu, deputy head of Research Institute of Economics and Technology under CNPC, parent of PetroChina.
Weaker fuel demand due to the spread of the global economic crisis also contributed to the sharp production cuts, said Liu.
But recent batches of inventory data have shown a marked decline since March, positive signs that demand growth of the world's No. 2 oil user may be picking up speed again.
"The stocks have been digested to near normal levels now. The situation has improved quite a lot, especially from March," CNPC's Liu said, adding that PetroChina alone cannot determine the whole supply picture.
China's refinery output, including that also of top refiner Sinopec Corp (
), ticked up in March versus the same year-ago level, its first rise in five months. In the meantime, state oil firms also raised crude imports to their second-highest on record on a daily basis last month, official data showed. Among the sporadic set of inventory data -- which China rarely publishes -- one local media said refined fuel stocks fell 15 percent in March versus February and another reported a smaller 6 percent drop in total fuel stocks, but a 14.7 percent fall in diesel inventories.
(Reporting by Chen Aizhu, Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
