Baidu beats Wall Street profit expectations
2009-04-27 18:42:00.0
Track China's Leaders
An employee looks at Chinese Web search leader Baidu.com Inc's new Japanese Web search engine as he poses for a photo before a news conference in Tokyo January 23, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Yuriko Nakao
Mon  EDT
) outpaced Wall Street's profit expectations in the first quarter and forecast higher-than-expected sales in the current quarter, sending its shares up 4.5 percent in after-hours trading.
While Baidu's sales growth has slowed from its historical pace, Pali Research analyst Tian Hou said the company nonetheless outperformed the low bar it had set for itself.
Earlier this year, Baidu said its growth would moderate in the first quarter because of the weak Chinese economy and a decision to remove paid listings of unlicensed medical companies from its site. According to Hou, China's economy has improved in March and April.
"If you look at China's market there's a rebound. If you look at Baidu, there's better performance than expectations. And also if you look at the pools of investable stock from the China Internet space, you really don't have a lot," said Hou.
For the current quarter, Baidu forecast revenue between $157 million and $161 million, compared to the $146.1 million forecast by Reuters Estimates.
Baidu trails Google and Yahoo in Internet search worldwide, but is the No. 1 player in China according to research firm comScore.
Google stepped up its efforts in China last month, with the introduction of free downloads of licensed music.
Baidu said its first-quarter earnings rose to $26.5 million, or 76 cents per share, compared to $20.9 million, or 60 cents a share, in the same period last year.
Excluding certain items, Baidu said it earned 86 cents a share, above the average analyst expectation of 84 cents according to Reuters Estimates.
First-quarter revenue rose 41 percent to $118.6 million, compared to the company's forecast of between $114 million to $117 million, and the average analyst expectation of $115.9 million.
(Reporting by Alexei Oreskovic and Kirby Chien, editing by Leslie Gevirtz, Bernard Orr)
