UPDATE 1-US hog price, meat company shares down on flu fear
2009-04-27 16:39:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. hog prices and stocks of major U.S. meat companies fell sharply on Monday on fears the Mexican swine flu outbreak, which has spread to the United States, could restrict trade and travel and curb consumer spending on meat.
The flu, which is not related to hogs or transmitted by pork or any other meat, has killed up to 149 people in Mexico and sickened 40 in the United States. So far, no one outside of Mexico has died from the virus, but precautions are being taken to prevent its spread.
The meat industry is worried the outbreaks could keep consumers at home and away from stores and prompt governments to restrict trade, all of which could hurt sales.
"The restrictions that are being put in place in Mexico City may impact people's buying habits," said Ron Plain, agricultural economist at the University of Missouri. "You might see a significant dip in shipments to Mexico. Mexicans eat a fair amount of U.S. pork."
), Tyson Foods Inc (
In fiscal year 2008, Tyson Foods, the largest U.S. meat company and No. 2 U.S. pork producer, exported 21 percent of its pork, and 27 percent of that went to Mexico.
J.P. Morgan on Monday lowered its ratings for Smithfield and Tyson partly due to the flu outbreak, while other research firms advised a "wait and see" approach.
"Though there is no evidence that swine flu can be obtained from eating pork, the fear generated by a disease named after hogs cannot be good for pork consumption," J.P. Morgan analyst Ken Goldman said in a note.
KeyBanc Capital Markets said on Monday it was not changing its ratings on Smithfield, Tyson, Hormel or chicken producer Sanderson Farms Inc based on the flu outbreak, but will monitor the situation.
"In our view, Smithfield is most at risk given that it is a vertically integrated pork producer and will be heavily impacted by any pressure on already weak live hog prices," Heather Jones, BB&T Capital Markets meat industry analyst, said in a note.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, where U.S. cattle and hog prices are set daily, hog futures prices fell the daily trading limit largely on worries that the flu could scare consumers away from pork and disrupt exports.
"There is a small chance that it could become an epidemic. If it becomes an epidemic world trade will shrink," said Jim Clarkson, livestock analyst at A.& A. Trading.
In afternoon New York Stock Exchange trading, Smithfield's shares were down $1.19, or 11.5 percent, at $9.13 per share, Tyson's were down 95 cents, or 8.7 percent, at $9.98 and Hormel's were down 63 cents, or 2.06 percent, at $30.00.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, hog futures for June delivery 2LHM9 closed down the 3-cent-per-lb daily trading limit at 68.650 cents per lb. For more Reuters swine flu coverage, please click here:
