Mexico peso, stocks slammed by flu outbreak fears
2009-04-27 10:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico's peso weakened sharply on Monday and stocks sank due to worries that a swine flu outbreak could further hobble Mexico's battered economy.
tumbled 4.83 percent to 21,491.
fell on Monday as concerns intensified that the spread of swine flu, which has killed more than 100 people in Mexico, would hit the already recession-stricken global economy.
"Cases do seem to be popping up across continents and people seem to be taking it quite seriously. Since Mexico seems to be where it all started, there is some medium-term impact, particularly related to tourism," said Beat Siegenthaler, head of emerging markets strategy at TD Securities in London.
"But it is too early to say that it could have a major economic impact," Siegenthaler said.
Earlier UBS cut its rating on Mexican stocks to 'underweight' from 'overweight,' partly on worries the outbreak will further hurt the economy, which was already seen falling into recession this year due to the U.S. economic downturn.
A prolonged epidemic could hit Mexico's $13 billion-a-year tourism industry and weigh on already weak retail sales as Mexicans frightened by the flu stay home and spend less.
Shares in Mexico's top retailer Wal-Mart de Mexico (
) lost 11.08 percent to 13.00 pesos, and ASUR (
In debt trading, the government's benchmark 10-year peso bond MX10YT=RR fell 0.975 of a point in price, pushing its yield up 14 basis points to 7.86 percent.
The U.S. State Department plans to issue a travel warning on Monday urging Americans to avoid all nonessential travel to Mexico because of the outbreak, a U.S. official said.
The European Union's health chief advised travelers on Monday not to go to areas affected by swine flu, but the EU did not issue any formal instructions to travelers.
Finance Minister Agustin Carstens said on Sunday the impact of the flu on Mexico's economy would be "transitory" but warned it could have an "important impact." (Reporting by Michael O'Boyle; Editing by James Dalgleish)
