UPDATE 1-PetroChina Q1 net worst in 2 yrs, hit by oil prices
2009-04-27 10:57:00.0
(Reuters) - PetroChina Co Ltd (
), the world's second-most valuable oil and gas producer after Exxon Mobil (
), posted a 35.3 percent fall in quarterly earnings, its worst result in two years, as a steep drop in oil prices battered margins.
The result, which was not as weak as analysts had predicted, comes ahead of earnings later this week from other energy producers such as Royal Dutch Shell Plc (
Some analysts say the outlook for PetroChina -- the largest of China's energy triumvirate that includes top Asian refiner Sinopec Corp 0386.N (
) -- remains grim, with crude prices likely to stay weak this year as the economic downturn and ample inventories combine to choke off demand.
"We're not seeing the upward momentum in crude oil prices," Michael Yuk, analyst with Sun Hung Kai Financial, said ahead of the results. "On that basis, we're pretty negative on PetroChina for the entire year."
Crude prices have hovered at an average $43 a barrel in the first quarter, down about 56 percent from a year ago and a far cry from record highs of near $150 a barrel last July.
But signs of a recovery in fuel demand from China, the world's second-largest oil consumer after the United States, could be a bright spot for PetroChina's upcoming quarters, said Gordon Kwan, head of energy research at Mirae Asset Financial.
Fuel inventories held by China's top refiners fell nearly 15 percent in March, the first sharp decline in over two years, as rising demand lifted sales by more than a fifth from February. [ID:nPEK351748]
) earned January-March net profit of 18.96 billion yuan, down from 29.31 billion yuan a year ago and the company's worst result since it began reporting on a quarterly basis in 2007, based on the international accounting standards.
The firm posted a 36.2 percent fall in first-quarter earnings to 18.77 billion yuan, under Chinese accounting standards.
PetroChina's shares have underperformed Chinese rivals in the first quarter, falling about 9 percent compared to the 6 percent gain in shares of both Sinopec and CNOOC. The benchmark Hang Seng Index
Analysts say investors are bearish on PetroChina, which has reduced its 2009 production targets, because of its ageing oil fields and high cost structure.
The firm said total crude oil output reached 205.7 million barrels of oil per day, down 5.7 percent from the same period a year ago. It said the average realised crude oil price for the first quarter was $37.10 per barrel, down 57.8 percent from a year earlier.
It processed 185.4 million barrels of crude oil in the first quarter, down 14.6 percent from a year ago. The total sales volume of refined products fell 2.8 percent.
Sinopec is scheduled to report earnings on Tuesday. (Editing by Ian Geoghegan; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
