Flu outbreak could hit Mexico stocks at open
2009-04-27 09:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexican stocks were seen sharply lower on Monday due to worries that the swine flu outbreak could further hobble Mexico's already battered economy.
fell on Monday as concerns intensified that the spread of swine flu, which has killed more than 100 people in Mexico, would hit the global economy.
Mexico's stock market was due to open at 1330 GMT, and traders said the IPC stock index
UBS cut its rating on Mexican stocks to 'underweight' from 'overweight,' partly due to worries that the swine flu outbreak will further hurt the economy, which is already seen falling into recession this year due to the impact of the U.S. downturn.
"The impact will be big, the stock market has had a big rally," said Gerardo Roman, head of stock trading at Actinver brokerage in Mexico City. "We could drop 2 to 2.5 percent."
The outbreak could hit Mexico's $13 billion a year tourism industry. International airlines said they would allow passengers with tickets to travel to Mexico to change their plans without incurring fees or penalty charges.
Roman said the hardest hit could be Mexican airport operators like Grupo Aeroportuario del Centro Norte, or OMA (
), Grupo Aeroportuario del Sureste, or Asur (
), and Grupo Aeroportuario del Pacifico, or GAP (
The peso currency traded down 3.11 percent at 13.71 per dollar in early trading on Monday, dragged down by investor fears over the impact of the flu.
The European Union's health chief advised travelers on Monday not to go to areas affected by swine flu, but the EU did not issue any formal instructions to travelers.
Finance Minister Agustin Carstens said on Sunday the impact of the flu on Mexico's economy would be "transitory" but warned it could have an "important impact."
Mexico's retail sector has been slammed by tumbling consumer confidence. Retail sales tumbled 8.6 percent in February as consumers put off spending on costly items like appliances. (Reporting by Michael O'Boyle and Robert Campbell, Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
