Swine flu could hit already ailing fuel demand
2009-04-27 14:41:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Apr 27 2009
An airport staff member wears a face mask, as he awaits to receive a flight from Los Angeles via Taipei, to screen passengers for possible swine flu infection, at Kuala Lumpur International Airport, April 27, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bazuki Muhammad
Mon  EDT
Already the United States and Europe have urged caution over travel to Mexico, where the virus has killed over 100 people, and panicked sellers on Monday sold the world's top airline brands.
"It could hurt (jet) demand here as I see more and more countries are putting out travel warnings," said Mike Zarembski, senior commodities analyst for optionsXpress in Chicago. "The airline business has already been reeling due to the economic crisis."
Jet fuel demand has already been battered as the economic crisis curtails travel for business and leisure, down 13.7 percent against year-ago levels, according to the International Energy Agency.
The crisis has sent oil prices tumbling from record highs over $147 a barrel in July. U.S. crude futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange fell to around $50 a barrel on Monday, led by losses in heating oil futures.
"I think that is one of the reasons why heating oil is down, because heating oil is the futures market proxy for jet fuel. There was some very good selling of the heating oil contract as a result," said Addison Armstrong, director of market research, Tradition Energy.
Asian oil swaps, meanwhile, fell across the 12-month forward curve on heavy selling in the distillates market, particularly for jet fuel.
Investment bank J.P. Morgan noted that during the SARS epidemic in 2003, global air passenger travel fell 8.2 percent during the second quarter of the year, and over 19 percent in Asia alone.
Demand growth from the primary countries affected by SARS -- China, Taiwan and Hong Kong -- fell to 3 percent during the period, down from 10 percent demand grown previously, the research note added.
"Memories of the SARS outbreak are still very fresh. The travel and tourism industry will be the most directly affected, and so oil prices will suffer as a consequence," said Mike Fitzpatrick, vice president at MF Global in a note.
If airline travel is significantly clipped, other fuels could get a boost, however.
"The gasoline market could benefit as people drive to offset their travel needs," said Chris Jarvis, senior analyst for Caprock Risk Management in Hampton Falls, New Hampshire.
(Additional reporting by Robert Gibbons; Editing by Christian Wiessner)
