SGX says short-selling helps markets
2009-04-27 07:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A trader reacts while looking at his screen on the trading floor of a brokerage firm in Singapore April 14, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Vivek Prakash
Mon  EDT
), one of the few bourses that did not ban short-selling last year, has reaffirmed its opposition to such restrictions, saying short-sellers helped improve market efficiency.
"Short-selling is a legitimate market activity and this is well-recognized both in financial literature and in international markets," SGX's head of risk management and regulation, Yeo Lian Sim, told the Reuters Global Financial Regulation Summit.
Short-sellers have been blamed for worsening the financial crisis, and many countries implemented temporary bans on short-selling in a bid to support share prices in the turmoil that followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September.
Within Asia, Australia, Japan, Korea and Taiwan curbed short-selling, whereas Singapore tightened regulations but allowed the practice to continue. Hong Kong warned it would not tolerate "abusive" short-selling but did not see the need to ban short-selling.
"What we did was to impose proportionate fines (on short-sellers) that fail to deliver the sales as delivery failure has implications on systemic stability," Yeo said.
She referenced a study by Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) earlier in April which showed that restrictions on short-selling provided little support for stock prices.
"I agree whole-heartedly that banning short-selling would take away liquidity," said Wong Kok Hoi, chief investment officer at APS Asset Management in Singapore, which manages $1.2 billion.
"Short-selling is never a cause. It's an effect and a response to some positive or negative news."
On the recent spate of corporate scandals involving Singapore-listed China firms, Yeo said it was unfair to disparage all 150 Chinese companies because of problems affecting some of them. Investors should judge each firm by its own merit, she said.
"We shouldn't go just by impressions. The fact is we are in a global recession. It's a difficult time for economies, it's a difficult time for companies," Yeo said.
She also said the Singapore bourse was committed to its "disclosure-based" supervisory regime, which puts the onus on investors to assess firms rather than depend on regulators to decide which companies were worthy of a listing.
"We are catering to a range of investors, including institutional, sophisticated and retail, with varied risk appetite," she said.
"With this (disclosure-based regulations), we can develop more choices for our investors," she added, responding to criticism that SGX had been lax in letting lower-quality firms list in Singapore.
She said SGX will focus on improving the existing system, citing recent changes such as asking firms to provide an explanation for the departure of directors and senior management as well as asking auditors to pay more attention to cash balances and payments due from customers.
