US hog prices,meat company shares down on flu fear
2009-04-27 13:38:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. hog prices and the value of shares in meat companies fell on Monday on fears the Mexican swine flu outbreak that has spread to the U.S. could prompt trade bans and curb consumer spending.
Despite its name, swine flu is not related to hogs nor is it transmitted by pork or any other meat.
"The restrictions that are being put in place in Mexico City may impact people's buying habits," said Ron Plain, agricultural economist at the University of Missouri. "You might see a significant dip in shipments to Mexico. Mexicans eat a fair amount of U.S. pork."
While trade with Mexico continues, other countries have banned U.S. pork from selected states.
Russia banned all meat not thermally treated from California, Texas, and Kansas, as well as from Mexico, and raw pork from either other U.S. state. China banned hogs and pork from U.S. states that have had mild human cases of the flu, while the Philippines banned U.S. and Mexican pork.
), Tyson Foods Inc (
In fiscal year 2008, Tyson Foods, the largest U.S. meat company and No. 2 U.S. pork producer, exported 21 percent of its pork and and 27 percent of that went Mexico.
"In our view, Smithfield is most at risk given that it is a vertically integrated pork producer and will be heavily impacted by any pressure on already weak live hog prices," Heather Jones, BB&T Capital Markets meat industry analyst, said in a note.
KeyBanc Capital Markets said on Monday it was not changing its ratings on Smithfield, Tyson, Hormel or chicken producer Sanderson Farms Inc based on the flu outbreak, but will monitor the situation.
In midday New York Stock Exchange trading, Smithfield's shares were down $1.26, or 12.21 percent, at $9.06 per share, Tyson's were down $1.05, or 9.61 percent, at $9.88 and Hormel's were down 58 cents, or 1.89 percent, at $30.05.
At the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, hog futures for June delivery 2LHM9 were down the 3-cent-per-lb daily trading limit at 68.650 cents per lb. (Editing by Christian Wiessner)
