UPDATE 2-Akzo Nobel says EBITDA tgt may take extra yr
2009-04-27 11:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Dutch chemicals group Akzo Nobel NV (
) may need an extra year to achieve its margin target of 14 percent for underlying earnings by end-2011 if the economic downturn persists, it said on Monday.
"If the current economic situation continues it might take a year longer to achieve," Chief Executive Hans Wijers told shareholders at the annual general meeting in Amsterdam.
The world's biggest paint company and producer of brands such as DuLux, Sikkens and Flexa had an earnings before interest, tax depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) margin of 12.2 percent in 2008.
Rabo Securities analysts said last week, after the company reported a 50 percent decline in core first-quarter profit, that the economic environment is making Akzo Nobel's margin target difficult to achieve.
"In the absence of any significant additional downturn than what we see today, I think we're in good shape to get there," he said, but added that Akzo Nobel will use its second quarter results to assess developments.
He said Akzo Nobel will examine how the economic stimulus packages in the United States, China and Britain are developing, adding there are also encouraging signs banking capital flows are starting to improve.
Last week, Akzo Nobel reported earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) from continuing operations, excluding exceptional items, of 142 million euros ($187 million), from 286 million a year earlier, as volumes fell 17 percent.
Wijers told shareholders there was still a lot of room to improve the company's margin and that Akzo Nobel, which is closing factories and cutting jobs, has also sighted some stabilisation in its markets.
"But it is very early to rejoice," Wijers said.
It had cut staff numbers by 2,050 by the end-March as part of its targeted 3,500 job cuts by end-2011. (Reporting by Aaron Gray-Block; Writing by Harro ten Wolde; Editing by Greg Mahlich and Andrew Macdonald) ($1=.7611 Euro) (harro.tenwolde@reuters.com; Reuters Messaging: harro.tenwolde.reuters.com@reuters.net; +31 20 504 5017)
