Gold hits 4-week high as flu fears spook markets
2009-04-27 05:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold steadied in Europe on Monday after rising to a four-week high earlier in the session as equities fell on concerns over the prospect of a global flu pandemic, which boosted interest in bullion as a haven.
The precious metal is also underpinned by technical factors after breaking above $900 an ounce late last week and it has been boosted by news China has significantly increased its gold reserves, analysts said.
However, gains in the dollar versus the euro are limiting gold's climb.
Spot gold was bid at $911.40 an ounce at 0910 GMT, against $911.10 an ounce late in New York on Friday. Earlier it touched a high of $918.25.
"If there is some worry that this will prolong the slump, or will increase the difficulties of the economy returning to some kind of shape...that might have an impact on gold," he said.
World stocks tumbled on Monday after seven weeks of gains, while oil and the euro fell, as concerns intensified that the spread of swine flu will hit the global economy.
Fears that any tentative signs of recovery in the global economy could be crushed by the virus, which has killed more than 100 people in Mexico, have put markets on edge.
On the foreign exchange markets, the euro dropped 0.5 percent versus the dollar, while the yen climbed to its highest in a month against the U.S. currency.
A stronger dollar typically weighs on gold, which is often bought as an alternative asset to the currency.
Gold broke through the psychological $900 barrier late last week, and was boosted on Friday by news that China has lifted its gold reserves by three quarters to 1,054 tons, against 600 tons at the time of its last report in 2003.
"The possibility that China might will increase its official sector gold holdings further is potentially supportive of prices," said HSBC in a research note.
There were also signs of recovery in demand for physical gold. Dubai's gold imports in the first quarter of the year grew 15 percent to 140 tons from a year earlier, according to the Dubai World Group.
Meanwhile gold buying in the world's biggest gold consumer, India, was strong ahead of the wedding season there. However, a rise in prices has lifted selling of scrap jewelry back onto the market, dealers said.
Demand for gold-backed exchange traded funds also remained stagnant. The largest gold ETF, New York's SPDR Gold Trust, said its holdings were unchanged on Friday from the day before.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was bid at $1,150 an ounce against $1,173.50, while spot palladium was bid at $230.50 an ounce against $231.
James Moore, an analyst for TheBullionDesk.com, said while platinum ETF holdings rose last week, "the PGMs could be in for a bumpy rise this week with restructuring deadlines from GM and Chrysler looming, as well as the release of U.S. auto sales for April."
Silver was bid at $13.00 an ounce against $12.84. The metal rose 3 percent to a near four-week high of $13.20 earlier in the session, but remains vulnerable to a correction in gold, analysts said.
(Reporting by Jan Harvey; Editing by Anthony Barker)
