UPDATE 2-China's ICBC Q1 profit beats expectations
2009-04-27 06:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
), the world's biggest bank by market value, posted a 6.2 percent increase in first-quarter profit on Monday due to loan growth and higher fees.
Though the rate of earnings growth across China's banking sector is slowing, major banks have reported profits so far in the quarter, continuing to lend despite an economic slowdown throughout the region.
"The driver here is the strong loan growth, which is offsetting its net interest margin compression," said Yuk Kei Lee, a senior analyst at Core Pacific-Yamaichi International, referring to ICBC's results.
The government-backed lender was expected to post an earnings decline of about 1 percent to 31.6 billion yuan, based on the average forecast of analysts at UBS and Macquarie.
Lee said lower interest rates and increased competition in pulling in high quality loan customers was weighing on margins. ICBC's healthy non-performing loan book was also helping profits, he said.
), the world's second-largest bank, which reported a 18.3 percent drop in quarterly profit on Friday. [ID:nSHA242237]
), credit card company American Express (
) own more than 7 percent of ICBC, combined.
ICBC's Hong Kong shares are little changed so far this year. The stock fell 5.9 percent on Monday in anticipation of the shareholder selldown in a broader market
ICBC's Hong Kong shares have traded in line with the benchmark Hang Seng Index so far this year. Both fell sharply at the beginning of the year and rallied since mid-March on hopes that the Chinese and global economies were nearing a bottom.
ICBC's total loans and advances to customers rose 13.9 percent, or 636.1 billion yuan, to 5.2 trillion yuan.
The company's non-performing loan ratio stood at 1.97 percent, a decrease of 0.32 percentage points from a year earlier. Total assets rose 12.5 percent to 11 trillion yuan ($1,612 billion).
The aggregate nominal value of subprime-related debt securities was $1.8 billion, representing 0.11 percent of the bank's total assets, according to ICBC. ($1=6.824 Yuan) (Editing by Chris Lewis and Anshuman Daga)
