PREVIEW-DSM Q1 seen pressured, resilience model tested
2009-04-27 08:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Dutch chemicals group DSM NV (
) is seen reporting a 76 percent fall in first-quarter core profit, but investors will hope to see further proof of the company's efforts to improve resilience to economic cycles. The average forecast for first-quarter earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) was 56 million euros ($87 million) in a Reuters poll of 10 analysts. Last year, the company reported EBIT of 236 million euros. [ID:nLL944226]
DSM has moved from bulk chemicals to nutrition and specialised materials in recent years in a bid to reduce vulnerability to economic cycles, and its Nutrition business in particular has benefited from the pricing power of vitamins.
Its Nutrition and Pharma business, which supplies raw materials for drugs companies, were seen performing well in the first quarter, while Performance Materials and Polymer Intermediates were expected to have been hit by the economic downturn due to exposure to the automotive and marine markets.
"With a large exposure to construction and automotive in the Materials (Sciences) divisions and Base Chemicals, we see little upside in the near term until these end markets turn the corner," ING analyst Jan Hein de Vroe said in a note.
He also said fertiliser prices, which helped save DSM's 2008 results, were coming off last year's record highs which will not help the company's results.
But De Vroe said that DSM's Nutrition and Pharma units provided a safety net because human health developments were on ongoing process.
UNATTAINABLE TARGETS?
Analysts at Rabo Securities have said that while DSM's strategy would help it outperform most European peers in the next decade, the world has changed rapidly in recent months and the company's Vision 2010 targets have become harder to attain.
In 2007, DSM said it would target annual autonomous sales growth of at least 5 percent, $1.5 billion in annual sales in China and an additional 1 billion euros in sales from innovation by 2010. It also gave targets for divisional earnings before interest, tax, amortisation and depreciation (EBITDA) margins.
"Economic headwinds will blow the Vision 2010 (targets) increasingly further out of reach," Rabo analysts said.
Chemicals companies have been hard hit by the global recession due to a drop in demand in the car, electrical and construction industries.
Last week, Dutch peer Akzo Nobel (
Despite the fact the company said some of its markets were stabilising, some analysts doubt whether Akzo Nobel will meet its EBITDA margin target of 14 percent by the end of 2011.
DSM shares have risen 17 percent since the start of this year, compared with a 1 percent rise in the DJ Stoxx European chemical index .SX4P. (Editing by Dan Lalor) ($1 = 0.6423 euro)
