RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Asia stocks, commodities hit by swine flu
2009-04-27 02:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks fell about 2 percent on Monday as the outbreak of swine flu in North America hurt shares of airlines while prompting some market players to trim risky positions, hitting currencies such as the Australian dollar.
European stock futures STXEc1 FDXc1 fell about 1.3 percent, pointing to a weaker open. [.EU]
Analysts said the initial market reaction was limited but were wary about the potential economic fallout from the flu outbreak, especially at a time when the global economy is starting to show signs of recovering from a deep recession.
Shares of companies such as Hong Kong's Cathay Pacific Airways (
) slid on worries about whether the potential flu fallout would hurt global travel, while South Korean poultry and fishery firms gained on an expected shift in food spending away from pork.
Mexico's health minister said the swine flu death toll in the country reached 103 as fears of a global pandemic grew with new infections in the United States and Canada. [ID:nFLU]
Investors in Asia are all the more aware of the potential damage after the outbreak of SARS in Hong Kong six years ago hobbled the city and regional economy, as well as flare-ups of bird flu in the past few years.
"This will deepen the global recession and will probably have a contagion effect on export-led economies in Asia," said Daniel Chan, senior investment strategist at DBS Bank in Hong Kong.
Japan's Nikkei average
) jumped on an expected pick-up in flu drug sales, while banks rose on news that Shinsei Bank (
After gaining 1.7 percent on Friday, futures on the U.S. S&P 500 SPc1 were down 1.7 percent in Asia trade, giving a boost to safe-haven U.S. Treasuries RTRTSY1.
Hong Kong's Hang Seng
shed 2.7 percent, partly due to a drop in shares of Chinese banks as major foreign shareholders are expected to sell some of their holdings as lock-up periods end this week and before they report quarterly earnings.
The world's largest lender by market value, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (
), lost about 4 percent as investors including Goldman Sachs (
), Allianz (
A report that German regulators had said the country's banks held about $1.1 trillion of toxic assets also dogged financial shares, some analysts said. [ID:nLP210732]
BONDS, AUSSIE AND COMMODITIES RETREAT
While Treasuries climbed, other government bond markets showed little reaction to the swine flu news.
Japanese government bond futures 2JGBv1 pulled back on the Nikkei's slight gains, shrugging off details about the Ministry of Finance's plan to increase base JGB issuance by $174 billion this fiscal year to pay for economic stimulus. Korean bond futures KTBc fell before bond auctions this week.
In limited Asian trade, the Mexican peso fell about 1.5 percent to 13.665
The dollar index, a gauge of its performance against six major currencies, climbed 0.4 percent to 85.099 .DXY. But the dollar fell to a one-month low versus the yen at 96.62 yen
Commodities succumbed to on worries demand will take a hit due to the spreading flu virus. U.S. crude oil futures were down $1.25 to $50.30 a barrel CLc1, while U.S. soy SK9 and corn CK9 futures both tumbled between 3 percent to 5 percent. (Additional reporting by Jun Ebias; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
