China has forced refugees back to Myanmar conflict zone: group
2012-06-26 07:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese authorities have forced back into Myanmar some ethnic Kachin refugees who have fled across the border to escape civil war, and China is denying basic care to many who remain, a human rights group said on Tuesday.
Myanmar's government is in talks with autonomy-seeking Kachin rebels, and more than a dozen other ethnic minority rebel groups, to try to end all its decades-old conflicts.
But despite several rounds of negotiations, the conflict in Myanmar's northernmost Kachin state has not ended.
The fighting, which flared up in the middle of 2011 after a 17-year truce, has pushed up to 10,000 people to seek refuge across the border in the southwestern Chinese province of Yunnan.
New York-based Human Rights Watch said many of these people had little access to proper sanitation, shelter, healthcare or schools for their children.
Others had been detained, refused entry to China or even forced back into the conflict zone in their country, also known as Burma, the rights group said in a report.
"The Chinese government has generally tolerated Kachin refugees staying in Yunnan, but now needs to meet its international legal obligations to ensure refugees are not returned and that their basic needs are met," said Sophie Richardson, the group's China director.
Human Rights Watch said it had documented two cases involving some 300 people who were ordered to return to Myanmar, and others who were sent back into the conflict zone after being turned away at the border.
China's Foreign Ministry denied the accusations, and said the people were not refugees.
"After the clashes abated they went back to Myanmar. While here, China provided help to them on humanitarian considerations," ministry spokesman Hong Lei told a regular news briefing.
A Yunnan province official said in March that authorities had been providing humanitarian help to the displaced and had helped mediate talks between the rebels and Myanmar's government.
While China has strong business and trade ties with Myanmar, it has long looked with wariness at its poor and unstable southern neighbor, and has repeatedly called on the country to ensure stability along their vast and remote border.
Chinese media on Tuesday cited police minister Meng Jianzhu as saying poppy cultivation in northern Myanmar had bounced back and that drugs were flooding into China from that part of the world, with heroin seizures up 55 percent in 2011 compared with the previous year.
Diplomats say the conflict in Kachin state is one of the biggest tests for Myanmar's new civilian government's reform effort.
As a signatory to various international conventions on refugees, China has an obligation to properly protect refugees, but it has not even allowed in the United Nations or international aid groups, Human Rights Watch added.
"Many Kachin refugees have already endured terrible abuses and war in Burma, only to settle into a life of dire struggle in Yunnan," Richardson said.
"Until it is safe for the Kachin to return home, the Chinese government has a responsibility to ensure their safety and well-being."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sad. Sounds familiar like when we invaded Iraq illegally and caused an exodus of millions to Syria and Jordan and simply didn¡¯t give a damn.
Jun 26, 20129:43am EDT--
krimsonpage: Using one¡¯s grandfather¡¯s pet racist phrase to justify racism,
krimsonpage: Using one¡¯s grandfather¡¯s pet racist phrase to justify racism,
is about the lamest comment I¡¯ve read on Reuters! You know! Back in Lincoln¡¯s days, even Lincoln believed that Afro-americans were inferior in intelligence. If you refuse to open up your mind to the bigotry in your family roots, and start feeling ashamed of the past horrific discrimination of American Government against Asians( namely, the recent apology by Congress, UNAMIMOUSLY BY ALL CONGRESS PERSONS, for the Chinese Exclusion Act),
then you, and YOUR ATTITUDE ONLY, are the reason for the current American decline, which we all deplore. And racists like you, will automatically be discounted, whatever you say, because you base your views on a generation who was extremely bigoted and ignorant about foreigners and other races in general.
Jun 26, 20121:37pm EDT--
What rubbish and bias is this article proposing? The violence in Myanmar is not news, somehow the neighboring country, which did NOT incite NOT participate in the violence becomes the focus!! TALK ABOUT RACIST SCAPEGOATING! What¡¯s Aung Sang Suu Kyi doing?!
What rubbish and bias is this article proposing? The violence in Myanmar is not news, somehow the neighboring country, which did NOT incite NOT participate in the violence becomes the focus!! TALK ABOUT RACIST SCAPEGOATING! What¡¯s Aung Sang Suu Kyi doing?!
How can it be a coincidence!?
When the majority gets democracy, the minority suffers!!
ALL the grand speeches she made at the Nobel Peace Prize acceptance ceremony, at Oxford where she received her doctorate ¡ª she showed VERY VERY LITTLE CONCERN ABOUT THESE MINORITY GROUPS THAT ARE DYING AT THE HANDS OF KILLERS OF HER ETHNIC GROUP, THE MAJORITY GROUP. It chills me to think of the analogy of Ghandi¡¯s India!
When India gained ¡°independence¡±, millions of Muslims and Hindus started slaughtering one another!!! When Yugoslavia gained ¡°democracy¡± from the strong man Tito, ethnic cleansing, genocide occurred in manners that were unfathomable under the previous dictatorship. Isn¡¯t it time somebody figure out how to prevent these repetitive patterns of ethnic violence when ¡°democracy¡± erupts!!
Jun 26, 20121:44pm EDT--
