HK shares drop 2.5 percent; flu fears hit airlines
2009-04-27 12:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares dropped 2.5 percent on Monday with Chinese banks weighed down by worries of strategic investor exits in the near term, while concern over a potential widespread swine flu outbreak sent airline stocks diving.
Analysts said investors were mindful of the devastating inpact that a global flu pandemic could have in the midst of a recession in major world economies. Hong Kong seemed to take the news a little harder than other regional markets on Monday, given its past brush with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), which sent the stock market down 10 percent between mid-February and late-April 2003.
"This is an economy which completely opens itself up to trade and tourism, so people are a little more fearful of the flu news here," said Andrew To, sales director with Taifook Securities.
"But the reaction hasn't been completely over the top; investors are watching to see how the disease spreads and what steps are being taken to contain it."
was down 386.68 points at 14,868.14.
The world's largest lender by market value, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (
), fell 3.8 percent on expectations of a possible sell-down when a large portion of shares of a foreign strategic holding emerge from a lock-in period on Tuesday.
), Allianz (
) can trade a part of their stakes in the world's most valuable bank and many investors expect them to cash out, at least in part. The lender is due to announce its first-quarter earnings later on Monday.
Other mainland bank shares also dropped on Monday, with China Construction Bank (
) down 2.3 percent. Bank of America can sell a portion of its shares in China's No.3 lender early in May.
Li Ka-shing's Hutchison Telecommunications 2332.HK dropped 44.9 percent to HK$1.34 as shareholders who buy the stock from Monday ownwards will not be eligible for shares in the company's newly spun-off unit, which will hold its Hong Kong and Macau telephone business following a separate listing. [ID:nHKG37583]
of top mainland companies was 3.1 percent lower at 8,702.78.
Worries about a global swine flu pandemic boosted pharmaceuticals stocks while beating down pork product makers, trade, travel and tourism stocks.
), which makes antibiotic finished drugs on the mainland soared 15.3 percent, while drugmaker Guangzhou Pharmaceutical (
), a manufacturer of pork products, dropped 7.7 percent, while conglomerate China Resources Enterprises (
), which has a pork producing unit, fell 4.6 percent. Analysts said this was a knee-jerk reaction to widespread concern about the virus.
) down 8.3 percent, the stock had shed nearly 30 percent between mid-Feb and late April in 2003 during the SARS outbreak.
China's flagcarrier Air China (
) retreated 11.3 percent, while China Southern Airlines (
) slid 14.1 percent, with a rebound in crude oil prices adding to their woes.
Shipping stocks sank, with bulk carrier China Cosco (
(Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Chris Lewis)
