FACTBOX-Asia moves to ward off new flu virus
2009-04-26 23:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Asia, a continent that has battled deadly viruses such as the H5N1 bird flu and SARS in recent years, has been taking steps to ward off the new swine flu virus.
Swine flu has killed 103 people in Mexico. There are 20 cases in the United States and six in Canada, and possible cases as far afield as Europe, Israel and New Zealand.
Oil prices fell over 2 percent towards $50 a barrel, paring some of the previous session's near 4 percent gain, on fears of a global flu pandemic after the outbreak. Nervousness about the outbreak knocked the dollar to its lowest level in a month against the yen, as traders in Asia fled into alternative currencies like the yen and the Swiss franc. Some Asian stock markets slipped. But analysts don't see a major fallout until more is known about the virus or if it spreads dramatically.
"At this point ... the impact is likely to be limited until we know a bit more," said Nagayuki Yamagishi, strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
A New Zealand teacher just returned from Mexico was being treated in hospital with flu-like symptoms, as three students from a second school party were also showing symptoms, health officials said. The teacher was part of a group of 25 from an Auckland secondary school that spent three weeks in Mexico, and was expected to be discharged later on Monday.
Ten from that group have been confirmed as having Influenza A and are being treated as likely swine flu sufferers. Results of tests are expected by Tuesday. Initial tests on a group of 14 from a second school in Auckland, which had also just returned from Mexico, have shown three with signs of Influenza-A.
Australia's first suspected cases of swine flu, involving two people reported to have just returned from Mexico, have tested negative for the disease, a government official said.
The two suspected cases, one in Brisbane and another on the Gold Coast further south, had caused jitters in the foreign-exchange market, causing the local currency to pull-back from offshore highs, analysts said.
The ministry says anyone returning from these areas with symptoms such as a fever, coughing or runny nose should report themselves on arrival to quarantine authorities.
South Korea at the weekend advised its citizens to avoid travel to three regions in Mexico, including Mexico City due to the swine flu outbreak, the Foreign Ministry said.
Shares in South Korean providers of chicken, beef and fish products and major pharmaceutical firms gained in early trading in Seoul as fears over the swine flu outbreak deepened.
Vietnam started scanning temperatures and looking for signs of respiratory infections from people arriving from the United States, Canada and Mexico at Ho Chi Minh City's international airport and at the city's port.
People should take precautions similar to those in 2003 when Asia battled SARS, such as wearing face masks and reporting to the authorities any fever and coughing whose cause is unknown, said Nguyen Tran Hien, head of the National Institute for Hygiene and Epidemiology.
SINGAPORE Singapore started screening the temperatures of passengers from the United States on Monday. The scanners will measure the temperature of passengers just before they undergo immigration checks, the Ministry of Health said. Passengers with a higher-than-normal temperature will undergo a more thorough medical assessment.
Japan's Narita airport, east of Tokyo, ramped up temperature checks for travellers from Mexico using thermographic imaging equipment.
Japan's foreign ministry issued an advisory asking those who were going to Mexico to consider if such trips were necessary. (Reporting by Asian bureaux; Editing Dean Yates)
