PRESS DIGEST - British business - April 25
2009-04-24 23:35:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
YOU'VE TRIED MY CHURCHILL FOOD, NOW TRY MY CHURCHILL PLATES.
) has acquired the rights to produce Jamie Oliver-branded crockery from the china maker Royal Worcester, which fell into administration last November. Separately, fellow Stoke-based pottery firm Portmeirion (
) has acquired the Royal Worcester and Spode Brands for 3.2 million pounds. Portmeirion said the purchase would generate at least seven million pounds of additional sales in the remaining eight months of the year and 12 million pounds every year after that. "We have got worldwide distribution. We can take these brands and market them properly," said Dick Steele, chief executive of Portmeirion.
Dawson Holdings DWN.L has been dropped as the distributor of IPC Media's magazines, which include titles such as the NME, Marie Claire and Horse & Hound. Marketforce, which prints IPC Media's magazines, has agreed a new distribution deal worth around 330 million pounds with Smith News and John Menzies. The new arrangement is expected to be announced on Monday or Tuesday next week. The loss of the IPC contract for Dawson follows decisions by Telegraph Newspapers and Cosmag not to renew deals. Dawson also revealed it has failed to retain an 84 million pound contract with Associated Newspapers. Dawson said it may have to cut 2,800 jobs nationally as a result of the contract losses.
) ended its contract with the firm. Hain said it would continue to supply 40 local M&S stores on a trial basis and that the firm's factory in Luton would remain open until next April. It is understood Northern Foods NFDS.L and Uniq UNUNI.L will win the additional trade. Irwin Simon, chief executive and president of Hain Celestial, said, "We can assure you that we are working very hard to secure new business and are fully committed to building the business." An M&S Spokesman said discussions with Hain had begun 14 months ago: "We have done everything we can to support Hain, delaying the transfer and agreeing to a significantly phased withdrawal to allow Hain time to try and secure new customers."
Royal Mail [GBPO.UL] has written to unions informing them the company is facing a "tight financial position" and that all employees across the Post Office, Parcelforce and other parts of the business, will face a pay freeze this year. Jon Millidge, the company's director of human resources, said the recent fall in the RPI meant a wage freeze was reasonable. Union leaders said it was unacceptable a company run by the official with the best wage in the public sector should freeze the pay of junior staff.
DOUBTS OVER CAPITAL & REGIONAL'S FUTURE
Commercial property investor and fund manager Capital & Regional has reported an annual pre-tax loss of 516.3 million pounds and warned that there is "material uncertainty" over its ability to continue as a going concern. Chief executive Hugh Scott-Barnett called the results "deeply disappointing". The company is close to completing a fund-raising and renegotiation of banking facilities in its Junction and X-Leisure funds. Shares, down 90 per cent since December 2007, closed down 0.25 pence at 40 pence.
) is in discussions to buy Tiscali's (
) UK broadband business for around 200 million pounds, less than half the price rejected by Tiscali last year. Tiscali said it is in talks over the "disposal of its activities in the UK" and expects a binding offer from Carphone before the end of the month. Tiscali's banks are pressuring the Italian Internet company into a sale to help reduce its 500 million euro debt burden. Earlier this month, auditors Ernst & Young refused to sign off Tiscali's accounts.
), owner of the struggling private equity company Candover, has said it has been contacted by several bidders looking to purchase the firm. The French investment group Eurazeo (
In a plan conceived by the communications minister's lieutenant, Kip Meek, the government is considering capping the amount of radio spectrum owned by Britain's mobile phone companies in an attempt to thrash out a deal that will fulfil Lord Carter's ambition of broadband for all. The deal would allow Vodafone (
) and O2 OTOW.OB to retain their ownership of the part of the spectrum they acquired in the eighties, but would disallow them from further ownership of the airwaves when the auction for discontinued analogue spectrum takes place in 2012, unless other holdings are sold off.
JJB Sports JJB.L is hoping to avoid collapse with a ground-breaking rent agreement with its landlords. The sports chain is trying to negotiate a company voluntary arrangement with its creditors in order to stay in business. A meeting with its creditors will be held in London on Monday, where the retailer must secure the backing of at least 75 percent -- measured by the value of cash they are owed. If unsuccessful, the company is likely to go immediately into administration, placing 10,000 jobs at risk.
) is to report a 4.5 billion pound profit from buying back some of its bonds in a move that will also bolster its crucial tier-one capital ratio by almost 0.9 percent. The nationalised bank is expected to realise an aggregate pre-tax gain of 4.5 billion pounds, which it will include in its results for the six months ending June 30. A number of other banks have also been buying back bonds and exchanging them for others. RBS said 61 percent of its investors participated in the offer to swap 5.75 billion pounds of bonds and 64 percent of dollar and euro-denominated bonds.
