PRESS DIGEST = British business - April 26
2009-04-26 01:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun  EDT
Liberty International LII.L is intending to raise up to 500 million pounds through a placing that is expected to come as early as this week, as it seeks to bolster its ailing balance sheet. The shopping centre developer said in February it intended to raise up to 350 million pounds through an equity raising and property sales, but the board has decided it needs extra funds. The move has the support of founder and majority shareholder Sir Donald Gordon. Liberty is also pressing ahead with asset sales and has sold 170 million pounds of non-core assets so far this year.
Rio Tinto's (
) new chairman Jan Du Plessis has agreed to meet in May with leading shareholders angry at plans to raise 12.3 billion pounds from Chinese state-owned Chinalco. Two days have been set aside to meet with up to 20 of the group's biggest institutional investors who believe the proposed deal violates their pre-emption rights. One investor said: "The world has changed so much since the Chinalco deal was agreed that Rio no longer needs to go down this route."
The John Lewis Partnership [JLP.UL] is said to have ignored warnings that its former textile divisions could collapse leaving workers with no redundancy payment. This comes despite John Lewis having given workers verbal assurances at the time of the sale that their redundancy terms would be guaranteed for at least two years. Employees at Carlisle-based Stead McAlpin and JH Britwistle say they have lost out on up to 40,000 pounds of redundancy payments following the collapse of its parent company, Apex. Statutory redundancy rules mean the workers may only receive a fifth of what they would have received under the John Lewis partnership scheme. Three MPs from local constituencies have tabled an Early Day Motion, urging other members to put pressure on the retail chain to honour the assurances originally given.
) is to be sold off by the end of the year, with advisers at Credit Suisse drawing up plans to split the nationalised bank in two. The measure is part of a fast-track government plan to recoup some of the hundreds of billions of pounds of taxpayers' money that has been ploughed into the troubled banking sector. Northern Rock's most toxic loans will be siphoned off into a "bad bank" that will remain in government hands. The bank's 20 billion pounds of customer savings and network of 70 branches will be put up for sale as soon as the split is finalised.
Southern Water, Anglian Water and South East Water, three of Britain's biggest water companies, have received emergency cash injections from their buyout backers to keep them from breaching their debt agreements. They have respectively received 85 million pounds, 115 million pounds and 15 million pounds in the past month. The three firms were bought in debt-fuelled deals totalling more than seven billion pounds at the top of the buyout boom in 2006, and have been troubled by a drop in the value of their assets which are linked to the Retail Prices Index.
Private equity group 3i QPE.L is preparing a discounted rights issue through which it hopes to raise 700 million pounds. An announcement is expected alongside results next month, though 3i has yet to discuss its capital raising plans with its largest institutional shareholders and the board of the group has yet to formally approve the plans. If it proceeds with the rights issue, the group will look to use the fresh capital to exploit investment opportunities as asset prices tumble.
) has introduced a clawback in directors' contracts that could force them to pay back bonuses, a first among companies on the FTSE 100 index. G4S said: "Any deferred shares awarded and dividends arising from these shares could be clawed back if the 2009 profit figures are restated materially in line with a recommendation by the Audit Committee within two years of the year-end." GlaxoSmithKline (
POOR CREDIT RATING FOR GATWICK BIDS SET TO SCUPPER BAA'S SELL-OFF
Credit ratings agency Standard & Poor's has told one of the three bidders for Gatwick Airport that it will not give an appropriate credit rating to any bid structure containing debt equivalent to more than half of the airport's 1.6 billion pound regulated asset base. Standard & Poor's told Global Infrastructure Partners that its Gatwick bid would receive a BBB- rating, the lowest investment grade. BAA (
). Geronimo currently operates 22 pubs in London and is thought to have secured 10 million pounds in funding from its private equity and banking backers to facilitate the purchase. Punch Taverns is expected to reveal a trading upturn when it reports its results next week. Last year the company was forced to put 500 of its pubs up for sale amid crippling debt obligations. Separately, rival pub group Bar Room Bar Ltd has been forced into administration after what its administrators, Zolfo Cooper, described as ongoing cash-flow difficulties.
A report into the safety of Britain's fleet of Nimrod spy planes, carried out late last year by the defence engineering company QinetiQ, exposed almost 1,500 faults -- 26 of which threatened the aircraft's safety. The failings were discovered after the RAF ordered the inspection to be carried out in response to comments made by the coroner investigating the death of 14 servicemen in Afghanistan who died when leaking fuel caused their aircraft to explode in September 2006. Some of the families of those that died are now taking legal action against the Ministry of Defence. An MoD spokesman said: "A team made up of BAE/QinetiQ/MoD has thoroughly investigated all of QuinetiQ's findings and are unanimous in their conclusion that the aircraft remains safe to fly. We are implementing all of the team's recommendations."
), the new owner of HBOS HAL_pa.L, is awarding its staff an average three percent pay rise, although it is believed that some senior executives will be receiving higher raises. "People at the top of these banks should not be taking rewards unavailable to most staff," said TUC general secretary Brendan Barber. "We have to get away from a culture that says those at the top take huge salary rises while ordinary workers lose jobs and are told to accept wage freezes."
), through the launching of a new carvery pub format. However, a lack of funds means the refurbishment must be done on a strict budget, following an announcement in January that the capital expenditure budget for the year to September would be cut by 20 percent. Nevertheless, Mike Tye, head of the company's Spirit Group managed arm, considers the measure necessary.
Transform, the HBOS-backed company which is the largest plastic surgery firm in the UK, is in dire straits, having been put up for sale last month after it was disclosed that the firm made a 137.7 million pound loss in the year to September 2007. Two potential buyers, the private equity firm Elysian Capital and Rutland Partners, have both baulked at purchasing the company. It is looking ever more likely that Transform will have no other option but to be placed under the direct control of HBOS, which will back the current management and attempt to engineer a reversal in fortune.
