China to drive Australia military upgrade - paper
2009-04-24 23:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China's growing military strength and strategic competition among Asia's great powers will drive a huge upgrade of Australia's military in a new defence blueprint, a newspaper report said on Saturday.
Australian defence planners will next week outline a A$100 billion ($72 billion) upgrade of the close U.S. ally's military, including doubling its submarine fleet and building powerful new surface warships with ballistic missile defence, the Australian newspaper said.
The defence white paper, which will guide Australia's strategic planning for coming decades, could upset China.
Beijing has plans to develop a so-called blue water navy to help secure access to vital resource routes, including sea lanes to energy and mineral suppliers in Australia.
Australia has also signed a security pact with China-rival Japan, linking both countries into annual defence talks with the United States and which China has criticised as an attempt at strategic confinement.
Australia has already begun a A$60 billion upgrade of the military, including new air warfare destroyers, stealth fighter aircraft, amphibious assault carriers, tanks and helicopters.
But with the country teetering on the brink of recession, the centre-left government has been under pressure to rein-in spending amid market expectations that cumulative borrowings could reach A$300 billion in the May 12 budget.
The military would be largely spared from budget cuts at the insistence of China-expert Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, the Australian said.
) would be delayed by a year to 2014-15, it said, while the military would have to find reductions to offset the large equipment shopping list.
The strategy document would double Australia's submarine fleet to 12 from 2025 to allow seven boats at any time to be on station in the country's north, close to key maritime straits running through the Indonesian archipelago.
It would also allow for construction of eight 7,000 tonne warships equipped with ballistic missile defence systems, as well as a new fleet of long-range maritime surveillance aircraft.
Australia's military should be capable of taking the lead security role in Australia's neighbourhood, particularly the South Pacific, as well as having the ability to deploy military forces further afield, the report said. ($1=1.391 Australian Dollar) (Reporting by Rob Taylor; Editing by Alex Richardson)
