G7 offers hope global economic decline easing
2009-04-24 15:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Finance leaders from the world's largest economies offered faint hope on Friday that the global economic crisis might be easing, but fresh data showed countries such as Britain and Spain still face huge hardship.
The Group of Seven rich nations' finance ministers meeting in Washington reckon the pace of economic decline has slowed and pledged to clean up banks' bad assets to restore the flow of credit, according to a draft statement obtained by Reuters.
"Recent data suggest that the pace of decline in our economies has slowed and some signs of stabilization are emerging," the draft communique said.
The draft came out ahead of meetings in Washington of the G7 leaders and those of the Group of 20, which includes major developing nations such as China, India and Brazil. It echoed comments by U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner as well as reports out of the United States and Germany.
Geithner said the global downturn showed signs of abating, while a key gauge of business sentiment in Germany, one of western Europe's hardest-hit economies, rose more than expected from a record low. In the United States, new orders for durable goods slipped far less than expected in March, while analysts said the housing market seemed to be stabilizing.
Earlier, Ford Motor Co (
However, news from some European countries and U.S. manufacturers showed the suffering is likely to worsen in the near term.
Britain's economy shrank at its fastest annual pace since 1980, and in Spain, until recently one of Europe's greatest economic successes, the unemployment rate soared to over 17 percent.
), Honeywell International Inc (
FREEFALL OVER?
The draft communique from the G7 finance ministers, which is expected to be signed on Friday, said economic activity should recover late this year but the outlook remained weak and there was a risk the economy may still worsen.
Supervisors said "stress tests" that regulators conducted at major banks were aimed at ensuring they have enough capital on hand to continue to lend in potentially bleaker conditions, and are not to be seen as a measure of their current solvency. The stress tests' actual results won't be issued until May 4.
Meanwhile, Geithner told the Financial Times there were signs of improvement in global markets and the world economy, but admitted the outlook for this year remained challenging.
"In recent weeks, there have been some encouraging signs that the global economic downturn may be slackening," he wrote in the Financial Times. "Conditions in some financial markets have improved and the decline in world trade may be abating."
Munich's Ifo economic institute said corporate sentiment rose in April to its highest in five months. Its business climate index, based on a monthly poll of around 7,000 firms, rose to 83.7 from 82.2 in March.
New orders for U.S. durable goods slipped 0.8 percent in March, far below the 1.5 percent dip analysts had forecast. Meanwhile, although sales of newly built U.S. single-family homes dropped 0.6 percent in March, analysts were cheered by a plummet in inventories.
Elsewhere, however, the parachutes have yet to open. Britain's economy shrank 4.1 percent year-on-year in the first quarter. With Britons reeling from the toughest budget in a generation this week, the Office for National Statistics reported that gross domestic product fell 1.9 percent in the quarter, the worst since late 1979.
In Spain, unemployment soared to 4 million in the first quarter, almost doubling in a year as the recession destroys jobs more quickly than anywhere else in Europe, official data showed.
In Detroit, Ford said it was on track to at least break even in 2011 and did not expect to seek U.S. government aid.
The automaker, which has weathered diving auto sales better than its peers General Motors (
) and Chrysler, said it burned through $3.7 billion in the first quarter but that that was a sharp drop from the second half of 2008.
Ford shares were up 12.5 percent in afternoon trading in New York, but the economic storm seems to be far from over.
With less than a week for Chrysler to clinch a survival deal with Italy's Fiat (
), the U.S. automaker is readying a bankruptcy plan but remains focused on reaching an alliance. Fiat has emerged as a potential buyer for GM's Opel unit too as GM also races to avoid bankruptcy.
(Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by Ben Klayman; Editing by James Dalgleish)
