Oil, stocks rise on results, economic data
2009-04-24 16:43:00.0
Oil, stocks rise on results, economic data | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Oil, stocks rise on results, economic data
Fri  EDT
Oil jumped above $51 a barrel on rising equity optimism, a weaker dollar and government data showing the inventory of U.S. homes for sale plummeted at a record pace in March.
Finance leaders from the world's largest economies, meeting in Washington, said recent data suggest that the pace of decline has slowed and some signs of stabilization are emerging.
The U.S. data "is adding some encouragement to the idea that maybe the economy is flattening out here at the bottom," said Kim Rupert, managing director of global fixed-income analysis at Action Economics LLC in San Francisco.
The Nasdaq eked out a seventh straight week of gains, but the S&P 500 pulled back from a rally of more than 2 percent late in the session, snapping a six-week winning streak, ending up 1.68 percent.
Rising stocks nipped the safe-haven appeal of government debt as investors worried about a spate of U.S. debt supply next week. But euro zone government bonds rose after Britain's economy posted its sharpest first-quarter decline in 30 years.
The unemployment rate in Spain soared to above 17 percent, also helping European debt prices to rise.
) provided the biggest boost to the Dow, a day after aggressive cost-cutting helped its results beat expectations.
"The earnings news last night as well as this morning in general appears to be relatively positive," said Michael Sheldon, chief market strategist at RDM Financial in Westport, Connecticut.
"At the core, the durable goods orders this morning also provided further indication that the manufacturing sector is showing tentative signs of improvement," he said.
Inventories of new homes last month contracted more strongly than expected, raising hopes the economic cycle may have bottomed.
A 5.2 percent monthly change in inventories of new U.S. homes was the largest drop in more than 45 years, while the year-on-year plunge of 33.7 percent was the largest on record.
closed up 119.23 points, or 1.50 percent, at 8,076.29. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
added 14.31 points, or 1.68 percent, at 866.23. The Nasdaq Composite Index
gained 42.08 points, or 2.55 percent, at 1,694.29.
index of top European shares ended 2.3 percent higher at 810.38 points, but fell for the week. It was the first weekly loss in the past seven weeks.
The euro rose for a fourth day against the U.S. dollar to trade at a one-week high after German corporate sentiment in April rose to its best level in five months, boosting hopes the downturn in the euro zone's largest economy may be bottoming.
The German Ifo business climate index rose to 83.7 in April from 82.2 last month, beating forecasts for 82.3.
The dollar fell against a basket of major currencies, with the U.S. Dollar Index .DXY down 0.75 percent at 84.764.
Against the yen, the dollar fell 0.95 percent to 97.12.
Oil has been influenced by dollar fluctuations and stocks for much of the week, as an indicator of future economic strength and of the potential for higher oil demand. But price gains were capped by historically high inventories of crude.
"Our market's been strong and taking direction from equities," said Addison Armstrong, analyst at Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut.
Gold surged to a three-week high before easing, boosted by the prospect of further purchases by China after the country said it had been buying the precious metal since 2003.
"The massive accumulation of foreign exchange reserves meant gold as a proportion of total reserves had fallen below 1 percent compared with a norm of about 2 percent," said Michael Lewis, head of commodities research at Deutsche Bank.
Asian stocks fell on earnings disappointments, snapping the region's longest streak of weekly gains in 18 months.
Japan's Nikkei average
fell 1.6 percent, underperforming the broad regional downdraft, while MSCI's index of Asia Pacific .MIAPJ0000PUS shares excluding Japan fell 0.4 percent.
(Reporting by Leah Schnurr, Vivianne Rodrigues, Chris Reese and Frank Tang in New York; Sitaraman Shankar, Ikuko Kao in London; writing by Herbert Lash; editing by Dan Grebler)
