WRAPUP 2-EU must act now to make gas pipeline reality
2009-04-24 11:50:00.0
(Reuters) - European governments and gas consumers must back the Nabucco gas pipeline with cash and contracts now if Europe is to cut its reliance on Russian gas, an energy security conference heard on Friday.
The EU-backed 7.9 billion euro ($10.41 billion) project to pump gas from the Caspian region via Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary to Austria needs turning words into action fast to become a reality after years of squabbling over terms.
"It is time for the poker game to end and decisions to be made," Jeremy Ellis, head of business development at RWE Supply and Trading (
), a Nabucco shareholder, told the forum.
"Europe and Turkey must now show their hands; the supply countries and investors will not wait forever...The gas reserves in the Middle East and the Caspian offer an opportunity for opening the southern corridor."
Four months after a cut-off in Russian supplies to Europe that idled factories and left thousands of people without heating, the 27-member bloc has done little to line up supplies and reach political and financial agreement on Nabucco.
European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso told the forum he was keen to see work advancing rapidly. But the EU has so far not given Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and other potential suppliers an incentive to supply the project.
A final investment decision, expected in 2010, to build the pipeline should spur a multi-national search for gas to fill it, Nabucco project leader Reinhard Mitschek said. [nLO092932]
Suppliers, however, warned time was running out as competition for resources from the central Asian region was growing with Russia, China and Iran buying up the available gas.
"Nabucco is one of competing buyer groups...but the key is we have no knowledge about the transit," Kristian Hausken, president of StatoilHydro (
) Azerbaijan, told Reuters.
) control Azeri's Shakh-Deniz gas field, which is expected to be the main supplier for Nabucco.
"There is no use to talk about who you want to buy from unless you don't know how to get there," Hausken added.
"Time is flying, we can go north," Hausken warned.
The forum in Sofia, designed to speed up work, will achieve little on a political level due to the absence of Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan and presidents of Caspian countries.
Analysts have said Central Asian producers, fearing Russia's anger, would be reluctant to make any promises for Nabucco on paper unless Brussels presented them with a set of guarantees on its timing, transit arrangements and financing.
), which is planning its own North and South Stream pipelines to bypass transit countries and bring gas to Europe, also criticised the EU for not doing enough to commit to diversification of routes.
"We need clear signals from consumers about where, when and what quantities they want of additional gas," Stanislav Tsygankov, head of external relation at Gazprom, said.
"If Europe is in doubt about the long-term need, we are ready to turn to Asian markets," he told the Sofia summit.
Last year, Gazprom made an offer to buy Azeri gas at European market prices and last month it signed a deal with Baku on starting talks on buying gas for exports to Europe from 2010.
Bulgaria, the country worst hit by the January cut-off in Russian gas supplies, called for an acceleration of big pipeline projects to ease the region's heavy dependence on Russian gas.
"The pure economic logic says that most likely we will see a delay in these projects and some of them might even be abandoned," Economy and Energy Minister Petar Dimitrov said.
"We all see the sharp decline in demand due to the economic crisis. But the political logic says "no", we should not allow delays. On the contrary, we must speed them up."
Sofia also urged rich west European consumers and international financial institutions to fund Nabucco. (Additional reporting by Tsvetelia Ilieva; editing by Peter Blackburn and Sue Thomas)
