UPDATE 3-JFE Q4 profit tumbles 83 pct, gives no forecast
2009-04-24 06:08:00.0
(Reuters) - JFE Holdings Inc (
), the world's third-biggest steelmaker, reported an 83 percent slide in quarterly profit, hit by a double whammy of crumbling global steel demand and a stronger yen hurting its exports.
JFE did not give profit forecasts for the year ahead, saying uncertainties over steel demand and iron ore prices make it difficult to determine its outlook.
Asia's steel sector may have seen the worst of its output declines, but Japanese steelmakers, led by world No.2 Nippon Steel Corp (
), could see further steep falls in profit as automakers facing a global slump in sales want cheaper steel, while a strong yen reduces returns on export sales.
JFE shares fell after the results, ending down 3.3 percent on Friday. The stock closed down 3.1 percent at 2,825 yen, moving in line with the iron and steel subindex .ISTEL.T.
"Considering how hard it is to read the economic climate, these results by themselves don't make me want to go out and buy steel shares," said Mitsushige Akino, Chief Fund Manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management.
) have yet to agree on price contracts for supplies in the year to March 2010 after demand for cars, electronics and machinery crumbled and global steel prices more than halved from record highs last year.
JFE's Senior Vice President Kohei Wakabayashi told a news conference that the company would cut output by 40 percent again in April-March but he expects to see a gradual improvement in July-September and a further recovery in the second half.
) had agreed to cut steel prices by around 10 percent, a smaller cut than expected that boosted JFE stock to six-month highs.
JFE, Japan's second-biggest steelmaker which also competes with South Korea's POSCO (
) and China's Baosteel (
), posted 20 billion yen ($206 million) in pretax recurring profit in January-March on sales of 838 billion yen, down 17 percent year-on-year.
For the year to next March, 12 analysts' forecasts ranged from a profit of 200 billion yen to a loss of 120 billion yen. JFE's pretax recurring profit in the year ended March 31 came to 400.6 billion yen, down 20 percent.
Many analysts expect that the slump in sales of cars, which use a lot of Japanese mills' high-end steel, will weigh heavily on their earnings in the next few years.
Government stimulus steps are unlikely to help Japan mills much as they are less involved in construction steel than Asian rivals like Baosteel. POSCO, the sole blast furnace operator in South Korea, a net steel importer, is expected to enjoy higher operating rates than other Asian firms.
POSCO, the world's No. 4 steelmaker, this month said its quarterly profit dropped 71 percent to 373 billion won ($279 million) and cut its 2009 output and sales targets by 15 percent and 18 percent, respectively. [ID:nSEO4545]
Shares of JFE have gained more than 20 percent since the start of this year, outperforming the iron and steel subindex's .ISTEL.T nearly 17 percent rise. (Additional reporting by Mayumi Negishi and Sachi Izumi; Editing by Dhara Ranasinghe) ($1=97.22 Yen)
