FOREX-Yen hits 4-wk high vs dollar on position unwinding
2009-04-24 02:22:00.0
(Reuters) - The yen hit its highest level in about four weeks against the dollar on Friday, driven by the unwinding of money-losing positions, as the market awaited developments on U.S. banks' stress tests.
The yen gained broadly, with the Australian dollar falling 1.2 percent AUDJPY=R and sterling dropping 1.4 percent GBPJPY=R against the Japanese currency.
But investors have been unwinding those bets since early April as a series of uncertainties loomed, including the findings of the stress tests and the fate of struggling U.S. automakers, and traders said position cutting continued.
"Some stops were hit on dollar/yen," said a trader for a European bank. The dollar ran into selling around 97.50 yen, a point it failed to breach earlier this week, as traders moved to limit their losses, he said.
after dropping as low as 96.90 yen on trading platform EBS, its weakest since March 30.
Some of the losses came as China announced a rise in its gold reserves, although it said it would stick to major currencies and high-quality assets as it diversified its foreign exchange reserves. [ID:nPEK307477] [nBJC000313]
Takahide Nagasaki, chief FX strategist for Daiwa Securities SMBC, said any diversification was unlikely to take place quickly.
"I doubt that China will immediately sell the dollar or U.S. Treasuries," Nagasaki said, adding that any sudden shift would only work against China, which has large holdings of U.S. debt.
The euro fell 0.7 percent against the yen to 127.95 yen EURJPY=R, still some way off of a one-month low of 126.10 yen reached earlier this week.
, having come off a one-month low of $1.2885 hit earlier in the week.
Market players said investors were reluctant to aggressively expand their risk-taking as they await the U.S. authorities' unveiling of the stress test methodology for banks, and watch as Chrysler tries for a deal with Fiat (
"Among those negative factors, risk aversion is increasing and the yen is the beneficiary," said Toru Umemoto, chief FX strategist Japan at Barclays Capital.
"I think short-yen was very popular in the past few weeks, and this yen appreciation is mainly brought by unwinding of the short positions," he added.
A number of such Japanese mutual funds are being launched this month, with some coming next week.
Separately, the Nikkei business daily said on Friday that Japan's Financial Services Agency was likely to impose limits on the amount of leverage that investors can use when trading currencies on margin.
Margin trading with leverage of around 100 to 600 times collateral has been increasing recently, and the FSA is looking at limiting the maximum amount of leverage to around 20 to 30 times, Nikkei said, adding that the new limit may come into effect as early as this summer. [ID:nT302676]
Group of Seven finance ministers meet in Washington on Friday, but currencies are not expected to be a prominent topic of the talks. [ID:nTKU103380] (Additional reporting by Charlotte Cooper; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
