Obama slams Romney's jobs record on campaign trail
2012-06-25 16:54:00.0
Obama slams Romney's jobs record on campaign trail | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Obama slams Romney's jobs record on campaign trail
Fri, Jun 22 2012
Thu, Jun 21 2012
Thu, Jun 21 2012
Tue, Jun 19 2012
Tue, Jun 19 2012
U.S. President Barack Obama speaks at a campaign event at Oyster River High School in Durham, New Hampshire, June 25, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Larry Downing
DURHAM, New Hampshire
Mon  EDT
DURHAM, New Hampshire
In remarks to a rally in New Hampshire, the Democratic president seized on a Washington Post report that Bain Capital, the firm that Romney founded and led, had helped U.S. companies become "pioneers" in shipping work overseas.
"So yesterday his advisers were asked about this and they tried to clear this up by telling us there was actually a difference between outsourcing and offshoring," Obama told a fired-up crowd of supporters crowded into a high-school gym.
"If you're a worker whose job went overseas, you don't need somebody trying to explain to you the difference between outsourcing and offshoring. You need somebody who is going to wake up every single day and fight for American jobs and investment here in the United States. That's what you need. That's why I'm running," he said, to loud applause.
Andrea Saul, a spokeswoman for the Romney campaign, has accused the president of using "false and discredited attacks" on Romney's business record to divert attention from his own economic failures.
"Mitt Romney was a successful businessman and governor with a decades-long record of helping to create American jobs, in contrast to President Obama's hostility to free enterprise that has left millions of Americans out of work," Saul said.
New Hampshire, though small, could be pivotal to whether Obama wins a second White House term in the November 6 vote, especially with Romney competing fiercely for larger election battlegrounds like Florida and Ohio.
Romney, one of the wealthiest men to ever seek the White House, has argued that his business record makes him better equipped to spur U.S. growth and bring down high unemployment than Obama, whose background is in law and community organizing.
Voter perceptions of the economy and candidates' economic leadership are expected to dominate the election.
The state delivers four electoral college votes in November. To claim the White House, either Obama or Romney will need a total of 270 electoral college votes.
Later on Monday, Obama travels to Massachusetts for more campaign events. He will campaign in Georgia and Florida on Tuesday before returning to Washington.
(Additional reporting by Laura MacInnis in Washington; Editing by David Brunnstrom)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Memo to Obama: you are the incumbent. No one care¡¯s about the incumbent¡¯s jobs record, they care about yours. And it looks bad.
Jun 25, 20125:05pm EDT--
No one care¡¯s about the challenger¡¯s jobs record, they care about the incumbent¡¯s jobs record. Tick, Tick, Tick¡­
Jun 25, 20125:06pm EDT--
Sensibility: ¡°Memo to Obama: you are the incumbent. No one care¡¯s about the incumbent¡¯s jobs record, they care about yours.¡± This doesn¡¯t even make sense. All you ever do is attack Obama like a shill for Romney, and yet you never prove capable of backing up your attacks. You blame Obama for the divisiveness in Washington, yet you fail to suggest what you would have had Obama do differently, or what you¡¯d have ROMNEY do differently. What has Romney been saying on the campaign trail that leads you to believe that he could end the divisiveness in Washington? I haven¡¯t heard him even talk about the divisiveness in our government. Amazingly, you blame Obama for Congress¡¯s refusal to pass comprehensive immigration reform, yet you can¡¯t explain why. You blame Obama for EVERYTHING and never defend your accusations with facts. It¡¯s all BS stemming from your hatred for our first African-American President. You claim you voted for him, but that¡¯s clearly BS because there¡¯s nothing he¡¯s done to earn your hatred. You can only hate him for what he is.
Jun 25, 20126:16pm EDT--
