Focus on basics key to Asia convertible bonds revival
2009-04-24 03:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
Many companies, mainly smaller ones, from China to India tapped the cheap funding source to raise capital during the bull markets of 2006 and 2007, with highly leveraged hedge funds happy to buy up the aggressively priced offerings.
When equity valuations cratered last year, the investors were left holding securities that had no equity value and traded like debt instruments which were in some cases under threat of default.
"We are seeing the first signs of a comeback in the convertible market," said Viswas Raghavan, managing director and head of international capital markets at JP Morgan.
"And what you're seeing is a lot of interest in outright, non-hedged convertible buying. This goes back to a 1990s-style of convertible investing where you saw dedicated convertible funds buying convertibles on a long-only, un-hedged basis, looking at converts as a defensive way to play the equity," Raghavan said.
Issuance of convertibles in Asia excluding Japan has dried up after peaking at $35.3 billion from 172 issuers during 2007, according to Thomson Reuters data. This year through April 8, $1.3 billion was raised in the region, a drop of 87 percent from the same period a year earlier.
Demand from hedge funds, which used convertible arbitrage strategies to lock-in profits ahead of the conversion by selling shares, was also hurt by crackdowns on short-selling.
"The problem is your traditional buyers -- hedge funds -- are no longer active," said Mike Djen, manager of the Ludgate Hill Asian Arbitrage Fund in Hong Kong.
That is also driving the need for change in the way deals are structured, as hedge funds had the appetite to buy bonds which had aggressive conversion levels.
"It will take some time for long-only fund managers to go back and revisit this asset class because it has been very much dominated by hedge funds in the past," said Nomura strategist Sean Darby.
Would-be issuers in beaten-down industries such as real estate, meanwhile, have little pricing power when bonds in rivals like Chinese property developers Hopson Development Holdings (
Indeed, the price at which the bonds could be converted to stock is so high that Hopson shares have to more than quadruple and Country Garden's shares would need to more than treble for their bonds to reflect any equity value.
The conversion premium -- a measure of how much the underlying stock price would need to appreciate for the convertible bond to regain equity conversion value -- for Asia ex-Japan convertible bonds is north of 200 percent on average, according to Morgan Stanley.
"A lot of the people who want to issue converts find it difficult because pricing of their peers will make the issue so unattractive," said Ludgate's Djen.
Bankers at UBS said a market for new CB issuance is poised to re-emerge, with plain vanilla structures to lead the way.
"The first few issuances are going to be the really large-cap, liquid names with strong credits," said Harish Raman, head of equity-linked capital markets for Asia at UBS.
For other issuers, investors will demand features that provide protection against plunging stocks and debt defaults.
"Once we get out of that range of big issuers, we are likely to see structures with financial covenants, security, high-yield type covenants and conversion price resets," Raman said.
Last month, for example, top South Korean mobile operator SK Telecom (
Viktor Hjort, credit analyst at Morgan Stanley, does not expect a flood of new convertible issuance.
"If you want to issue, you have to offer a combination of yields or coupon which will be different to the past, where zero-coupon was the main feature," he said.
"You will also have to offer an equity upside which you can't get from the existing bonds," Hjort added.
(Additional reporting by Michael Flaherty; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
