WRAPUP 6-Nomura books $2.2 bln Q4 loss, better days seen
2009-04-24 07:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Nomura Holdings Inc (
) suffered a $2.2 billion quarterly loss as it shouldered costs to integrate Lehman Brothers' operations, but the acquisition is starting to give Japan's largest broker a stronger pipeline for new deals.
Nomura bought Lehman's LEHMQ.PK Asian, European and Middle East operations in September shortly after the Wall Street bank failed, aiming to build up its global presence and grow outside its mature home market.
Nomura has had to eat huge costs to retain Lehman staff and absorb its operations while at the same time booking losses on its exposure to Iceland's economic implosion, Fortress Investment Group (
), and accused swindler Bernard Madoff.
"The outlook going forward will clearly be dependent on the state of global capital markets, but these results would suggest the worst is over for the stock," said Marc Desdmidt, COO of Asian Equities at BlackRock in Hong Kong.
"Nomura has acquired strong capabilities through the Lehman acquisition, the benefits of which are yet to emerge."
He said sales of investment trusts had increased in the quarter to March and its pipeline of merger advisory and stock offering deals had grown, a sign it was starting to leverage Lehman's investment banking operations.
Among recent deals, Nomura helped Kirin Holdings (
) in its purchase of San Miguel Brewery SMB.PS and was an adviser to Chinese metals group Chinalco, which made a $19.5 billion investment in global miner Rio Tinto (
"The new fiscal year has started but we can still not be optimistic about the business outlook," Nakada said. "But we have taken various measures. And we will keep our efforts to turn the business around as soon as possible."
Nomura reported a net loss for January-March of 217.1 billion yen ($2.2 billion), bigger than a 153.9 billion yen loss a year earlier and bringing its annual loss to 709.4 billion yen -- the largest by a Japanese financial institution since the financial crisis started.
For related graphic, click
Nomura said it booked 53.1 billion yen in costs related to acquiring Lehman in January-March, following a similarly sized charge in the October-December period.
The brokerage also took a 45 billion yen hit on a drop in the value of its real estate holdings after becoming "as conservative as possible" in assessing those assets, Nakada said.
To cut costs, Nomura has reduced the number of staff at its wholesale business by more than 2,100 since October 2008, right after the Lehman acquisition, Nakada said.
Nomura said in December it would cut 1,000 jobs in London, the centre of its European operations.
"We will continue to adjust the number of staff to match our business development," he said.
Nomura, which last month sold about $3 billion worth of new shares to strengthen its capital, said it had no immediate plans to raise more funds.
Nomura's clients have been reluctant to sell new shares due to the weak stock market. Japan's benchmark Nikkei average
slid to a 26-year low in March, before recovering some ground in a rally to the middle of this month.
Japanese companies sold $3.7 billion worth of shares in January-March, down 18 percent from a year earlier.
Daiwa, Japan's second-biggest brokerage, will likely report a net loss of about 100 billion yen for the year ended in March when it announces results on Tuesday, the Nikkei newspaper reported on Friday.
The Nikkei also said Citigroup's (
Citigroup is in the process of selling some of its Japan operations as part of its global efforts to raise cash. (Additional reporting by David Dolan; Editing by Michael Watson)
