S.Africa's rand dips as ANC set for big win
2009-04-24 02:49:00.0
(Reuters) - South Africa's rand slipped against the dollar on Friday as some investors worried about the size of the ruling ANC's huge election majority, but firmer global equities limited losses.
In global markets, Asian stocks edged higher as financials gained on hopes that credit fears have eased. Gold rose 1 percent, which is usually good for the rand, after news China's gold reserves were now the fifth largest in the world.
South Africa's ruling ANC looked set for a big win after Wednesday's vote, hovering around the two-thirds majority that allows it to change the constitution, a scenario that concerns markets even though the party has stressed it will not abuse the right. South Africa's rand was 0.3 percent weaker at 8.94 to the dollar by 0643 GMT, with reaction muted since a convincing victory had been expected and the two-thirds majority was arguably a largely symbolic landmark anyway.
"Investors are jittery about the 2/3rd level but we believe it is mainly psychological," Nomura analysts said in a note.
Some investors are worried Zuma will bow to pressure from leftist allies to steer the party away from the ANC's pro-business stance, although he has little room for major policy shift given the effects of the global financial crisis.
The rand weakened the previous session as the ANC took a commanding lead in early results, but recovered some ground overnight on the back of a Wall Street rally and subsiding risk aversion.
"Those investors with risk appetite tend to flop back towards your riskier prospects and South Africa would probably be seen as one of those," said George Glynos, managing director of market analysts ETM.
South Africa's equities were expected to open weaker despite a Wall Street rally, after a strong showing the previous session. The blue chip Top-40 June futures contract ALSIc1 was 0.36 percent lower ahead of the market open at 0700 GMT.
South Africa's government bonds were a touch firmer with the yield on the 2015 bond ZAR157= up 2.5 basis points to 7.98 percent and that on the 2036 issue ZAR209= 3 basis points firmer to 8.11 percent.
The central bank started loosening monetary policy in December and has since cut the repo rate by 250 basis points to 9.5 percent after rates rose by 500 basis points between June 2006 and June 2008. (Reporting by Alison Raymond and Rebecca Harrison; Editing by Matthew Tostevin)
