PRESS DIGEST-Indonesian Newspapers - April 24
2009-04-23 22:24:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
- THAILAND'S PTT EYES NATUNA GAS
Thai energy company PTT pcl PTT.BK is discussing with Indonesia a deal to buy gas from the Natuna D. Alpha block near Riau islands, said energy minister Purnomo Yusgiantoro.
A new internet survey by research group Nielsen shows that Indonesia enjoys the highest consumer confidence index in the world, while the lowest score went to Korea and Portugal. The study was conducted in late March.
Senior Golkar politician Akbar Tandjung held a meeting on Thursday with party cadres who want him as President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's vice presidential running mate, a Golkar official said.
- INDONESIA'S MAYAPADA PLANS RIGHTS ISSUE IN H2
Indonesian lender, PT Bank Mayapada International Tbk, plans a rights issue worth 500 billion rupiah ($45.75 million) in the second half of this year to help strengthen its capital and expand business, said Tahir, the bank's commissioner.
Several foreign investors -- including from China, South Korea, Italy and Malaysia -- plan to cooperate with local companies in a joint venture with total investment up to $400 million to build new docks, director-general of transportation at the Industry Ministry Budi Darmadi said.
- INDONESIA'S TELKOM GETS TAX INCENTIVES OF 250 BLN RPH
Indonesia's largest telecoms firm, PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia Tbk (
), got tax incentives from the government worth 250 billion rupiah ($22.87 million) in 2008, finance director Sudiro Asno said.
Indonesian securities firm, PT Mandiri Sekuritas, has been appointed as the arranger of a syndicated loan for cement producer, PT Semen Gresik Tbk (
), worth 5 trillion rupiah ($457.5 million) to help Gresik expand its business, Kartika Wirjoatmodjo, managing director at Mandiri Sekuritas, said.
- BTN TARGETS 12 TRLN LOAN EXPANSION IN '09
Home lender PT Bank Tabungan Negara (BTN) is targeting lending of 12 trillion rupiah ($1.10 billion) this year, down from 15.5 trillion rupiah in 2008, president director Iqbal Latanro said.
- - - - ($1 = 10,930 rupiah)
