Europe must commit now to Nabucco gas pipeline-RWE
2009-04-24 05:02:00.0
(Reuters) - European governments and gas consumers must now pledge to back the Nabucco gas pipeline if Europe is to reduce its reliance on Russian gas, an energy security conference in Sofia heard on Friday.
The Nabucco gas pipeline project to pump gas from the Caspian region via Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary to Austria needs immediate political and financial agreement as well as financial backing after years of squabbling over terms.
"It is time for the poker game to end and decisions to be made," Jeremy Ellis, head of business development at RWE Supply and Trading (
), a shareholder in the EU-backed pipeline project, told the conference.
"Europe and Turkey must now show their hands; the supply countries and investors will not wait for ever ... The gas reserves in the Middle East and the Caspian offer an opportunity for opening the southern corridor."
The Nabucco gas pipeline consortium expects an intergovernmental agreement, needed to start up the 7.9 billion euros ($10.41 billion) project, by the end of June. It had been expected in the first quarter of 2009.
Bulgaria, the country worst hit by the January cut-off in Russian gas supplies, called for an acceleration of big pipeline projects to ease the region's heavy dependence on Russian gas.
"The pure economic logic says that most likely we will see a delay in these projects and some of them might even be abandoned," Economy and Energy Minister Petar Dimitrov said.
"We all see the sharp decline in demand due to the economic crisis. But the political logic says "no", we should not allow delays. On the contrary, we must speed them up."
Dimitriv said rich west European consumer countries and international financial institutions should follow the EU's example and provide funding for the Nabucco project.
At a summit last month, the EU leaders yet again voiced their support for Nabucco but have not given Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and other potential suppliers an incentive to supply the project.
Turkmenistan is building a gas pipeline to China, due to be completed this year, but has not signed any major deals with Western companies.
Turkmenistan is keen on the EU-backed Nabucco gas pipeline but needs Brussels to come up with concrete proposals on its implementation, a senior U.S. official told Reuters on Friday. [ID:nLO395316]
Turkmenistan produces about 75 billion cubic metres (bcm) of gas a year and sells about 50 bcm to Russia's Gazprom (
) and Norway's StatoilHydro (
