HK shares drift lower on caution; Huiyuan soars
2009-04-24 01:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares dipped 0.4 percent lower by midday on Friday amid caution ahead of key first quarter corporate earnings next week.
Shares in China's top juice maker hit HK$6.3 before retreating slightly to HK$5.84, up 15.4 percent. After Coke's buyout deal was scuttled by Beijing in March, shares in the Chinese juice maker had shed more than half their value.
"Coke has deep pockets, they have budgeted $2 billion for this market and Huiyuan can benefit from Coke's ability to spend heavily on marketing and advertising, its relatively superior distribution network and the way it can push out new products quickly," said Renee Tai, analyst with CIMB-GK Research.
was down 66.14 points at 15,148.32.
Shares worth HK$31 billion changed hands, compared with midday Thursday's HK$28.7 billion. Turnover had dropped to a two week low on Thursday despite a 2.3 percent rebound in the market, suggesting the upside to the market could be short-lived, said analysts.
"Patient investors may want to stay in cautious mode and continue to watch out for volatility," said Wilson Wong, analyst with Taifook Securities.
) added 2 percent on the improved earnings outlook as turnover on the exchange picked up pace, climbing to a daily average of HK$65 billion so far in April from under HK$45 billion in the first quarter of 2009.
Handset makers also outperformed, rising sharply for a second straight day after Goldman Sachs raised its rating on the stocks. The world's largest cellphone maker, Foxconn International Holdings (
), vaulted 9.2 percent after the brokerage upgraded the stock to neutral from sell on an improved outlook from its customers Nokia and LG.
of top mainland companies gained 4.19 points to 8,943.28.
) dropped 5 percent despite posting 29 percent growth in its first-quarter earnings amid strong revenue growth and stable profit margins, as analysts deemed the stock too expensive after its recent run-up.
HSBC downgraded the stock to neutral from overweight after the stock rose over 250 percent from its November 2008 lows, driven by a surge in capital expenditure by China's wireless companies. Nomura cut the stock to neutral from buy, arguing that the potential benefits of the increased capex spending was already factored into ZTE's share price.
