TOPWRAP 3-Job cuts, mixed bank news show long road to recovery
2009-04-23 08:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Euro zone businesses stepped up job cuts this month even though they are cautiously optimistic about next year, a survey showed on Thursday, and mixed news on major banks suggested recession is far from over.
While pockets of recovery emerged in the European banking sector, investors remained nervous after news of heavy losses suffered by Japanese financial firms and persistent worries about what official stress tests will reveal about U.S. banks.
Euro zone manufacturing and service sector companies gave significantly less downbeat reports than economists had expected. Markit's Purchasing Managers' Index showed business in the region contracted at its slowest pace in six months in April and there was overall optimism about conditions in 12 months' time. [ID:nLN405659]
But ECB policymaker Axel Weber reminded markets on Wednesday that a decelerating downturn was not the same as recovery, and the euro zone managers also reported they cut jobs at the fastest pace on record in the 10-year-old PMI survey.
In the United States, the latest figures for new unemployment claims were higher than forecast while a record number of people remained on benefit as the recession bit. [ID:nN23310355]
"While we take encouragement from the recent signs of improvement, we would caution against getting too carried away," said Martin van Vliet at ING Financial Markets in Amsterdam. "This probably is more the end of the beginning rather than the beginning of the end of the recession."
), Switzerland's second largest bank, smashing first quarter profit forecasts, and Britain's Barclays Plc (
As markets look more closely at how individual companies perform, rather than buying and selling stock indexes, Credit Suisse shares rallied and Barclays shares edged up.
But European stock indexes [.EU] vacillated, held back by anxiety about the overall health of the banking sector and poor results from Swiss engineering group ABB (
Earlier on Thursday Japan's Nikkei newspaper reported top brokerage Nomura Holdings (
) would report a record $7.2 billion annual loss, largely due to the costs of snapping up operations from failed Wall Street stalwart Lehman Brothers.
Later the country's second largest bank, Mizuho Financial Group (
), estimated it was likely to post an annual loss of nearly $6 billion, which would be its first in six years. [ID:nT22036]
With many more jobs to be cut and bad assets to be written off, a sharp cut in International Monetary Fund forecasts for the world economy added to market nervousness ahead of the results of U.S. bank stress tests due on May 4.
U.S. banks will be briefed by regulators as early as Friday on how they performed in government "stress tests," before the results are made public later, The Wall Street Journal reported, citing government officials. [ID:nN22188687]
The IMF cut its world outlook yet again on Wednesday, predicting the economy will shrink 1.3 percent this year, by far the deepest post-war contraction. [ID:nN21500818]
Britain, Germany, Italy, Spain and the euro area as a whole are all expected to shrink sharply this year and keep on contracting in 2010. The IMF expects the U.S. economy to merely stagnate next year after shrinking 2.8 percent this year.
The German Finance Ministry said on Thursday Europe's biggest economy was heading further down after its economic slump probably deepened in the first quarter of the year. [ID:nBAF001653]
China is one of the few major economies with growth prospects this year, with the help of its $585 billion stimulus and a surge in lending early this year.
"The consensus is that the economy bottomed out in the first quarter," central bank adviser Fan Gang told Reuters in an interview. "Growth of 7 to 8 percent this year is possible. The economy has started showing signs of stabilising, but growth still relies on government investment." [ID:nT35333]
Underlining the weakness of older economies, auto parts maker Robert Bosch [ROBG.UL] announced job cuts and German rival Continental (
Italy's Fiat SpA (
) reported a first-quarter trading loss and said it was still in talks to form a partnership with ailing U.S. carmaker Chrysler. [ID:nLN691516]. (Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by Ruth Pitchford; Editing by Toby Chopra)
