Few patients ready to take new IMF vaccine
2009-04-23 15:22:00.0
(Reuters) - A new flexible credit line introduced by the International Monetary Fund a month ago has proved to be a useful tool to inoculate emerging economies against financial contagion, but few patients seem to be able or willing to take the vaccine.
Since the IMF unveiled its new credit line for "well-run" emerging economies on March 24, three countries have lined up for the funds -- Mexico, Poland and, just this week, Colombia. While Peru, Uruguay and South Africa could probably join the club any time soon, the list is unlikely to grow much further.
In fact, the limited number of nations able or willing to benefit from the new facility remains as its main weakness, and may be one of the expected items on the agenda of world leaders gathering in Washington this weekend for the IMF/World Bank's spring meetings.
"For the flexible credit line to be an effective crisis prevention tool a critical number of emerging markets would need to use it, Royal Bank of Scotland analysts said in a research note.
"Arguably it is a little bit like vaccinations for diseases such as MMR (measles, mumps and rubella), as it might require a certain take up rate to be effective, and to reduce the risk of contagion across countries," RBS analysts said.
Limiting the effect of the IMF line is the fact that Asia is still reluctant to request any support from the fund, favoring other sources of financing such as China or Japan.
In the region, Korea would certainly qualify for the line, as it has already qualified for a $30 billion swap line with the U.S. Federal Reserve, which has also been extended to Mexico and Brazil. But the South Korean government, with more than $200 billion in foreign reserves, has already said it was not considering tapping into the funds.
Such is also the case of Brazil and Russia, which have sizable foreign reserves. Brazil, instead of drawing from IMF resources, has pledged to inject up to $14.5 billion to capitalize the fund.
Similarly, Chile and the Czech Republic would easily qualify for the line, but both countries have already said they are not interested in it.
In the other camp are the nations which need IMF assistance but would hardly be approved to tap into the facility, designed only for economies that do not need major policy adjustments.
Turkey is the main example of that. The Turkish government is expected to sign a loan deal with the fund in the next few days but the country will likely get a stand-by agreement, which is conditional on periodic performance reviews by an IMF mission.
Argentina is also seen as an eventual applicant, but the heterodox policies of President Cristina Fernandez would be a major challenge even for a more flexible IMF, which in the past was criticized for being too rigid when demanding policy adjustments from poor countries.
MORE CONFIDENCE, LESS STIGMA
For the countries who took it, the new IMF facility has proved to be an efficient confidence booster -- reducing debt refinancing costs and avoiding a disordered devaluation of their currencies -- even without an actual withdrawal of the funds.
"That's the whole point of that. Any overdraw facility, you hope not to use it, but it has a big impact on your business," said Jerome Booth, head of research at fund manager Ashmore.
Yield spreads between Mexican sovereign bond and U.S. Treasuries, seen as a gauge of investors aversion to the country's risk, tightened some 50 basis points since the government requested $47 billion from the new IMF line, for instance.
According to the benchmark JPMorgan EMBI+ index, Mexican spreads currently stand around 335 basis points.
The Mexican peso has rallied about 18 percent since hitting a record low early in March, supported to a great extent by the IMF deal.
A positive market reaction was also seen in Poland and Colombia, which have requested $20.5 billion and $10.4 billion worth of the new IMF line, respectively. The zloty and the Colombian peso both rallied about 2.0 percent right after the announcement of the agreement.
IMF funding will not stop emerging market currencies from weakening in line with an expected erosion in economic fundamentals, but should avoid disordered, panic-driven currency depreciations, analysts said.
Moreover, the "deeply-troubled-economy" stigma traditionally associated to IMF loans has not plagued the countries which signed up for the new flexible line -- making it easier to be swallowed by other potential takers, at least in thesis.
