Correa vows hard line on investors
2009-04-23 11:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Ecuador's socialist President Rafael Correa vowed to take a hard line with foreign investors if he wins re-election this weekend despite worries about the economy in the oil-exporting country.
Hugely popular for standing up to foreign oil companies and debt holders in one of South America's poorest countries, Correa is expected to easily win the election and said late on Wednesday he will stick to his guns in his second term.
"We don't deal in half measures here," he told Reuters in an interview, flanked by top central bank officials in the presidential palace. "We will have exactly the same position, absolute toughness to defend the interests of the country."
Correa said he would terminate relations with oil companies such as Spain's Repsol if they do not meet his demands to sign new contracts, but that he had no plans to nationalize the industry like his ally, Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez.
A European and U.S.-trained economist, Correa is considered the most powerful leader in Ecuador's 30-year democracy, with a firm grip on the levers of the OPEC nation's economy and on state institutions.
Recent polls show he has about 50 percent support ahead of Sunday's vote, way ahead of his seven rivals. The 46-year-old needs to score 40 percent of the vote to avoid a run-off vote with the second-placed candidate.
Sounding upbeat despite lower oil revenues, rising unemployment and foreign reserves that have been halved in six months, Correa said he believed Ecuador's economy would grow by 2.5 percent this year.
"We believe the worst of the crisis has past, unless oil prices fall to dangerous levels again," he said, red-eyed from weeks of campaigning. The International Monetary Fund forecasts Ecuador's economy will shrink 2 percent in 2009.
Iran, China and Russia are all interested in investing in the country, Correa said.
Brandishing a copy of Barack Obama's best-selling book, 'The Audacity of Hope', which he took from a packed bookshelf in his modern office, Correa said the U.S. president "appeared to be sincere."
He did not say whether that respect for Obama, whom he met at a summit last week, will translate into better relations with the United States. Correa expelled two U.S. embassy officials this year, accusing them of meddling in Ecuadorean affairs. He is also closing a U.S. air base in the country.
'SUFFICIENT FUNDS'
Last year, Correa defaulted on $3.2 billion in foreign loans, a move that angered investors but was applauded in the world's top banana exporter, where many consider the debt an unfair burden.
"We have set aside resources in the budget and if more is needed we have identified sources of financing," Correa said.
"The Ecuadorean state sets the rules here, not multinational companies," Correa said. "We could not have achieved our goals with pats on the back."
(Writing by Frank Jack Daniel; editing by Kieran Murray and Mohammad Zargham)
