UPDATE 4-Akzo Nobel core Q1 profit halves, stability hinted at
2009-04-23 06:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Dutch chemical company Akzo Nobel's (
) missed forecasts with a 50 percent fall in core first-quarter profit on plunging demand for its products, hitting its shares, but said it had seen signs of stabilisation.
"Forward visibility remains very limited," finance director Keith Nichols told reporters on Thursday. "(But) it was encouraging to at least see that the sharp deteriorations in certain markets did stabilise in March".
The world's biggest paint company does not expect a "dramatic recovery in volumes" this year, he said.
Akzo Nobel had earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) from continuing operations, excluding exceptional items, of 142 million euros ($184 million). Revenues fell 13 percent to 3.27 billion euros.
The average forecast was for 187 million euros profit in a Reuters poll of eight analysts. Last year's first-quarter EBIT was 286 million euros, having been restated to include National Starch operations Akzo Nobel was unable to sell last year.
The company reiterated that 2009 will be a challenging year, adding it was seeing a stabilisation for decorative paints in China and resilience in the British retail market, although the U.S. housing market remained tough.
Akzo Nobel, which also makes coatings for fridges and laptops, said it was on track to save 540 million euros by the end of 2011 through synergies from last year's acquisition of ICI and restructuring measures.
By the end of March, it had achieved annualised savings of 210 million euros, up from about 130 million at the end of 2008.
Akzo Nobel shares were down 4.5 percent at 32.15 euros by 1040 GMT, with the DJ Stoxx European chemical sector index .SX4P down 1.1 percent.
"We are afraid that the weakening European markets for decorative paints will take much longer than expected to recover and that the second and third quarters will be much lower than expected," SNS Securities analyst Danny van Doesburg said.
Akzo Nobel, which gets almost half of its sales from Europe, said first-quarter volumes fell 17 percent, oustripping a 5 percent increase in prices.
The chemicals sector has been hit hard by destocking and slumping demand, but Akzo Nobel rival PPG Industries PPG.AS, the world's second-argest paint maker, expects seasonal demand growth in the second quarter after activity steadied in March.
Nichols told reporters Akzo Nobel, which is cutting jobs and closing factories, also expects a traditional seasonal pick-up in demand following the winter months.
Akzo Nobel's margin for earnings before interest, tax, amortisation and depreciation (EBITDA) shrank to 9 percent in the first quarter from 11.7 percent last year.
Nichols said Akzo Nobel's EBITDA margin target of 14 percent by the end of 2011 was still realistic, assuming no significant decline in the economic outlook.
Analysts are concerned the company will find it tough to raise prices to offset volume declines, but Nichols said the company was taking various steps to achieve its target. He declined to comment on whether margin declines had bottomed out. (Editing by Greg Mahlich and Dan Lalor) ($1 = 0.7738 euros)
