Iranian official, EU's Solana discuss nuclear meeting
2009-04-23 05:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran's chief nuclear negotiator spoke with European Union foreign policy chief Javier Solana after the Islamic Republic said it was ready for talks with six world powers, Iranian media and EU officials said Thursday.
A spokeswoman for Solana said he and Iran's Saeed Jalili discussed organizing an expert-level meeting on the long-running dispute over Tehran's nuclear program, which the West fears is a cover for making bombs. Iran denies the charge.
Responding to the powers' invitation to discuss the issue, Tehran said Wednesday it welcomed "constructive" talks but that it would press ahead with work to develop atomic energy.
"I talked yesterday with Dr Jalili on the phone. I hope there will be some contact soon," Solana told reporters in Brussels.
The spokeswoman said they had discussed holding a meeting involving Jalili and Robert Cooper, an aide to Solana.
"The first step is to organize a meeting of experts," she said. "They do not know when that will be. The aim would be to continue the dialogue."
The United States, Russia, China, France, Germany and Britain said on April 8 they would ask Solana to invite Iran to a meeting to find "a diplomatic solution to this critical issue," referring to the nuclear row.
It marked a significant shift in U.S. policy under President Barack Obama, whose predecessor George W. Bush shunned direct talks with Iran as long as it continued with enrichment activity.
Wednesday, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton threatened "crippling sanctions" against Iran if it did not end its nuclear program. She told U.S. lawmakers she was under no illusions about the difficulty of engaging Iran successfully.
Iran, the world's fourth-largest oil producer, has repeatedly ruled out halting uranium enrichment, which can have both civilian and military purposes. Tehran says its program is for peaceful power purposes.
Iranian state radio quoted Solana as saying Wednesday's Iranian response "contains constructive items and a new opportunity for advancement of talks."
Jalili said Iran's statement "contains a new suitable orientation for the advancement of talks in an atmosphere of mutual respect and fairness," the radio report said.
(Reporting by Hashem Kalantari in Tehran and David Brunnstrom in Brussels; writing by Fredrik Dahl; editing by Philippa Fletcher)
