UPDATE 1-World still afflicted by loss of confidence-BOJ
2009-04-23 16:10:00.0
(Reuters) - There is still a lack of confidence in the world financial system and policymakers are not "omnipotent" despite the aggressive actions taken to address the financial crisis, Japan's top central banker said on Thursday.
"Currently, the global financial system is still afflicted by a loss of confidence," Bank of Japan Governor Masaaki Shirakawa said in a speech at the Japan Society in New York.
"We need to be aware that policymakers are not omnipotent," he said. "The policy actions we have taken in the past twenty months are no substitute for the necessary unwinding of economic imbalances accumulated in the preceding booms."
Monetary policies alone cannot prevent the recurrence of boom and bust cycles, he added.
The U.S. economy needs to work out excesses, Shirakawa said, which include unsustainable financial leverage, household overindebtedness and perhaps the overextension of the financial industry.
"This will be painful but inescapable," he added. "In view of Japan's decade-long experience, there are no possible alternatives."
"We must resist a descent into protectionism by any means," he said.
Like protectionism, regulatory overreaction will also undermine economic efficiency and put downward pressure on productivity growth, he added.
In response to a question, Shirakawa said a recovery in the Chinese economy may not be sufficient to kick-start global growth.
"We're observing ... some good news from China," he said. "At this point, it's too early to tell whether China succeeds in bringing the world economy from the current conditions," he said.
At the end of the day, the world economy and financial system are interrelated and a single country cannot lift the other parts alone, he noted.
Finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven rich countries -- which includes the United States, Japan, Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada -- and the larger G20 club of developed and emerging economies will hold separate sessions in Washington on Friday, a day before the International Monetary Fund and World Bank spring meetings begin.
But coming soon after G20 leaders met in London on April 2, these gatherings are not expected to generate much new policy.
