Coke, Huiyuan in informal talks after deal blocked
2009-04-23 09:08:00.0
Coke, Huiyuan in informal talks after deal blocked | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Coke, Huiyuan in informal talks after deal blocked
Products of Huiyuan are displayed at a news conference on the company's 2008 interim results in Hong Kong in this September 10, 2008 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Thu  EDT
) to weigh partnership options after China blocked its takeover of the company last month, a source familiar with the situation said.
In March, China rejected Coca-Cola's planned $2.4 billion acquisition of top juice maker Huiyuan, saying the deal would have been bad for competition. The acquisition would have been the largest-ever buyout of a Chinese company by a foreign rival.
"After the deal collapsed there have been discussions in Beijing," the source said, adding that the talks with senior Huiyuan management are at an informal stage.
Coca-Cola is in negotiations with Huiyuan that could include taking a minority stake in the Chinese juice maker's assets, a Wall Street Journal report citing unidentified sources said on Thursday.
China's Ministry of Commerce rejected the takeover deal under an anti-monopoly law enacted last year, saying in a statement that Coca-Cola's changes to the deal were insufficient to allay its concerns.
At the time of the decision, Gary Bradshaw, a portfolio manager at Dallas-based Hodges Capital Management, called the rejection "a minor setback" for Coca-Cola rather than "a major slap in the face."
"They'll probably regroup and try to go at it from a different angle," Bradshaw said.
"It is our policy not to comment on speculation," Kenth Kaerhoeg, a Coca-Cola spokesman in Hong Kong said.
(Reporting by Joseph Chaney; editing by Mike Nesbit)
