UPDATE 3-Bunge reports Q1 loss, shares drop sharply
2009-04-23 13:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Shares of Bunge Ltd (
Widely missing Wall Street forecasts, it was the second consecutive quarterly loss for New York-based Bunge, which has suffered along with the wider agribusiness sector amid tight credit markets and recession-weakened demand for raw materials.
Bunge's weaker-than-anticipated first-quarter performance and its outlook for challenging near term market conditions prompted the company to cut its full-year earnings per share forecast to $4.90 to $5.40 from its previous range of $6.90 to $7.40.
But it maintained its view for a rosier second half of 2009, citing a likely rebound in demand for soymeal and better demand for fertilizer, as strong grain prices boost farm profits and promote planting.
"The first quarter of this year turned out to be more challenging than we had anticipated. We do not expect to be able to make up for the losses incurred in Q1 despite the fact that we are confident in a solid second half of the year," Bunge CFO Jacqualyn Fouse said.
The first-quarter net loss came to $195 million, or $1.76 a share, compared with a year-earlier profit of $289 million, or $2.10 a share. Analysts on average were expecting a profit of 69 cents a share, according to Reuters Estimates.
The company's quarterly loss included a $64 million inventory valuation write-down in its fertilizer segment, equivalent to roughly 45 cents per share.
Net sales fell to $9.198 billion, down 26 percent from the same quarter a year ago.
A steep drop in global fertilizer prices from record peaks in 2008 left many suppliers, including Bunge, holding high cost inventories while prices and demand for raw materials eroded amid the economic recession and credit crunch.
Aggressive pricing by competitors hit margins in Bunge's fertilizer segment and cut into sales volumes in the latest quarter.
"The breakdown in import price parity also drove margins lower and likely attributed to some inventory destocking during the quarter," Morgan Stanley analyst Vincent Andrews said in a research note.
Bunge, the largest producer and supplier of fertilizer in South America, said its fertilizer segment lost $262 million in the quarter, compared with a profit of $133 a year earlier. Net sales were down 41 percent in the quarter amid a 23 percent decline in volumes.
But Bunge added that retail fertilizer supplies in Brazil have dropped since the start of 2009 and are nearing more seasonal levels, which should improve margins later in the year.
Weaker than anticipated global demand for soybean meal from struggling livestock and poultry producers hurt results in Bunge's agribusiness sector, more than offsetting robust soybean demand from China, the world's top importer.
Bunge's agribusiness profits fell to $18 million in the first quarter, down 93 percent from a year before, as world demand for soybean meal from animal feeders was weaker than expected.
Global soymeal consumption in the first quarter was down 6 percent from a year earlier, Bunge said, but it added that there were signs of stabilization in the pork and poultry industries.
Bunge said soymeal demand this year could still be up 1 percent from 2008, with stronger demand in the second half of the year.
Bunge's edible oils segment posted a $22 million first-quarter profit, down 57 percent from the same quarter the previous year, as margins suffered amid high cost inventories and falling prices.
The company's milling products sector posted a profit of $19 million in the quarter, up from $7 million a year earlier.
Shares of Bunge were down $7.03 or 12.9 percent to $47.47 on the New York Stock Exchange in afternoon trading after trading as low as $46.66 earlier. The shares are down more than 50 percent from a year ago. (Reporting by Karl Plume, editing by Gerald E. McCormick)
