CORRECTED - EU, S.Korea trade pact near, but drawback remains
2009-04-23 10:33:00.0
(Reuters) - The European Union is close to clinching a 100 billion dollar trade deal with South Korea, diplomats said, but the concerns of Europe's ailing carmakers could still scupper the pact to boost dwindling world trade.
A majority of the EU's 27 member states backed the deal to tear down trade barriers with Seoul during crunch talks on Monday, but so-called "duty drawback" remains a major obstacle to initialling the deal at an EU-South Korea summit on May 23, the diplomats said.
Under the duty drawback system, South Korean carmakers would be allowed to import cheap components from China and have all import duties paid on those parts reimbursed if they are in cars destined for the EU market.
But the EU's auto industry -- employing 2.3 million people directly and a further 10 million in related sectors -- and some governments are unhappy over Korean car manufacturers having this advantage.
"The clear message from the meeting was that the majority want to conclude this agreement. They see benefits of getting an agreement which is more or less done, but duty drawback was still a major issue," a diplomat told Reuters.
"The conclusion is that duty drawback is a red line for the EU and member states will not give it up. But the Commission will now go back to Korea, and what they are trying to do is look at concerns and find a solution to the application drawback to the car."
"Some of those countries who back the car industry, notably Germany, are now on board," a second diplomat said.
For Brussels, a deal to lower barriers to trade and investment with South Korea would be its first such pact in Asia. The EU is the Asian country's second largest export market after China, and South Korea is the EU's fourth-largest non-European trade partner.
Europe's largest business group, BusinessEurope said it "strongly supports an ambitious conclusion of the trade pact".
"Should the Commission show flexibility on the question of duty drawback, it must secure results for companies in the other outstanding areas of the talks such as rules of origin for key sectors and tariff difficulties," Eoin O'Malley, senior trade adviser at BusinessEurope, told Reuters.
"This should be possible, meaning that in practice a conclusion should be reached in late spring or early summer." (Editing by Richard Balmforth)
