G7 aims to lift confidence but not too high
2009-04-23 13:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu  EDT
While there are tentative signs the pace of the global recession may be slackening, bad loans continue to pile up on the books of financial firms, and removing them will be a costly and time-consuming process.
"We have got to deal with this problem. You can't sort out the economy without sorting out the banking system," British Finance Minister Alistair Darling told Reuters on Thursday.
He and fellow finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of Seven rich countries and the larger G20 club of developed and emerging economies will hold separate sessions in Washington on Friday, a day before the International Monetary Fund and World Bank spring meetings begin.
Coming so soon after G20 leaders met in London on April 2, these gatherings are unlikely to generate much new policy.
The Fund estimated that euro zone banks would need to write down $750 billion in bad assets through 2010, compared with $550 billion for U.S. financial firms. In Britain, another $200 billion in write-downs are likely, it said.
The Bank of Canada expressed some frustration on Tuesday over the slow progress in cleaning up banks, saying measures to stabilize the global financial system "have taken longer than expected to enact."
TOO BIG TO GEL?
Traditionally, it has been the G7 and not the G20 that meets on the sidelines of the semiannual IMF gathering. The dual meetings this time are symbolic of the growing economic clout of emerging powerhouses such as India and China.
However, only the smaller group is expected to deliver a statement at the conclusion of its meeting. The G20 gathering is being billed as largely a planning session to build on decisions made at the London summit and to prepare for the next one, most likely in New York in September.
Some G7 officials also expressed concern that the G20 was too unwieldy a forum to address tricky issues surrounding the bank cleanup, and those discussions would be confined to the meeting of rich nations.
"In addition to the communiques, you've got to have delivery," he said. "Countries have to assume responsibility for their words. Otherwise these groups won't be able to retain the credibility which is so important to rebuilding trust in the global markets."
That trust is slowly building amid signs that the rate of economic decline is slowing, a necessary precursor to an eventual recovery.
Finance leaders will no doubt want to nurture the newfound confidence while underscoring that recovery probably won't come until 2010, and even then growth is likely to be tepid.
"I think we're past the crisis stage," said Sheila Bair, head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp, a U.S. bank regulator. "We're in the clean-up stage now."
(Additional reporting by Sumeet Desai; Editing by Andrea Ricci)
