UPDATE 3-Hyundai Q1 falls, but winning share in weak markets
2009-04-23 05:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Hyundai Motor Co (
), South Korea's top automaker, reported a smaller-than-expected 43 percent drop in quarterly net profit as a weak won cushioned higher marketing costs and weaker car sales.
Hyundai said it grew market share and expected further gains in the United States, where generous incentives and its lineup of smaller, cheaper vehicles such as the Elantra compact and Sonata sedan have won over cost-conscious customers.
) have escaped the industry's worst-ever downturn, which has driven U.S. giants General Motors (
"Given the severity of the economic slowdown, Hyundai performed relatively well but that's largely thanks to the windfall gains from a weak won," said Lee Jong-woo, research head at HMC Investment Securities.
Hyundai, which with Kia is the world's No.5 car maker, sounded a more upbeat note on the quarters ahead.
"From the second quarter, we expect global governments' economic stimulus measures and support plans for the auto industry to have some positive effect," Chung Tae-hwan, Hyundai's chief financial officer, told reporters and analysts.
Starting next month, South Korea will cut taxes by 70 percent to customers who replace their old cars with new ones. Hyundai this week raised its 2009 sales growth target for China by 11 percent after tax cuts for small cars and economic stimulus packages there boosted sales. [ID:nSHA367607]
Hyundai said its global market share rose to 4.7 percent in the first quarter, from 4 percent a year ago. It said it was aiming to expand its U.S. market share to 5 percent for 2009, from 4.3 percent in March.
Aided in part by executives' bullish remarks, shares in Hyundai ended up 3.2 percent at 68,100 won, outperforming a 0.9 percent gain in the wider market
Hyundai posted January-March net profit of 225 billion won ($166.5 million), its lowest in at least seven years, but beating a 205 billion won forecast by 11 analysts in a Reuters poll.
That compared with a 392.7 billion won profit a year ago. The strong net result was in part due to contributions from Hyundai's Chinese and U.S. factories.
For a related Graphic, click:
Hyundai's 153.8 billion won operating profit was below a forecast for 206.4 billion won, and its overall profit margin dropped to 2.5 percent from 6.5 percent as the recession pressured automakers to step up marketing and reduce prices.
"This is a good time for South Korean automakers to be increasing their market share, and Hyundai is doing the right thing in aggressively marketing its products," said Jang Huh, managing director at Prudential Asset Management.
Hyundai said the average cost of incentives in the United States rose to $2,800 per vehicle from $2,200 in 2008, higher than big Japanese rivals. Hyundai grabbed attention earlier this year by allowing U.S. buyers to return vehicles if they lost their jobs within a year.
Bolstering Hyundai's price competitiveness, the won dropped over 30 percent against the dollar
For all of 2009, Hyundai is expected to report a 4.8 percent fall in net profit to 1.38 trillion won, according to a poll of 22 brokers by Reuters Estimates.
Reflecting the company's resilient outlook, shares in Hyundai rose 40 percent in January-March, well ahead of the wider market's
Hyundai's estimate contrasts with major rivals' expectations of massive losses for 2009, and reflects efforts by policymakers to spur demand in its higher-margin home market.
Toyota is expected to post a net loss of around $3.6 billion for the year ended March, and a further $3.1 billion loss in the current year, according to Reuters Estimates. ($1=1351.1 Won) (Editing by Marie-France Han and Lincoln Feast)
