Asia Steel-China prices slip 4 pct on weak demand, firm output
2009-04-23 03:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese spot steel prices dropped 4 percent to a five-month low, reversing firm trade in recent weeks, as sporadic evidence of demand recovery in the auto and construction sectors failed to translate into broad-based buying amid steady output growth.
Prices of China's benchmark hot-rolled coil fell 4.2 percent to around 3,190 yuan ($467.2) a tonne this week, unchanged from 3,245/3,415 yuan quoted last week, data from Metal Bulletin showed.
For a graphic on Chinese spot steel prices, click:
"Demand has picked up a little bit and trader inventory has also come down in tandem, but the recovery remains fragile and anecdotal," said a Chinese steel trader.
The price fall was broad-based, with the newly launched construction steel futures, which posted strong gains last week on signs of economic recovery in China, also retreating from recent highs.
China's September rebar SRBU9 fell 3.2 percent this week to 3,505 yuan after two consecutive weekly gains, while wire rod for September delivery SWRU9 dropped 2.8 percent to 3,404 yuan after rising 4.4 percent last week.
"We believe that no sustainable rise in steel prices is possible as there is still a lot of idle capacity in the world ... Short bursts of demand-led price recovery, followed by price declines could continue until 2012," Goldman Sachs analysts said on Thursday.
China's March steel output was little changed from a year ago, while global production dropped 24 percent, data showed this week, suggesting that huge overproduction in the world's biggest steel producer may continue to depress prices. [ID:nLL49687]
In the first quarter, China's steel output rose 1.4 percent to 127 million tonnes and record imports of iron ore for the second straight month, which may lead to firm growth in steel production in the coming months.
A government official warned on Thursday China's steel oversupply may reach more than 100 million tonnes this year. [ID:nPEK21381]
Despite a lack of firm signs of demand recovery, China's No.2 steelmaker Ansteel (
Some traders are now expecting China to raise export tax rebates on hot-rolled coil after the product was excluded from recent tax adjustments and as China seeks to improve exports of steel, which shrank 60 percent last month.
But changes in the tax system are angering regional buyers including South Korea, China's top overseas steel market.
In Japan, Nippon Steel (
) won a smaller-than-expected auto steel price cut of 15,000 yen ($152.6) a tonne from an estimated 100,000 yen in a deal with Toyota Motor (
), offering rare glimmer of hope for steelmills as they continue to slash output by almost half due to collapsing demand.
"(But) there is no point overpaying when cars are not selling and your steel supplier is running below 60 percent capacity utilisation ... We believe prices are set to drop an additional 10,000 yen at least, when iron ore prices are agreed on," said CLSA analyst Jeremie Capron. (Reporting by Miyoung Kim; Editing by Ben Tan)
