DEALTALK-Private sale of ICBC shares to dampen market impact
2009-04-23 06:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Investors are bracing for the sale of up to $4 billion worth of shares in Industrial and Commercial Bank of China when lockups on strategic investors lapse next week, but a deal is expected to be less disruptive than previous such sales at rival banks.
), Allianz (
), the world's most valuable bank, starting Tuesday.
All three have said they would prefer to sell the shares through private placement, and many in the market expect the shares to be sold in a negotiated transaction to investors including mainland Chinese corporate buyers.
), respectively, when lockups expired earlier this year.
"It all comes down to politics," said one dealmaker, who was not authorised to talk media on the record.
While Goldman was originally free to sell half its 4.93 percent stake this month and the rest in October, last month it pledged to keep 80 percent of that stake until April 2010.
The bank also said at the time that it was in no rush to sell the 20 percent stake. It declined to comment on Thursday, as did Allianz, while American Express could not immediately be reached.
Improved liquidity in the Hong Kong market in recent weeks should help smooth the sale of a big chunk of ICBC stock. Daily turnover in Hong Kong jumped to more than HK$70 billion last week, compared with less than HK$45 billion in the first quarter.
"The recent rally in ICBC shares may give Goldman and others enough incentive to cash out but as long as there are enough buyers, it won't upset the market too much," said Peter Pak, vice president at BOCI Research.
Some of Goldman's stake is held by investment funds that it manages, and some watchers said it is possible the entire 20 percent of its stake will not be sold.
"Goldman is not the major worry, it's the other two that are most likely to sell," said Patrick Shum, chief portfolio strategist with Karl Thomson Securities.
) shares, which have rallied 46 percent from an early March low.
"Even if the shares are sold off-market, if the transaction price is below the market price it will put a good deal of pressure on ICBC shares," Shum said. ($1=HK$7.8) (Editing by Lincoln Feast)
