TOPWRAP 1-C.Suisse profit beats forecasts; Japanese peers in red
2009-04-23 03:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Credit Suisse (
) beat forecasts with its quarterly profit on Thursday, offering markets some relief after news of heavy losses suffered by top U.S. and Japanese financial firms fanned fresh worries about the sector's health.
Switzerland's second-largest bank posted net profit of 2 billion Swiss francs ($1.71 billion) for the first quarter, double expectations, and said it was optimistic about its prospects, lifting its shares by 7 percent.
Earlier on Thursday, a Japanese newspaper reported that the country's top brokerage Nomura Holdings (
) would report a heavy annual loss and later the second-largest bank, Mizuho Financial Group (
), forecast a big loss.
The news followed Morgan Stanley's second straight quarterly loss and a sharp cut in International Monetary Fund forecasts for the world economy, adding to market nervousness ahead of the results of U.S. bank stress tests due on May 4.
Asian markets initially followed Wall Street lower, but later clawed back their losses, helped by optimism about carmakers and technology stocks, to gain 1.4 percent by late afternoon trade
South Korea's top carmaker Hyundai Motor Co (
) jumped over 3 percent after reporting a smaller-than-expected drop in quarterly profit, while Toyota (
) jumped 3.5 percent after Goldman Sachs upgraded it to "buy" from "neutral," citing prospects for gains in U.S. market share.
Credit Suisse's results contrast with a forecast of a 2 billion franc loss by its larger Swiss rival UBS (
), which has been hit particularly hard by the global financial crisis and is still struggling to recover.
"We remain optimistic about the prospects for Credit Suisse, particularly in the context of the overall industry," Chief Executive Brady Dougan said in a statement.
The evidence of the fallout from the crisis and the resulting recession, which the IMF says will be the world's deepest since World War Two, was at hand in Japan.
Nomura is likely to show a record $7.2 billion annual loss largely due to the costs of snapping up operations of the failed Wall Street stalwart Lehman Brothers, Nikkei newspaper reported. Separately, Mizuho estimated it was likely to post an annual loss of nearly $6 billion, which would be its first in six-years. [ID:nT22036]
Trillions of dollars committed to stimulus packages, mixed corporate earnings and data suggesting the free-fall in the world economy was slowing, have spurred talk of "green shoots" of recovery and sparked a six-week rally in global stocks.
Tech companies provided some of the recent signs of resilience, with Apple Inc (
A Reuters poll on Thursday of cash-rich Japanese retail investors showed a record jump in its sentiment gauge in April, though still a 60 percent majority of those surveyed were bearish on Japanese stocks. [ID:nTKC003319]
But despite glimmers of hope, there is a growing sense that the road to recovery will be long and bumpy, marked by more corporate cost-cutting, job losses, depressed economic activity and hefty write-offs of assets gone bad.
The International Monetary Fund yet again cut its world outlook, predicting the economy will shrink 1.3 percent this year, by far the deepest post-war contraction. [ID:nN21500818]
Britain, Germany, Italy, Spain and the euro area as a whole are all expected to shrink sharply this year and keep on contracting in 2010. The IMF expects the U.S. economy to merely stagnate next year after shrinking 2.8 percent this year.
The German Finance Ministry said on Thursday Europe's biggest economy was heading further down after its economic slump probably deepened in the first quarter of the year. [ID:nBAF001653]
"The consensus is that the economy bottomed out in the first quarter," central bank adviser Fan Gang told Reuters in an interview. "Growth of 7 to 8 percent this year is possible. The economy has started showing signs of stabilising, but growth still relies on government investment." (Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by Tomasz Janowski; Editing by Neil Fullick)
