PRESS DIGEST - Hong Kong - April 23
2009-04-22 20:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
HONG KONG, April 23
Wed  EDT
HONG KONG, April 23
APPLE DAILY -- Goldman Sachs has changed to a positive tone for China's GDP growth this year as it revised up the growth prediction to 8.3 percent from six percent for 2009.
MING PAO DAILY NEWS -- Citigroup has revised up its previous target price estimate on CITIC Pacific, but it is still lower than the current share price. The group believes the Chinese firm would continue to offload its non-core assets.
SING TAO DAILY -- Sources say PCCW will not seek to extend the privatisation plan's for a later long stop date, meaning today the privatisation proposal will terminate. The company was also said to be declaring a high dividend today about HK$1.30 per share.
SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST -- A report from the Director of Audit has criticised spending at the Equal Opportunities Commission ranging from a HK$15,200 dinner in Beijing to the payment of a HK$320 speeding ticket.
HONG KONG ECONOMIC JOURNAL -- Individual shareholders of PCCW said they believe chairman Richard Li won't take the case to Court of Final Appeal. But he is yet to make a decision following Wednesday's court decision to overturn the previous ruling that sustained the company's privatisation deal.
HONG KONG DAILY NEWS -- The Hang Seng Index closed at its intra-day low yesterday at 14,878, losing 407 points or 2.7 percent. Analysts say the bear market bounce previously was of the weaker type because it was not supported by gains in blue-chip prices.
SING PAO -- Husky Oil in Canada, partially-owned by Hong Kong billionnaire Li Ka-shing, is planning to spin off it Southeast Asian assets for separate public listing in Asia. Assets will be injected under the plan when market conditions improve.
WEN WEI PO -- Hong Kong Monetary Authority intervened with the currency market, selling Hong Kong dollars as the exchange under peg went up to the strong end of the threshold against the greenback. Aggregated balance in the Hong Kong banking system will rise to over HK$170.4 billion today.
TA KUNG PAO -- Hong Kong-listed TCL Communication Technology Holdings has issued a profit warning for its first quarter performance. Its core operations would dip into the red as sales volume drops. For Chinese newspapers, see...............[PRESS/CN]
For Taiwan newspapers, see............[PRESS/TW]
