UPDATE 2-HK's PCCW says privatisation will lapse; shares drop
2009-04-22 23:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong telecom company PCCW (
) said on Thursday it will not extend a deadline for its $2.2 billion privatisation plan after a court blocked the buyout, sending its stock down as much as 17.5 percent.
The ruling by a Hong Kong appeals court on Wednesday was a setback for Richard Li, PCCW's chairman and largest shareholder, who was leading the buyout plan along with other major shareholders, and a boost for the city's securities watchdog, which had alleged vote-rigging in the deal.
Li, son of Hong Kong's richest man, Li Ka-shing, issued a statement expressing regret at how the whole process played out, while PCCW said it would not push ahead with the plan by extending a key deadline, but would pay a special dividend of HK$1.30 per share.
"They know the privatisation matter is dead, so this is another way for (major shareholders) to make some money out of the company," Francis Lun, general manager with Fulbright Securities, said, referring to the special dividend.
Shares of the city's dominant telecom operator were down 14 percent at HK$3.54 as of 0208 GMT, after hitting a near 4-month low of HK$3.4 as trading resumed after being suspended from April 16, when the appeal hearing began.
"I genuinely wanted to, through the privatisation proposal, give minority shareholders an opportunity to exit for cash at a substantial premium to the market price," Li said in a statement.
"I feel sorry that minority shareholders have lost this chance, considering the overwhelmingly large vote registered in favour of the privatisation. We still believe this was the correct decision for all stakeholders," said Li, who led the privatisation bid through his Pacific Century Regional Developments (
Hong Kong's High Court found nothing irregular and no strong evidence of coercion of minority shareholders, who had accepted the offer from Li's group of HK$4.50 per share, sweetened from HK$4.20.
"This may not be the end of the story, given that Mr. Li may appeal," said Marvin Lo, analyst at Daiwa Securities.
Citigroup Global Markets said Li's group of controlling shareholders, including Beijing-backed China Unicom (
), may approach the Court of Final Appeal, but added the recent unanimous appeal court decision "does not bode well for their chances there". (Additional reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Nick Macfie and Lincoln Feast)
