UPDATE 2-Taiwan's AU sees Q2 LCD upturn after Q1 loss
2009-04-23 04:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's AU Optronics Corp (
), the world's No.3 LCD maker, forecast a rise in shipments and prices this quarter after reporting its second straight quarterly net loss due to weak demand.
The display sector is showing early signs of recovering from one of its worst downturns as China's stimulus packages helps boost demand for computers and televisions.
The industry has been battered by steep falls in prices of screens used in flat TVs and computer monitors, forcing manufacturers to slash output in the second half of last year.
Some fund managers however said a nascent recovery could be shortlived if major LCD makers overestimate demand and race to pump out new capacity significantly later this year, leading to high stockpiles that could again hurt panel prices.
"A second-quarter improvement is not a surprise but one concern is if global demand really can pick up like what they had expected," said John Chiu, a fund manager at Taiwan's Fuh Hwa Securities Investment Trust.
"Oversupply is possible but there won't be a severe one because companies have learnt a lesson from previous downcycles," said Chiu, who owns AU, Chi Mei and other display component stocks in his T$10 billion ($295 million) fund.
AU booked a net loss of T$20.2 billion in January-March, swinging from a profit of T$27 billion a year ago.
But the loss narrowed from a loss of T$26.6 billion in the last quarter of 2008, and was largely in line with a consensus forecast of T$20.4 billion loss made by Reuters Estimates.
For a graphic, click:
AU and local smaller rival Chi Mei Optoelectronics Corp 3009.TW have recently benefitted from a spate of orders from China, and AU has also seen signs of recovery in TV demand in North America.
Last week, larger South Korean rival LG Display Co Ltd (
), Hewlett-Packard Co (
It said it could be running at almost full capacity in the second quarter as it brings forward operations at a new LCD plant by the end of the second quarter, one quarter ahead of schedule, to meet growing demand for flat-screen TVs.
The island's top LCD maker raised its 2009 capital expenditure forecast by up to 20 percent.
Investors had bet on AU's improvement as AU's shares jumped 2.5 percent to their highest close in nearly 7 months on Thursday. Chi Mei shares rose 3.2 percent in a broader market
), which also makes memory chips and sells PCs, mobile phones and LCD TVs, is likely to report a quarterly profit on Friday. [ID:SEO316971]
AU expects its second-quarter shipments of TV panels, which make up about half of its total sales, to rise 50 percent from the first quarter, and prices would rise by about 5 percent for both PC and TV panels in the same period.
"The worst is over and I am quite confident of our business in the next few months and our sales should improve month by month," AU President L.J. Chen told investors.
