Canada's Hanwei in talks to supply China wind farm
2009-04-22 14:31:00.0
Canada's Hanwei in talks to supply China wind farm | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Canada's Hanwei in talks to supply China wind farm
OTTAWA, April 22
Wed  EDT
OTTAWA, April 22
) said on Wednesday it is in talks to supply equipment for a 400 megawatt wind farm planned for China, a project that offers both big challenges and rich rewards.
Hanwei, which has signed a letter of intent with government officials and a wind farm developer, said the deal could be worth about C$400 million ($323 million).
Vancouver, British Columbia-based Hanwei, which has more than 1,000 staff in China, plans to build a manufacturing plant in the Baotou region of China to supply the farm with turbines and blades.
The project faces several hurdles, Hanwei's senior vice-president of finance and business, Kim Oishi, said in an interview.
Alongside government approvals, the wind farm requires 2 MW turbines, which Hanwei must develop to advance its present 1.5 MW turbine technology.
The company, which has another plant about 2,000 km (1,250 miles) from Baotou, must also secure a reliable, low-cost, local supply chain for parts -- often a common problem for turbine manufacturers, said Oishi.
The project, which would represent Hanwei's second major wind power customer, after Ruihao Energy Technology Co in China, also has some key advantages.
"The Chinese government is desperate to stimulate the economy in order to reach an 8 percent growth rate. They've got a big stimulus package and ... they're pushing money out to people like us," said Oishi.
"Our debt financing arrangements have become much more flexible and (we have) better access to debt capital than we ever had ... So we don't anticipate any slowdowns in our particular projects."
Hanwei, which entered the wind energy business in 2007, said China is the world's fifth biggest wind power market.
To advance this project from the current non-binding letter of intent, the company is in talks with Beijing Kunding Xunlei New Energy Technology Ltd, which will develop and operate the farm, and Baotou's development and reform commission, a government agency.
They plan to build the farm about 100 km (62 miles) from Baotou, a region that is estimated to host more than 30 percent of China's wind power resources, Hanwei said.
Hanwei, which grew its 2008 revenue by 136 percent to C$96.5 million, sells mainly to the energy sector in China.
It expects revenue to grow between 40 percent and 60 percent in 2009, with wind power and oil field pipe units accounting for more than 90 percent of sales.
Shares in Hanwei were up 4.5 percent, or 8 Canadian cents, at C$1.84 on the Toronto Stock Exchange on Wednesday. The stock has lost nearly 58 percent of its value in the past year.
($1=$1.24 Canadian) (Reporting by Susan Taylor; editing by Rob Wilson)
