UPDATE 3-Kimberly-Clark profit falls; sees lower 2009 sales
2009-04-22 14:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Kimberly-Clark Corp (
) reported a lower quarterly profit, pressured by weaker demand for higher-end products, increased pension costs and a stronger U.S. dollar.
The consumer products maker, which derives almost half of its revenue outside the United States, said the stronger dollar reduced its first-quarter profit by about 30 cents a share compared with the prior year.
Kimberly-Clark backed its 2009 profit forecast of $4.00 to $4.20 a share, but said earnings in the first half of the year are likely to be down compared with 2008, with improvement expected in the second half of the year.
Given the currency headwinds, pension costs and a challenging sales environment, the outlook looks "pretty good," Edward Jones analyst Jack Russo said by telephone.
Russo, who has a "buy" rating on the stock, expects the company's sales growth in the emerging markets, including China, Brazil, India and Russia, to help Kimberly-Clark offset slower growth in the United States.
), consumers have been buying less expensive products, such as generic toilet paper, during the recession.
Some consumers have also been using the supplies they already have at home, rather than stocking up on items such as paper towels and toilet paper.
The company, whose other brands include Scott, Cottonelle, Ballard Medical and Kotex, posted a first-quarter profit of $407 million, or 98 cents a share, compared with $441 million, or $1.04 a share, a year earlier.
Analysts, on average, expected the company to earn 97 cents a share, before special items, according to Reuters Estimates.
The lower sales volumes reflect challenging economic conditions in North America and Europe, particularly affecting its K-C Professional and Consumer Tissue businesses, as well as the child care category in Personal Care, the company said.
"The K-C Professional division is still struggling because they service a lot of restaurants and food service accounts," Edward Jones' Russo said. It was the only segment at Kimberly- Clark to post a fall in operating profit margin in the latest first quarter.
Kimberly-Clark, which is freezing pension plan benefits for all U.S. non-union employees, effective Dec. 31, 2009, as part of its efforts to trim costs in the recession, expects 2009 pension expense of about $255 million, down about $40 million from the original plan for the year.
In the latest first quarter, Kimberly-Clark's pension expense rose about 8 cents a share.
On a conference call with analysts, the company said it expects to reduce headcount in the second and third quarters to cut costs further. But the company said it was unable to quantify potential cost savings from the move.
Kimberly-Clark shares fell to an intraday low of $49.01, before paring some losses to trade down 23 cents at $49.72 on Wednesday afternoon on the New York Stock Exchange. (Editing by Derek Caney; Editing by Andre Grenon)
