Clinton talks tough as Iran says ready for meeting
2009-04-22 18:42:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton testifies before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Capitol Hill in Washington April 22, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Yuri Gripas
Wed  EDT
"We are also laying the groundwork for the kind of very tough ... crippling sanctions that might be necessary in the event that our offers are either rejected or the process is inconclusive or unsuccessful," Clinton told the House of Representatives foreign affairs committee.
Clinton's tough talk came as Iran, in an official statement, said it believed discussions could resolve disputes between the Islamic republic and the West, but it said Tehran would press ahead with its work to develop atomic energy.
"The Islamic Republic of Iran ... welcomes constructive and fair talks based on mutual respect and believes current problems could be resolved through talks," the statement said.
"The Islamic Republic of Iran will continue its nuclear activities in an active interaction with the (United Nations) International Atomic Energy Agency in the framework of the NPT (Non-Proliferation Treaty) like other agency members," it said.
The statement was Tehran's response to an invitation this month by six world powers to discuss the nuclear issue, according to Iranian state television.
Last week, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said Iran had prepared proposals to end the dispute, without giving details.
"We actually believe that by following the diplomatic path we are on, we gain credibility and influence with a number of nations who would have to participate in order to make the sanctions regime as tight and crippling as we would want it to be," Clinton told U.S. lawmakers.
Engaging Iran marked a significant shift in U.S. policy under President Barack Obama, whose predecessor, George W. Bush, shunned direct talks as long as Tehran continued with enrichment activity.
While saying it would welcome talks, Iran also criticized the powers' statement, issued after a meeting in London earlier this month, saying parts of it were contradictory and insulting by referring to a dual track strategy of carrots and sticks.
Iran has repeatedly dismissed demands that it stop enriching uranium, which can have both civilian and military uses. Tehran says its activities are aimed at producing electricity so that it can export more of its gas and oil.
Negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program come at a delicate time as Washington seeks the release of Iranian-American reporter Roxana Saberi, who was jailed last weekend on charges of spying for the United States.
"Roxana Saberi, who is being held in an arbitrary and terribly unfair, unprecedented, unjustified way, should be able to come home. And we hope that we can achieve that," Clinton said at the hearing.
She also reiterated the United States wanted information about a missing ex-FBI agent, Robert Levinson, who has not been heard from since he went to Iran two years ago.
"We are going to continue to press this at every turn," said Clinton of the Levinson case.
(Additional reporting by Arshad Mohammed in Washington and by Fredrik Dahl in Iran; Editing by Doina Chiacu)
