HK shares gain 0.9 pct after two-day slide
2009-04-23 01:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares staged a small rally to rise 0.9 percent on Thursday after a two-day slump, but gains were limited by weakness in the Chinese markets and underlying concerns about the results of the stress tests at U.S. banks.
Shares in Hong Kong's dominant fixed-line operator PCCW (
The stock opened 17.5 percent lower as trading resumed a day after a court blocked the buyout. The court ruled in favour of the city's securities watchdog, which alleges vote-rigging in the deal.
PCCW also declared a special dividend of HK$1.30 per share to be paid on or around May 18, in lieu of any final dividend for the 2008 fiscal year.
"The special dividend is the only positive but may serve little apart from alleviating the disappointment effect from the buyout block. We stay sell," wrote Citigroup analyst Anand Ramachandran on Thursday.
was up 133.76 points at 15,012.21.
"Most Asian markets have been hovering and trade is going to remain pretty rangebound until we have the results of the stress tests on the U.S. banks," said Patrick Shum, chief portfolio strategist with Karl Thomson Securities.
The test, designed to see how the country's largest banks would fare if the U.S. recession proved unexpectedly severe, results are due on May 4.
Turnover shrank to HK$28.7 billion from midday Wednesday's HK$32.2 billion.
of top mainland companies was 0.9 percent higher at 8,796.47 with China Life (
) gave up 2.8 percent after reporting an 89 percent drop in its first-quarter earnings, hard-hit by the fall in its average selling price for copper and chemical products.
China's largest shipping conglomerate China Cosco (
) dropped 1.1 percent to HK$6.27 after reporting a 40 percent decline in its 2008 earnings, lagging market expectations, as it slid into the red in the second half owing to mark-to-market losses on its freight-forward agreements.
Another dry bulker, China Shipping Development (
) gave up 2.6 percent after issuing a profit warning for the first quarter. The announcement was generally expected by investors amid the continuing slump in global trade, but the stock pulled back after a 42 percent rally since the beginning of April.
"We are not surprised by CSCL's profit warning for the first quarter of 2009, which we expect to be the worst quarter of the year for the company following unprecedented revenue declines for the industry, with double-digit contractions in both volumes and rates," said Tom Kim, analyst with Golman Sachs in a note to investors.
(Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Chris Lewis)
