Gold rises on higher physical demand, PGMs rise
2009-04-22 15:28:00.0
Gold rises on higher physical demand, PGMs rise | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Gold rises on higher physical demand, PGMs rise
Wed  EDT
Spot gold traded at $891.10 an ounce at 2:04 p.m. EDT, up 1.0 percent from its late Tuesday quote $882.25 an ounce in New York.
U.S. gold futures for June delivery settled up $9.80, or 1.1 percent, at $892.50 an ounce on the COMEX division of New York Mercantile Exchange.
U.S. stocks rose over 1 percent, reversing earlier losses, as several key companies gave positive outlooks that eased worries about a prolonged global recession. .N
The euro extended gains versus the dollar to session highs as stocks on Wall Street rebounded. A firmer dollar typically weighs on gold, which is often bought as an alternative asset to the U.S. currency.
Elsewhere, an uptick in physical demand for the metal in Asia ahead of the Akshaya Tritya festival on April 27 -- an auspicious time for gold buying -- is also helping support prices.
"We sold around 100 kgs this morning," said a dealer with a private bank in Mumbai.
Investor demand remained relatively sluggish, however. Holdings of the SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, were steady on Tuesday from the previous day.
The trust's holdings have declined 19.01 tonnes in the last four weeks, compared with a rise of 96.01 tonnes in the preceding four weeks.
Inflows into gold-backed ETFs jumped to an all-time high in the first quarter of this year, the World Gold Council said on Wednesday.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was at $1,169.50 an ounce, up 1.5 percent from its late Tuesday quote of $1,152.50, while palladium was at $231.00 an ounce, up 4.1 percent from its previous finish of $222.
Palladium received underlying support from renewed talk of its use in cold fusion technology after CBS-TV covered the topic on its news program "60 Minutes" on Sunday, a NYMEX floor trader said.
Palladium is employed as one of the main ingredients to generate energy in cold fusion, but the technology is still in its experimental stage and has not been scientifically proven to work.
Meanwhile, the UK government announced it will implement a car-scrapping scheme similar to the "cash-for-clunkers" initiatives already in place in countries such as Germany, which have boosted car sales there.
Around half of the world's platinum is used by the automotive industry.
Chinese imports data released on Wednesday showed China imported 3,566 kilograms of platinum in March, up more than 35 percent from a year before.
The figures reflect a rise in platinum jewelry buying in China at the beginning of the year, dealers said, with jewelers taking advantage of lower prices to rebuild stocks of the metal.
Spot silver was at $12.32 an ounce, up 2.8 percent from its previous finish $11.99, tracking gains in gold.
