Gold rises as equities turn negative
2009-04-22 09:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold climbed in Europe on Wednesday as European shares and U.S. stock futures extended declines, boosting interest in the metal as a haven from risk.
Spot gold was bid at $887.05 an ounce at 1245 GMT (8:45 a.m. EDT), against $882.25 an ounce late in New York on Tuesday.
"(Gold) is looking at equity markets for direction right now," Standard Bank analyst Walter de Wet said. "Equities play an important role, particularly in a week when there is no really important macro data."
U.S. stock futures fell further after a raft of corporate results, with Morgan Stanley reporting a net loss.
European shares also fell, reversing earlier gains, after the numbers. Volatility in stock markets helps gold, which is often bought as a safe store of value.
On the currency markets, the dollar -- which is perceived as a less risky currency due to its liquidity -- rose to a one-month high against the euro, hurt by falling equities.
A firmer dollar typically weighs on gold, which is often bought as an alternative asset to the U.S. currency. But the relationship between the two has weakened in recent months as both take their cues from risk aversion.
"We sold around 100 kgs this morning," said a dealer with a private bank in Mumbai. Gold imports in India have also picked up this month after an extremely slow period at the beginning of 2009.
Investor demand remained relatively sluggish, however. Holdings of the SPDR Gold Trust, the world's largest gold-backed exchange-traded fund, were steady on Tuesday from the previous day.
The trust's holdings have declined 19.01 tonnes in the last four weeks, compared with a rise of 96.01 tonnes in the preceding four weeks.
"The 21.7 tonnes in ETF outflows that were made on Thursday and Friday... will counteract support from the predicted 30 tonnes in imports to India," said MF Global in a note.
Inflows into gold-backed ETFs jumped to an all-time high in the first quarter of this year, the World Gold Council said on Wednesday.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was bid at $1,174 an ounce against $1,152.50, while palladium was bid at $229.50 an ounce, up from $222.
The UK government announced it will implement a car scrapping scheme similar to the 'cash-for-clunkers' initiatives already in place in countries such as Germany, which have boosted car sales there.
Chinese imports data released on Wednesday showed China imported 3,566 kilograms of platinum in March, up more than 35 percent from a year before.
The figures reflect a rise in platinum jewelry buying in China at the beginning of the year, dealers said, with jewelers taking advantage of lower prices to rebuild stocks of the metal.
"The market is obviously excited about China's net purchases of platinum which are running considerably above year earlier levels," JPMorgan said in a note.
Spot silver was bid at $12.13 an ounce against $11.99, tracking gains in gold.
(Reporting by Jan Harvey; Editing by Sue Thomas)
