Vestas expects wind market stagnation in 2009
2009-04-22 11:50:00.0
(Reuters) - The world's largest manufacturer of wind turbine parks, Danish company Vestas, expects the worldwide wind market to stagnate in 2009 compared with last year.
"(The market) will likely reach the same level as 2008, and will perhaps tip slightly above this," Hans Joern Rieks, in charge of Vestas' Central European operations, told Reuters at the Hanover trade fair on Wednesday.
Vestas' outlook is more skeptical than that from the German Association of Wind Energy (BWE) which expects the worldwide wind energy market to expand 10 percent in 2009 to around 34 billion euros ($43.94 billion).
Rieks said he expected the U.S. wind market to be about half of what it was last year, and European sales to largely remain flat, while Asia could grow by around 10 percent.
"The optimists say that Germany might see a bit of growth, but we don't see it like that," Rieks said.
Competitors like REpower und Nordex expect to see benefits from government stimulus packages, like those enacted in the United States and Germany.
"These (however) won't really take hold until 2010," Rieks added.
Nonetheless, Vestas expects to profit from its new factories in the United States and inner Mongolia.
"In the past few years we were at a competitive disadvantage in the U.S. because we had to export everything there," Rieks says.
The company would stick to its plan to invest more than a billion euros in the U.S. in 2009 and 2010, Rieks added.
Vestas is also well positioned in China, where it enjoys 8 percent of the total market.
"If we can lift this into the double-digits, then we are on the right path," Rieks said.
Vestas has so far seen no delays or cancellations due to the global financial downturn, according to Rieks.
"We don't expect this either," he added.
The company, however, acknowledges that financing for new projects has become more difficult.
The market is being hurt by the fact that large financiers, like the hard-hit German bank HSH Nordbank, will have to severely trim their activities in the sector, Rieks said.
(Reporting by Arno Schuetze, writing by Tyler Sitte; editing by Elaine Hardcastle)
