U.S. farmers hit fields to sow corn, soy for world
2009-04-22 11:40:00.0
(Reuters) - Iowa corn and soybean farmer Julius Schaaf doesn't know where grain prices are headed, or how quickly the economy will find its footing. And he can only hope for the good weather that is key to growing bountiful crops.
Yet this week found Schaaf, a 30-year farming veteran, enthusiastically laying seed into fields that come autumn will contribute to an estimated 12 billion bushel U.S. corn crop and 3 billion bushel U.S. soybean crop, helping feed people and animals around the world.
"We're planting hard and fast," said Schaaf, who is optimistic he and his fellow farmers in Iowa, the top U.S. corn-producing state, can reap a near-record crop this year.
In all, farmers are expected to plant 84.986 million acres of corn this spring, the U.S. Agriculture Department has projected. That could translate to 12.2 billion bushels if weather and yields are average.
U.S. farmers are also expected to plant about 76.024 million acres of soybeans, which under normal conditions could mean a harvest of more than 3 billion bushels. Last year's crop came in at 2.959 billion bushels.
The United States is the world's largest exporter of corn and soybeans. Last year, the corn crop was valued at $47.4 billion and the soybean crop at $27.4 billion, government figures show.
Wet weather has slowed seeding progress in many key growing areas, including fields across Missouri, Kansas, Indiana and Illinois. The delays were sparking some fears about the ultimate production potential for the corn crop because the crop fares better if it is more developed when the high heat of a Midwestern summer sets in.
"Planting in Illinois has barely gotten under way," said Emerson Nafziger, agronomist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Illinois farmers had only about 1 percent of their corn acreage planted as of Sunday, according to the USDA, compared to the five-year average pace of 23 percent.
In Iowa, where production accounts for more than 15 percent of total U.S. output, only about 6 percent of the state's corn acres had been seeded as of Sunday, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The five-year average pace for the state at this time of year is 10 percent.
Nationally, only 5 percent of the new corn crop was seeded, behind the five-year average pace of 14 percent but slightly ahead of last year's progress at this time.
Still, the delays can be made up quickly barring more bad weather, said Prudential Financial analyst Shawn McCambridge.
"Farmers can put in an awful lot of acreage in a short amount of time," he said.
Demand for soybeans has been on the rise of late, fueled by active buying by China.
But corn demand has been lighter, hurt by a struggling corn ethanol industry and lower demand for meat -- which means less corn sold for feed rations -- due to the recession. And that has brought corn prices down sharply.
Last summer, corn futures on the Chicago Board of Trade traded over $7 a bushel and soybean futures climbed above $16, fueled by heavy flooding which delayed production in the U.S. Midwest.
This week, farmers saw corn futures under $4 and soybeans under $11 a bushel.
Still, Gidel said farmers were better positioned than many others to ride out the recession.
"Around the world everybody still needs to eat," he said.
On his farm near Sidney, Iowa, Schaaf said he was confident global demand would come "roaring back."
"Prices are more volatile than they were in the past," Schaaf said. "So it's hang onto your hat and ride it out."
Jay Lynch, who farms with his father in north-central Iowa, has also felt the pain of the falling prices. He had contracted with a local ethanol plant amid last year's premium corn prices only to see the ethanol company go bankrupt and his contract dissolved.
Another ethanol company is eager for his corn this season, but the prices are barely at break-even levels, he said.
Still, he said he is optimistic for the new season.
"There will be a lot of corn," said Lynch. "The fields are working real nice."
(Reporting by Carey Gillam; editing by Jim Marshall)
