UPDATE 4-BHP says Escondida copper output to fall 30 pct
2009-04-22 06:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Production from the world's biggest copper mine, Escondida, will decline by 30 percent this fiscal year, owner BHP Billiton (
) said, as it posted falls in quarterly output and remained wary about the future.
Iron ore and aluminium production also fell, and the company said it stood ready to halt operations as demand weakened.
"BHP's production scorecard is a little light across most business units versus our expectations. There is little cause for optimism," Deutsche Securities said in note, referring to BHP's cautious outlook.
"In the medium term, we expect that market conditions will remain uncertain," said BHP, the world's biggest mining group, which has been cutting production and shelving projects amid the worst global recession in decades.
"All our operations will remain under review. We will continue to take appropriate actions in any business that is cash negative and set to remain so, or where there is lack of demand," the company added in its production report.
By contrast, rival Rio Tinto Ltd/Plc RIO.A(
), which holds minority stake in Escondida, last week showed a 33 percent gain in quarterly copper production, boosted by higher output from other mines it owns. [ID:nSYD276590]
BHP shares in London slid 2.2 percent by 0959 GMT, making it one of the biggest losers on the FTSE 100 blue chip index
Shares in BHP, the world's biggest mining group, have lagged the UK mining index .FTNMX1770 by 12 percent this year.
Last year, Chile-based Escondida produced 1.2 million tonnes of copper, or just under 5 percent of global output, so a 30 percent drop equates to about 360,000 tonnes.
BHP manages the mine, in which it holds a 57.5 percent stake. Rio Tinto holds 30 percent and Mitsubishi Corp (
) 10 percent. Rio has agreed to sell China's Chinalco half its stake.
Copper is part of BHP's base metals unit, which was one of the worst bottom-line performers when interim results were released in February, sinking to an operating loss.
A BHP spokeswoman said the company had initially anticipated Escondida's production would slip by around 20-25 percent in the company's fiscal year to June 30.
"The copper number is particularly of concern because copper is a bellwether of the wider state of the industrial commodities sector," said Andrew Harrington, Sydney-based mining analyst for the Patersons brokerage.
The price of copper has shed more than 6 percent this week, though it is up nearly 50 percent this year, leading some analysts to say the worst of the commodities slump could be over.
A scrapped proposal by BHP to buy Rio with shares that was worth up to $193 billion at one point would have significantly lifted BHP's exposure to copper.
Speculation BHP may make a second offer resurfaced in the last week, though takeover regulations mean it must wait until November 27, 2009 - unless it can get the support of Rio's board.
So far, BHP's biggest curtailment has been in nickel, with the closure of the Ravensthorpe nickel mine in Australia. Analysts say more cutbacks could follow in other commodities, such as alumina and aluminium.
Coal output in Australia already has turned down as Asian steel-mills hit hard times, with metallugical coal output down 25 percent from the previous quarter. Iron ore, another steel-making commodity, is also feeling the pinch.
BHP reported a 1 percent drop in iron ore production and 4 percent fall in aluminium year-on-year, down 2 percent and 4 percent respectively on the previous quarter. Nickel rose 10 percent year-on-year and was off 4 percent on the second quarter.
All the deferred ore was being sold on the spot market, BHP said.
For a graphic of BHP production, click:
For a table of BHP output, click [ID:nSYD473347] (Additional reporting by Eric Onstad in London; Editing by Michael Urquhart, John Stonestreet)
