China predicts recovery, West sees no end to crisis
2009-04-22 05:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China declared on Wednesday that its economy has already hit bottom, but wealthy nations saw few signs that the global crisis will end soon in the debt-laden Western world.
Even stock markets, which had risen after U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner indicated that most banks had enough reserves to weather the storm, were flat as heavyweight European companies produced a mixed bag of results.
Financial markets, battered by a crisis which the International Monetary Fund says may force $4.1 trillion in asset writedowns, are craving any sign that the worst of the slump is over.
Supporting hopes that China will help the global economy return to growth, Deputy Central Bank Governor Yi Gang said the world's third largest economy hit a low point in the last three months of 2008 and was on track to grow close to Beijing's 8 percent target this year.
"Looking into the future, the second quarter and the remainder of this year will continue this recovery trend," Yi told a meeting in Beijing.
China must meet that target to create enough jobs for its huge numbers of new workers. But the "old economies" also badly need help from dynamic Asian countries in a recession which has respected no national frontiers, unlike most past downturns.
The picture in Asia is patchy. Japan's March exports nearly halved compared with a year earlier, but rose from February, the first monthly gain since last May.
China, helped by a $585 billion state stimulus plan, is expected to be the first major economy to recover. By contrast, in Europe, many policymakers believe things are getting worse more slowly, but see no "green shoots" of recovery yet.
French Prime Minister Francois Fillon expected a slow recovery only in 2010. "What is certain is that 2009 will be a year of severe recession ... a (contraction) of -2.5 percent is probable," he said.
A senior central banker was also cautious in forecasting better times. "In terms of the global economy we are still in the midst of a sharp downturn," said Axel Weber, who sits on the European Central Bank's Governing Council.
"If you are looking for green shoots: my view is that a deceleration of the downward pressure can be expected, but up to now there are no clear signs of a leveling off in Germany and Europe," he told the Financial Times.
Weber heads the central bank of Germany, whose economy is suffering one of Europe's deepest recessions due to a collapse in its exports, which had been the lifeblood of its growth.
Things are little better in Britain, heavily reliant on its banking industry which came close to collapse last year.
Analysts polled by Reuters reckon Britain must issue bonds worth 180 billion pounds ($262 billion) this financial year, and some reckon it could be as high as 200 billion.
But with an election due by June 2010 and the ruling Labor Party sinking in the polls, Darling will stress the economy should turn around by the end of the year.
"We've got to ...invest in Britain's future to ensure that we can take advantage of the recovery when it comes, and it will come," said Darling.
The biggest fear of most Britons -- and countless millions around the world -- is unemployment. Here things are still getting worse and won't improve for some time.
Numbers of Britons claiming jobless benefits rose less than expected in March, official data showed. "(However), it is hard to gain much comfort from a still very substantial increase of 73,700," said economist Howard Archer of Global Insight.
Other figures showed government borrowing in the 2008/09 fiscal year totaled 89.958 billion pounds, much higher than the 77.6 billion forecast last November, and the highest since records began in 1946/47.
"This suggests that ... (Darling) will be unveiling some truly terrible estimates for borrowing this year and next, which will keep bond markets very nervous," said James Knightley at ING Economics.
U.S. stocks got a boost on Tuesday from Treasury Secretary Geithner's assurances on U.S. banks. Europe was more cautious. Shares ticked higher as banks gained ground, offsetting the impact of Roche, which tumbled after a cancer drug setback, while company results sent mixed signals.
"The test is the earnings season, that stocks suffer bad news but react well to that. So far they're not passing that test but not failing it decisively either," said John Haynes, strategist at Rensburg Sheppard.
(Reporting by Reuters bureaus worldwide; Writing by David Stamp) Editing by Ruth Pitchford)
