WRAPUP 2-VW, Peugeot post Q1 slump; sector overhaul in focus
2009-04-22 07:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Plunging profit at carmaker Volkswagen, slumping sales at rival PSA Peugeot Citroen and job cuts by truck-maker Volvo provided further evidence of the dire state of the automotive industry on Wednesday.
But markets welcomed steps being taken by some to counter the downturn, such as German Volkswagen's (
) move to conserve cash and Swedish Volvo's (
Volkswagen's preferred shares (
) were up 5.8 percent at 1150 GMT, while Volvo stock was up 8.3 percent.
Elsewhere, Daimler (
Also, U.S. financial investor Cerberus [CBS.UL], the majority owner of Chrysler, has no interest in taking a stake in General Motors' (
) Opel business, a source close to the situation told Reuters on Wednesday. [ID:nWEA7713]
Volkswagen, Europe's biggest carmaker, was able to post a first-quarter operating profit down 76 percent to 312 million euros ($403 million) thanks to a 600 million contribution from the sale of its Brazilian heavy truck business to MAN (
Automotive net liquidity rose 34 percent to 10.7 billion euros as of the end of March compared with 8.0 billion euros at the end of December, as the carmaker slashed investment cash.
"There is no other company in the industry that performs better in this market than Volkswagen," said Credit Suisse analyst Arndt Ellinghorst, welcoming the results and adding "I stick to my thesis that VW should use its net liquidity to buy (sportscar brand) Porsche AG".
LBBW analyst Frank Biller sounded a more cautious note: "It looks as if VW did a good job of holding its ground but until we can look at the full accounts in the quarterly report it's too early to give a more detailed analysis".
) shares underperformed the market, as it posted a 25 percent drop in first-quarter revenue to 11.0 billion euros, and confirmed it still expected a loss and negative free cash flow in 2009.
The French carmaker's shares were down 1.4 percent, while the CAC-40 index
Although incentives to scrap cars in some European countries -- especially France and Germany -- had a positive impact on sales, "the overall outlook remains volatile, with limited visibility at this stage," Peugeot said. [ID:nL0584215]
Natixis Securities analyst Georges Dieng said: "The question is really how the scrapping schemes in European countries are going to finish. The market will adjust at that moment either up or down, and that will affect how it evolves in 2010".
In a further sign of the sector's woes, Volvo announced it would cut more than 1,500 jobs to adjust to plummeting demand across its main markets.
Elsewhere on Wednesday, Volkswagen's (
) premium brand Audi said it would postpone any decision to build vehicles in the United States as it pledged to invest around 300 million euros in the Seat plant in Martorell, Spain, where it plans to begin building the Q3 compact sport utility vehicle in 2011. [ID:nFAB013051]
In Asia, China's ministry of commerce said it would expand a subsidy scheme to encourage the replacement of old cars and buses. [ID:nPEK143246]
The results season for Europe's carmakers continues with Italian Fiat (
(Additional reporting by Matthias Blamont, Philipp Halstrick, Aileen Wang, Alan Wheatley, Ben Harding and Manuel Maria Ruiz, Niklas Pollard and Oskar von Bahr; Editing by Marcel Michelson and Dan Lalor) ($1 = 0.7738 euro)
