HK shares follow Shanghai to finish at two-week low
2009-04-22 05:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares shed 2.7 percent, to finish at a two-week low on Wednesday as the Shanghai market pulled back on talk China's regulators may tighten new lending after a record first quarter for loan growth.
Brokers cited market talk that China's regulator was investigating money flows to see how much of the new lending was finding its way into stock speculation. They also noted speculation that China was looking to lift its moratorium on initial public offerings, to explain the sharp drop on the Shanghai bourse.
"When the Shanghai index crossed 2,500 points it must have set off a few alarm bells; Chinese regulators don't want to see the markets overheat again," said Alex Tang, research director at Core Pacific-Yamaichi International.
"But they may not take any drastic measures to talk down the market, after all they have done to boost investor sentiment," he said.
) slid 5.9 percent to HK$4.33, while Bank of China (
) retreated 3.4 percent, while Bank of Communications (
ended 407.44 points lower at 14,878.45.
) retreated 1.7 percent, adding to Tuesday's steep losses as doubts emerged about credit quality deterioration at U.S. banks.
On Tuesday, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said most U.S. banks had enough in reserve to continue lending, but investors are cautious about prospects for further write-downs and capital needs at banks around the world, especially after the International Monetary Fund said write-downs could reach $4.1 trillion.
Meanwhile, emerging markets-focused lender Standard Chartered (
) jumped 5.6 percent after Goldman Sachs rated the stock a buy, making a "right time, right place, right moves, right price" argument for the stock.
of top mainland companies was 3.5 percent lower at 8,721.25.
CITIC PACIFIC, CNBM BUCK TREND
The move is seen as a part a wider overhaul of the diversified Chinese conglomerate, which took a nearly $2 billion hit on currency bets in 2008, under its new management.
"This business has been making losses for years, so selling it will alleviate some of the pressure on the company's bottom line and increase its cash flow," said Castor Pang, strategist with Sun Hung Kai Financial.
"CITIC Pacific may sell some other non-core assets in the near future. Maybe they will sell their infrastructure business in China, it doesn't seem to be their focus," he said.
Goldman Sachs raised its target price on the stock by 18 percent to HK$17, expecting demand from construction to pick up in the second and third quarters of 2009 as activity in the infrastructure and property sectors picks up pace.
) dropped 12 percent to HK$5.80 after a share placement involving 54 million shares priced at HK$5.60, a 15 percent discount to Tuesday's closing price.
(Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Chris Lewis)
