Secondhand smoke tied to more health effects
2012-06-14 15:14:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Jun 12 2012
Thu, May 24 2012
Tue, May 22 2012
Mon, May 21 2012
Thu  EDT
(Reuters Health) - People regularly exposed to secondhand smoke may have increased risks of dying from various causes, a long-term study from China suggests.
Researchers found that compared with adults who lived and worked in smoke-free environs, those exposed to secondhand smoke were more likely to die of heart disease or lung cancer over 17 years.
The findings, which appear in the medical journal Chest, cannot definitively prove that secondhand smoke is the culprit. But the researchers were able to account for some other key factors, like a person's age, education, job, and blood pressure and cholesterol levels.
And the links between secondhand smoke and mortality remained, say the researchers, led by Dr. Yao He of Chinese PLA General Hospital in Beijing.
"This is exactly the type of study design you want to see," said Joanna Cohen, director of the Institute for Global Tobacco Control at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore.
Cohen, who was not involved in the research, pointed out that the study followed people over many years, and it found evidence of a "dose-response" relationship -- meaning people's risks climbed as their secondhand smoke exposure increased.
A number of studies have found that non-smokers who regularly breathe in other people's tobacco smoke have an increased risk of developing heart disease or certain cancers, including lung tumors.
In the U.S., the most recent Surgeon General's report said there was "suggestive" evidence that secondhand smoke might boost people's risk of stroke and emphysema, also known as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or COPD.
But the evidence was considered insufficient to say there was a "causal relationship," Cohen noted.
"This type of study," she said, "is important for adding to evidence of a causal relationship."
Cohen also said it was "huge" that the information was coming from China. "It's the country with the most number of smokers," she pointed out. And, she said, it is trailing other nations in anti-smoking education and tobacco control.
At the start, 44 percent said they lived with a smoker, while 53 percent said they inhaled secondhand smoke at work.
Over the following years, 249 study participants died. And the risks of death from heart disease, stroke, lung cancer and emphysema were all two to three times higher among people exposed to secondhand smoke.
Among men, for example, 11 percent of the 271 men exposed to secondhand smoke died of stroke. That compared with 6.5 percent of the 168 men who lived and worked in smoke-free surroundings.
The numbers of people who died of each specific cause were fairly small, which is a limitation.
"When numbers get small," Cohen said, "it makes it more difficult to get a precise estimate" of risks.
But she said the results do support evidence that secondhand smoke may boost the risks of not only heart disease and certain cancers, but stroke and emphysema as well.
Chest, online May 24, 2012.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
OSHA / NIOSH RESEARCH In 1991 NIOSH { OSHA¡¯ research group} Looked into ETS although at the time they recommended reducing ETS exposure they found the studies lacking. NIOSH recognizes that these recent epidemiological studies have several shortcomings: lack of objective measures for charachterizing and quantifying exposures,failures to adjust for all confounding variables,potential misclassification of ex-smokers as non-smokers,unavailability of comparison groups that have not been exposed to ETS, and low statistical power. Research is needed to investigate the following issues: 1. More acurate quantification of the increased risk of lung cancer associated with ETS exposure,including determination of other contributing factors[e.g.,occupational exposures]that may accentuate the risk. 2.Determination of the concentration and distributuion of ETS components in the workplace to help quantify the risk for the U.S. working population. a.The association of ETS exposure with cancer other than lung cancer
OSHA / NIOSH RESEARCH In 1991 NIOSH { OSHA¡¯ research group} Looked into ETS although at the time they recommended reducing ETS exposure they found the studies lacking. NIOSH recognizes that these recent epidemiological studies have several shortcomings: lack of objective measures for charachterizing and quantifying exposures,failures to adjust for all confounding variables,potential misclassification of ex-smokers as non-smokers,unavailability of comparison groups that have not been exposed to ETS, and low statistical power. Research is needed to investigate the following issues: 1. More acurate quantification of the increased risk of lung cancer associated with ETS exposure,including determination of other contributing factors[e.g.,occupational exposures]that may accentuate the risk. 2.Determination of the concentration and distributuion of ETS components in the workplace to help quantify the risk for the U.S. working population. a.The association of ETS exposure with cancer other than lung cancer
c.The relationship between ETS exposure and nonmalignant resporatory diseases such asthma,bronchitis and emphysema, and
c. Possible mechanisms of ETS damage to the cardiovascular system,such as platelet aggravation,increased COHb leading to oxygen depravation,or damage to endothelium
d.Effects of workplace smoking restrictions on the ETS exposure of nonsmokersand ETS-related health effects in nonsmokers After ten years of no conclusive research and lack of studies that didn¡¯t eliminate the bias OSHA decided that the studies did not have substance and here is there present policy. Environmental Tobacco Smoke (ETS) Because the organic material in tobacco doesn¡¯t burn completely, cigarette smoke contains more than 4,700 chemical compounds. Although OSHA has no regulation that addresses tobacco smoke as a whole, 29 CFR 1910.1000 Air contaminants, limits employee exposure to several of the main chemical components found in tobacco smoke. In normal situations, exposures would not exceed these permissible exposure limits (PELs), and, as a matter of prosecutorial discretion, OSHA will not apply the General Duty Clause to ETS.
Jun 14, 20127:19pm EDT--
