UPDATE 3-Electrolux posts Q1 core profit as cost cuts boost
2009-04-22 07:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Electrolux, the world's second biggest home appliances maker, swung to an unexpected first quarter core profit on Wednesday, lifting its shares, and said good cash flow would help it ride out the economic storm.
"What we have seen of the first quarter in the U.S. is that the slope on the downward curve is levelling off a bit," Chief Executive Hans Straberg said in an interview with Reuters.
"It's not that it's over now...but it seems that we can see the bottom," Straberg said.
Shares in Electrolux jumped nearly 15 percent to 86.75 Swedish crowns by 0939 GMT, sharply outperforming the wider market
The white goods maker, second only to U.S. rival Whirlpool (
) in volume but bigger in terms of market capitalisation, said tough cost-cutting measures had helped create a leaner company well-positioned for any market turnaround.
Straberg doused expectations by some that Electrolux could be in need of capital later this year should demand remain weak, saying Electrolux had absolutely no need for a share issue thanks to its good cash flow and liquidity.
Whirpool announced on Tuesday a quarterly dividend of $0.43 per share. Electrolux's board in February proposed no dividend would be paid for 2008.
Profit before interest and tax swung to 38 million Swedish crowns ($4.36 million), excluding extraordinary items, from a 39 million loss a year ago to come in well above the mean forecast of a 236 million loss in a Reuters poll of 13 analysts.
"The good news is that they managed to post about a quarter of a billion more in underlying EBIT than the market expected," said Anders Trapp, analyst at SEB Enskilda.
"Europe is the surprise. They actually managed to come through with some price increases," he added.
It took 424 million crowns in restructuring charges for reducing manufacturing capacity in Italy, Russia and China.
Kenneth Toll Johansson, analyst at Erik Penser, said better-than-expected figures in Europe and a lower loss in North America had helped the quarterly results.
"Even cash flow looks good -- they have certainly been very disciplined and reduced production in line with the decrease in demand," he said.
White goods makers have been hit by several years of sliding demand in North America, and more recently sales in Europe -- its biggest market -- had taken a hit as consumers curb spending due to the economic downturn.
Sales totalled 25.8 billion crowns, beating expectations for 25.5 billion and last year's 24.2 billion.
