UPDATE 2-Altera's Q1 lags but China should drive growth
2009-04-21 20:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Programmable chipmaker Altera Corp (
) on Tuesday posted a weaker-than-expected quarterly profit, but beat Street estimates for revenue thanks to growth in Asia's telecommunications market.
Executives and analysts say China, which is rolling out high-speed third-generation networks across the world's third-largest economy, will play an increasingly crucial role in underpinning demand and sales growth for the corporation.
), Panasonic Corp (
"China is spending money at a greater rate than Obama is," said Global Crown Capital analyst David Wu. "The question now is what the non-Chinese customers are doing."
Altera, which competes with Xilinx Inc (
) to provide chips to telecommunications and other industries, reported a net profit in the first quarter ended March 27 of $44 million, or 15 cents a share, down from $83.9 million, or 27 cents a share, a year earlier. [ID:nWNAB5797]
Analysts had expected a profit of 16 cents a share, according to Reuters Estimates.
Revenue fell 21 percent from a year ago to $265 million, but was above current analyst expectations of $259 million.
"China was a primary driver, and we expect this to be a growth driver for the company in Q2," CEO John Daane said in a conference call with analysts.
Altera in early March revised its sales guidance to account for strength in the Chinese 3G market, saying its sales would fall 15 percent to 20 percent from the fourth quarter, compared with a previous forecast of a 15 percent to 25 percent decline.
Although China will continue to drive sales in the current quarter, it was too early to say whether overall revenue will be up, down or flat, Daane said.
WHITHER CHINA?
Even that vast market might not be a consistent source of growth in the short run, warned Pacific Crest Securities analyst Ruben Roy.
"The buildouts tend to be lumpy," he said.
Roy expects the third quarter to show a drop in sales, followed by a slight uptick in Q4, with sustained growth from the Chinese market delayed until the first half of 2010.
Sales should grow 2 percent to 7 percent in the current quarter, and the book-to-bill ratio should remain greater than one, Morse said. A book-to-bill ratio greater than one means that a company has more orders than it can deliver.
Gross margins, a closely watched barometer of a company's health, are forecast to match this quarter's margins of 64.5 percent but could top 66 percent depending on costs, customer mix and pricing, said Chief Financial Officer Timothy Morse.
First-quarter gross margins missed forecasts by 200 basis points because most of Altera's customers were large companies and able to negotiate cheaper prices or a cheaper product mix.
"There's speculation about pricing pressure," said RBC Capital Markets analyst Mahesh Sanganeria.
Analysts currently expect second-quarter earnings per share of 15 cents and revenue of $262 million, according to Reuters Estimates.
There is also $7.2 billion earmarked in the U.S. stimulus package for rural broadband in the next 18 months, he added.
"There are clear signs of a sustained economic recovery," Morse said. "Excluding China, the March acceleration was particularly strong, especially compared to December."
"Recognize that this (China) is $42 billion of spending over two years, so we are just at the beginning of this process," Daane added.
Shares of San Jose, California-based Altera fell 3.4 percent to $16.93 after its close of $17.53. (Reporting by Clare Baldwin; Editing by Edwin Chan, Gary Hill)
