Hong Kong shares hover, CITIC Pacific outperforms
2009-04-22 01:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong shares were little changed at midday on Wednesday as caution crept in ahead results of stress tests on U.S. banks, but CITIC Pacific outperformed as its new management embarked on an overhaul of the conglomerate.
The move is seen as a part a wider overhaul of the diversified Chinese conglomerate, which took a nearly $2 billion hit on currency bets in 2008, under its new management.
"This business has been making losses for years, so selling it will alleviate some of the pressure on the company's bottom line and increase its cash flow," said Castor Pang, strategist with Sun Hung Kai Financial.
"CITIC Pacific may sell some other non-core assets too in the near future. Maybe they will sell their infrastructure business in China, it doesn't seem to be their focus," he said.
ended the morning session 19.24 points higher at 15,266.65.
) had fallen 0.25 percent, adding to Tuesday's steep losses as doubts emerged about credit quality deterioration at U.S. banks.
On Tuesday, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said most U.S. banks had enough in reserve to keep lending, but investors are cautious about prospects for further write-downs and capital needs at banks around the world, especially after the International Monetary Fund said write-downs could reach $4.1 trillion.
) jumped 7 percent after Goldman Sachs rated the stock a buy, making a "right time, right place, right moves, right price" argument for the stock.
of top mainland companies was 0.7 percent higher at 9,100.85.
Goldman Sachs raised its target price on the stock by 18 percent to HK$17, expecting demand from construction to pick up in the second and third quarters of 2009 as activity in the infrastructure and property sectors picks up pace.
) dropped 10.2 percent to HK$5.93 after a share placement involving 54 million shares priced at HK$5.60, a 15 percent discount to Tuesday's closing price.
) rose 5.6 percent, while China Eastern (
) gained 2 percent. Chinese airline stocks have been on the rise since Monday, when they adopted the new system under which discounts on air fares have been narrowed.
(Reporting by Parvathy Ullatil; Editing by Nick Macfie)
