Huaneng Power Q1 net more than doubles on tariffs
2009-04-21 20:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Huaneng Power International Inc (
), China's largest electricity provider, posted an unexpected 127 percent surge in first-quarter earnings, due to tariff hikes in the second half of last year, even as power demand in China continued to slump.
) as coal prices fall and as power demand in China -- the world's second-largest electricity consumer after the United States -- ticks up on hopes that the domestic economy will show stronger growth in coming months.
"The first half should be marginally profitable, based on falling coal prices," JP Morgan analyst Edmond Lee told Reuters ahead of the results. "For the full year, there will be a complete turnaround."
Still, the outlook for China's loss-making power producers is clouded by uncertainty because contract negotiations with domestic coal miners have hit a stalemate and power generation remains anaemic due to the economic downturn. [ID:nPEK258743].
Huaneng's net profit in the first quarter soared to 549.9 million yuan, compared with 241.9 million yuan in the same period a year ago, according to Chinese accounting standards, the firm said late on Tuesday.
Analysts say Huaneng, whose power plants are spread out across China, is more defensive than its peers such as Datang International Power (
), which are more exposed to the coastal and northern cities with weaker power demand.
Huaneng said that power generation in the first quarter fell 9.28 percent, due to lower domestic demand amid the global financial crisis. [nHKG127797].
The Chinese government raised power tariffs last July and August for a total of around 0.04 yuan per kilowatt. But the measures were not enough to fully offset rising coal costs, which touched record levels last July.
Shares of Huaneng have risen 8.2 percent in the first three months of the year, underperforming shares of Datang, which have gained 14.9 percent. But Huaneng's stock beat the benchmark Hang Seng Index, which lost 5.6 percent in the same period.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ken Wills)
