UPDATE 2-Aegon sells Taiwanese unit for 65 mln euros
2009-04-22 04:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Dutch insurer Aegon (
) became the latest foreign insurer to exit Taiwan as it sold its Taiwanese life insurance unit, resulting in a 400 million euro negative hit to second-quarter earnings.
Aegon, which received a capital injection of 3 billion euros from the Dutch government last October, said it sold the business for 65 million euros as part of its strategy to optimise capital allocation and returns, but added it still views Asia as an important growth market.
"We will continue to focus our attention on further developing Aegon's Asian platform, which includes our operations in China, India and Japan," Chief Executive Alex Wynaendts said in a statement.
The sale comes as a number of major global insurers have either left or are looking to leave Taiwan's competitive insurance market to focus on their larger operations and shore up financial positions at home amid the financial crisis.
Aegon's Dutch rival, ING Groep (
), sold its Taiwan insurance unit late in 2008 to Fubon Financial (
) for $600 million [ID:nTPU000762], while AIG (
) is also aiming to sell its Taiwan business, Nan Shan Life.
Britain's Prudential (
SNS Securities said Aegon's Taiwanese unit had been hit by declining interest rates and falling equity markets in the fourth quarter, as well as lower sales, which forced it to raise its capital buffer.
"Aegon now is exposed to a significant lower interest rate risk," SNS Securities analysts said in a note.
Aegon shares were up 0.35 percent at 3.16 euros at 0803 GMT, underperforming a 2 percent rise in the DJ Stoxx Insurance index .SXIP.
Aegon said the sale will result in a total negative earnings impact of about 400 million euros in the second quarter, resulting in a charge of about 300 million euros to shareholders equity.
The Dutch insurer said it sold the business to Zhongwei, a holding company set up by the chairman of Meifu Development and the president of Taiwan Glass Industry.
"The sale would reduce the financial burden on Aegon, but it remains to be seen if the buyer has a deep enough pocket if the Aegon unit needs to raise money to meet capital requirements in the future," said a chief investment officer of a U.S.-based rival, who asked not to be named.
Zhongwei told reporters it is now preparing to raise at least T$10 billion ($295 million) for working capital, to be used for future business growth.
Local media first reported in February that Aegon planned to sell its business for about T$4 billion, following other foreign insurers looking to unload their overseas assets as they moved to shore up their shaky positions at home. [ID:nTP86947]
Aegon's Taiwan business had a net loss of 103 million euro in 2008, while its embedded value was about 70 million euro at the end of last year. ($1=.7748 Euro) (Editing by David Cowell and Simon Jessop)
