Nikkei edges up, Elpida and Pioneer jump
2009-04-22 03:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average edged up on Wednesday, with stocks such as Pioneer Corp (
) and Elpida Memory 6665.T rallying on prospects of government help, although caution over upcoming earnings and the health of the U.S bank sector capped gains.
"Market participants are poised to take profits at these levels after the Nikkei brushed 9,000 earlier this month," said Junichi Misawa, a senior fund manager at STB Asset Management.
"The market feels that company earnings results will have to be seen and gauged first before the Nikkei can gain further," Misawa said.
rose 0.2 percent to 8,727.30, a day after it slid 2.4 percent to book its lowest close since April 8. It temporarily climbed above 9,000 this month after coming back from a 26-year closing low near 7,000 struck in March.
Remarks by Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner on Tuesday that most U.S. banks have enough capital to keep lending provided limited relief, with market participants still eager to hear the results of the Obama administration's bank stress tests, which are expected on May 4.
"Before making any big moves, investors want to hear the announcement on May 4. Until then, it's hard to see a clear direction in financial markets," said Masayoshi Okamoto, head of dealing at Jujiya Securities.
Banking shares fell on Wednesday, with Japan's top lender Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (
) shed 0.8 percent to 2,955 yen.
Analysts said bleak economic conditions at home were also dampening the outlook for Japan's banks by raising concerns that financial institutions may have to raise more capital by issuing shares.
Market watchers are also focusing on how much a recession has eaten away at Japan's corporate earnings and profits, and whether companies will raise or cut their initial estimates.
"For now, concerns over companies cutting their earnings estimates are being partially eased by those companies that have raised their estimates," said Yumi Nishimura, a manager at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
), a major heavy machinery and engineering company, revised up its 2008/09 group net profit forecast to 11.7 billion yen from 11 billion yen after the close. Its shares shed 2.4 percent on Wednesday. [ID:nT22008R8N]I
) edged down 0.6 percent, retracing gains made earlier after the Nikkei business daily said the automaker's operating profit for the last financial year is likely to come in about 10 billion yen higher than previously estimated, thanks to a weaker yen and better-than-expected sales in China. [ID:nT124607]
Trade was moderate on the Tokyo exchange's first section, with 2.6 billion shares changing hands, almost in line with last week's daily average.
Declining stocks outnumbered advancing ones by more than 2 to 1. (Additional reporting by Aiko Hayashi; Editing by Joseph Radford)
