Gold turns lower as shares rally; rhodium flies
2009-04-21 15:56:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold fell slightly on Tuesday, relinquishing earlier gains as global share prices arrested their decline and overshadowed credit jitters that had previously heightened bullion's appeal.
Investors pondering whether the economic downturn might be showing some sign of stabilizing capitalized on end-user demand for auto-material rhodium, extending recent sharp gains.
Global stocks, as measured by MSCI's all-country index, moved into positive territory .MIWD00000PUS as Wall Street rallied, with some brighter than expected earnings offsetting concern about corporate profits.
"The equities market has really turned things around. I think the government is not going to be as aggressive as previously thought with the (notion of) bank nationalization ," said Rob Kurzatkowski, futures analyst at optionsXpress.
Spot gold was at $881.90 an ounce at 3:09 p.m. EDT, down 0.3 percent from its late Monday quote $884.15 in New York.
"We've seen a bit of a disappointing day for gold. The fact that we failed in front of $900 is a bit of a bear signal and I wouldn't be surprised if we saw another move lower," said James Moore, analyst at TheBullionDesk.com.
Physical fundamentals looked promising however. Gold demand in India, the world's largest bullion buyer, rose from lows after prices had fallen last week, with trader MMTC Ltd saying it would import 9-10 tonnes this month.
Autocatalyst material rhodium rose another $50 on Tuesday to $1,625 an ounce, extending stellar gains seen over the past week.
Analysts say expectations for rises in Chinese car sales and auto industry initiatives -- including Germany's cash for clunkers scrapping scheme to encourage new car purchases -- have enticed end-users to replenish stocks of the metals and investors to jump on the bandwagon.
"There's a lot of demand out of China. I think it's car related and chemical catalyst related. In these small markets which are unregulated there's also a little bit of investment demand and that's triggering the price even further," said Andreas Daniel, head trader at German-based Heraeus Metals.
Ruthenium, used to make computer hard discs, also rose nearly 7 percent on Tuesday to $80 an ounce.
Concerns over investment demand nagged at the gold price after key gold-backed exchange-traded funds recorded outflows last week. Holdings of the world's largest gold ETF, New York's SPDR Gold Trust, fell 21.7 tonnes last week. <GOL/SPDR>
London's ETF Securities said its largest gold-backed exchange-traded product, Gold Bullion Securities (
), saw an outflow of 2.3 percent in the week to Friday.
Among other precious metals, spot platinum was at $1,150.00 an ounce, down 0.8 percent from its late Monday quote $1,159.50, while spot palladium was at $222.00 an ounce, off 1.6 percent from its previous finish of $225.50. Silver was at $11.96 an ounce, down 0.7 percent from its previous finish $12.04.
