PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - April 22
2009-04-21 21:35:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue  EDT
) hopes to capitalise on public disillusionment with traditional lenders to launch an aggressive expansion into financial services and become the "people's bank". Chief executive Sir Terry Leahy said: "There will not be a better time to increase our commitment to financial services, customers are looking for a better deal." The largest retailer in Britain said it enjoyed a rise in applications for its savings accounts since the turn of the year. In the past four months, Tesco saw more than 100,000 accounts being opened. It now has six million accounts in total -- from savings to credit cards -- against five million a year ago.
According to official figures released on Tuesday, the proportion of young people not in employment, education or training (Neet) has changed little over the past 20 years. Despite government efforts to boost youth employment, "the proportion of young people who are Neet has remained fairly constant since 2001 at 13 percent of all 16 to 24 year-olds". However, the employment rates for workers aged over 50 have risen faster than any other age group since 1992.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Alistair Darling is set to announce a one billion pound 1980s-style community work programme to take young people off the dole. Darling will target scant resources on job schemes for under-25s in an attempt to prevent a generation ending up "on the scrapheap" as the recession tightens its grip. Although it is claimed that lessons have been learnt from the recession of the 1980s, the one billion pound two-year scheme has echoes of Margaret Thatcher's "community programme". The chancellor will also unveil a watered down plan to help motor industry workers.
This financial year the Chancellor of the Exchequer will be forced to issue more than 200 billion pounds worth of government bonds, as he concedes in Wednesday's budget that public finances have plunged deeply into the red. Alistair Darling will have to tap the market for an issuance of gilts that will be well over 50 billion pounds higher than the Debt Management Office predicted last month. RBC Capital Markets' head of sterling rates product development, John Wraith, said: "We are not at this stage, but if international investors start to question the credibility of the UK economy, then they could start to sell their gilts."
According to reviews commissioned by the Treasury, the public sector can make another nine billion pounds a year of efficiency savings by 2014. It emerged there was the potential to inject private capital into some of the remaining government-owned businesses and there is the possibility of selling public sector property worth 20 billion pounds over the next decade. The Treasury says: "Just as we have a three percent efficiency target at present, the next spending round will include a further efficiency target."
) tested their willingness to back a 270 million pound share placing equivalent to roughly five percent of the group's current capitalisation. A lukewarm response from large shareholders led the owner of the Financial Times to conclude there could be more efficient ways of funding its growth plans. Pearson had wanted to use the money as a war chest for unspecified "bolt-on" purchases to build up its international education business.
Margins at Primark, the discount fashion chain, are due to suffer later this year as owner Associated British Foods (
) grapples with the drastic decline in sterling. On Tuesday, finance director John Bason revealed that one effect of the weaker pound would be a reduction in Primark's margins in the "tens of basis points" range, as ABF bought clothes from India and China pegged to the dollar. Chief executive George Weston said it was too early to say whether Primark would have to put its prices up, as some of the effect would be offset by cheaper costs elsewhere. Its shares increased 32 pence to reach 686 pence.
), Ian Smith, left the door open to merger talks with Wolters Kluwer (
), its Dutch rival, as he appointed Anthony Habgood as its new chairman. When pressed to be specific about plans regarding a long-mooted tie-up with Wolters Kluwer at the Anglo-Dutch publishing company's AGM on Tuesday, Smith did not rule out the possibility. "Well, it is too early to look outside the company as our current priority is internal," he said. Its shares edged up 0.5 pence to reach 499 pence.
On Tuesday, the London Stock Exchange (
) as partners for Baikal, its planned block trading platform. Fidessa's director of strategy, Steve Grob, said: "Brokers are acting more like (trading) venues and vice versa and so it's an obvious thing for Fidessa to step into the exchange space this way."
The UK head of the Turnaround Management Association (TMA) has warned that dozens of small companies are being left "to wither on the vine" as banks refuse to deliver the financing they need to survive the economic downturn. TMA's UK president, Tyrone Courtman, said: "Simply trying to find the time and resources to give to small companies is just not there from the banks, so many are falling over unnecessarily, even those with a credible plan." Courtman said TMA members were finding it harder to turn struggling companies around without sufficient support from banks.
