UPDATE 4-Johnson Controls forecasts profit, sends stock up
2009-04-21 13:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Johnson Controls Inc (
) posted a quarterly loss, citing weak auto production and hefty restructuring charges, but the company forecast a profit for the remainder of its fiscal year, sending its shares up sharply.
Johnson Controls, the No. 3 North American auto parts supplier, said on Tuesday that vehicle demand was stabilizing throughout North America, Europe and China after a 17-month downturn that has driven the industry to the verge of failure.
) and Chrysler LLC, backed by up to $5 billion in funding from the U.S. Treasury.
Johnson Controls said it has completed 70 percent of the restructuring it had announced at the end of 2008, ahead of schedule. The actions included shutting 21 plants and eliminating 9,300 jobs, or 7 percent of its global workforce.
"From a financial perspective, clearly the worst is behind us," Chief Financial Officer Bruce McDonald said on a conference call with analysts.
"Quite frankly our liquidity position has never been stronger and the liquidity cloud we had hanging over our heads has been fully addressed," McDonald said.
For the second quarter ended March 31, the Milwaukee-based company reported a net loss of $193 million, or 33 cents per share, compared with a year-earlier profit of $289 million profit, or 48 cents per share.
The results reflected restructuring charges of $230 million. Excluding items, Johnson Controls reported a loss of 16 cents per share. On that basis, analysts on average had expected a loss of 17 cents, according to Reuters Estimates.
"Global automotive losses, after hefty restructuring steps, appear set to narrow sharply starting next quarter and, as previously discussed by us, reach break-even by year-end," JPMorgan analyst Himanshu Patel said.
Johnson Controls supplies parts for almost every major automaker, including General Motors, Toyota Motor Corp(
), Honda Motor Co Ltd (
), BMW (
Johnson Controls' shares were up $1.41, or 8.7 percent, at $17.55 on the New York Stock Exchange. (Reporting by Soyoung Kim, editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Lisa Von Ahn)
