Emerging stocks find decoupling hard to do
2009-04-21 10:50:00.0
(Reuters) - A huge 40 percent rally in emerging markets stocks in the past six weeks has rekindled the theory that developing economies have "decoupled" from the rich world, but a prolonged U.S. recession is likely to undermine the thesis and the market rally.
The optimists argue that such an impressive outperformance in emerging stocks is just the beginning of a sustainable recovery in global appetite for risk, underpinned by signs that Chinese demand is growing again and coupled with hopes that the U.S. economy is not free falling anymore.
On the opposite side of the argument, a substantial number of investors fear that, although the medium-term outlook for emerging markets is appealing, the prospect of a slow and painful global economic recovery will translate into bouts of selling pressure.
"We view this as almost certainly a bear-market rally and over the next few weeks, one month or two, we'd expect some give back," Allan Conway, who manages $11 billion in emerging equity markets for Schroders, told Reuters in a recent interview.
"You probably won't see a retesting of the lows (in emerging market stocks), but you should see a give back to some reasonable magnitude," Conway added.
Some bounce back was already evident on Monday, when the MSCI emerging market stock index .MSCIEF dropped more than 1.5 percent, tracking a decline of more than 3.5 percent on the Standard & Poor's 500
However, the MSCI emerging market stock index has soared 36 percent during six consecutive weeks of gains ended Friday. By comparison, the Standard & Poor's 500 has gained about 25 percent in the same period.
Currently near 635 points, the MSCI emerging equity index stands at its highest level since mid-October. It is still far, however, from the 850 point level seen in September before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and even farther from its 2008 high of 1,250 points.
"The key near-term risk for Latin America is a profit taking on the S&P 500 driven by a weak first-quarter earnings season," Merrill Lynch's strategists Pedro Martins Jr and Fanny Oreng said in a research note.
Merrill Lynch estimates the S&P is currently more than 10 percent overvalued, taking into account the bank's bearish view on company earnings.
The main risk for emerging stocks, Conway says, is that the U.S. recession may extend also into 2010, dragging the world economy into a longer-than-expected downturn.
According to the International Monetary Fund, the current global recession is likely to be "unusually long and severe, with a sluggish recovery."
In excerpts of the IMF's World Economic Outlook, due to be published on Wednesday, the fund said emerging market economies, including those with sound economic policies, will also be affected by a related drop in exports and capital flows.
LONG LIVE DECOUPLING?
Even so, most analysts agree that emerging stocks will likely outperform the S&P 500 in a horizon of two to three years. And some of them believe the recent rally is already the beginning of that run up.
J.P. Morgan, for instance, forecasts the MSCI emerging stocks index to return to its pre-Lehman level of 900 points this year -- which entails another 40 percent gain on top of the latest rally.
"Decoupling is dead -- long live decoupling: The correlation between developed and EM financial markets remains in place, but EM economic growth is still holding up," J.P. Morgan's strategist Adrian Mowat said in a report.
Despite the consensus that this is still a bear-market rally, the bank says, "bears" are being dragged into the market as evidence mounts that China is recovering while the United States is stabilizing.
As for concerns about weak corporate earnings ahead, J.P. Morgan argues that there is a consistent lag of six months between the turn in equity markets and analyst earnings revisions.
Moreover, emerging economies in general will grow -- or contract less -- than the developed world this year as China and most Latin American countries were able to lower interest rates and implement pro-growth fiscal policies.
"We have seen decoupling in 2009," said Alberto Bernal, head of macroeconomic strategy at Miami-based Bulltick Capital Markets. "It makes perfect sense to see that, even as the United States is in a very tough situation."
"Can we see corrections in the market? Of course we can. But I am very confident that when we talk in December we will see a significant outperformance of Brazil against the S&P. It is very likely as well that the Mexican Bolsa will outperform," he said.
