FTSE up 0.4 percent early on; Tesco, oils higher
2009-04-21 04:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index gained 0.4 percent early on Tuesday buoyed by strength in retail giant Tesco (
By 0803 GMT, the FTSE 100
index was up 14.61 points at 4,006.47, regaining the 4,000 level after sliding 2.5 percent on Monday, its biggest percentage fall since March 30.
The benchmark index is down 10 percent so far this year, but up 15 percent since hitting a six-year low on March 9.
"The good news from Tesco helps provide some positive sentiment ... but with banks hit once again and some uncertainty ahead of tomorrow's UK budget and inflation news today the underlying mood remains fragile," said Ben Timms, senior trader at Blue Index.
Tesco jumped 4.5 percent after Britain's biggest retailer beat forecasts with a 10 percent rise in annual profit to 3.13 billion pounds and said its underlying British sales growth accelerated in the first few weeks of its new financial year.
"Another year of solid top and bottom line delivery," said Cazenove. "Higher interest charges and U.S. losses are offset by stronger margins in the UK and a good performance from TPF (Tesco Personal Finance), resulting in our top-end forecasts being met."
) was the top FTSE 100 riser, up 6.2 percent after it beat forecasts with a 2 percent dip in first-half profit as growth at its discount fashion chain Primark and in sugar sales offset tough trading in other areas.
Oil heavyweights also lent strength to the market as crude prices CLC1 stabilised, with BP (
Broker comment also created some gainers, with telecoms firm Cable & Wireless CW.L adding 2.7 percent following a Bank of America-Merrill Lynch upgrade, while drinks group Diageo (
MINERS, BANKS WEAK
Weak miners weighed as metal prices retreated again, with Rio Tinto (
), Vedanta Resources (
), Kazakhmys (
Jan du Plessis, Rio Tinto's new chairman, said the completion of Chinalco's proposed $19.5 billion pound investment in the miner would be his priority as he took over from outgoing chairman Paul Skinner, the Financial Times reported.
Banks extended Monday's slide, reversing last week's rally following further reflection of Monday's results from Bank of America (
while Japan's Nikkei 225
), Barclays (
) shed 1.3-3.7 percent, although HSBC (
Insurers were also weak reflecting falls in equity markets, with Prudential (
), Old Mutual (
), Friends Provident FP.L and Aviva (
Investors were nervous ahead of March UK CPI data, due at 0830 GMT, with headline inflation seen up 0.2 percent on the month giving a 2.9 percent annual increase, down from 3.2 percent in February.
British Finance Minister Alistair Darling is expected to spend an extra 1 billion pounds to support the construction industry in Wednesday's budget, a government source told Reuters on Monday. [ID:nLK349854] (Editing by Dan Lalor)
