RPT-GLOBAL MARKETS-Credit fears return, hit stocks, help bonds
2009-04-21 12:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Asian stocks slid and government bonds rose on Tuesday after a 41 percent quarterly increase in bad loans at Bank of America renewed fears of deteriorating credit, halting a rebound in risk taking.
The financial sector was under fire after the largest U.S. bank greatly increased its reserves for non-performing assets, raising uncertainties about future writedowns at a time when investors are already worried about the results of stress tests on the U.S. banking industry. [ID:nSP442805]
), in a shift after gains in financials had led a steep rally in global equities since March.
"One day of a major correction does not break a trend, especially the ferocious rally of the past six weeks," said Dariusz Kowalczyk, chief investment strategist with SJS Markets in Hong Kong, in a note.
"But we do expect a more substantial return to the risk aversion trade some time in the near term, most likely in relation to the U.S. bank stress test results expected on May 4."
Japan's Nikkei share average
fell 3 percent, weighed down by a mix of exporters and industrials.
The MSCI index of Asia Pacific stocks outside Japan .MIAPJ0000PUS fell 2.3 percent, after hitting a six-month high last Thursday. The index is still up some 25 percent in the last month, in what many strategists regard as a bear market rally.
The financial sector led the region lower, and cyclical stocks were also sold, though technology shares were generally outperformers.
) was the second-biggest drag on Hong Kong's Hang Seng index
, which slid 3.5 percent. The world's largest wireless provider said subscriber growth showed signs of slowing as the broader economy slows in China. [ID:nHKG200859]
Government bonds, which have been dogged by fears about large upcoming supply to finance government stimulus spending, got a lift as investors bailed out of equities.
Very steep yield curves generally flattened this week, with investors finding greater value in late maturities. The difference between 10-year and 2-year Australian bonds narrowed 15 basis points in the last week.
Reserve Bank of Australia Glenn Stevens said for the first time Australia is in the midst of its first recession since 1991, but added that the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus have yet to come through fully yet.
"I think the reasonable person, looking at all the information available now, would come to the conclusion that the Australian economy, too, is in recession," Stevens told a gathering of company directors.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note US10YT=RR slid to 2.83 percent from 2.85 percent late in New York, with new supply light this week.
The June 10-year Japanese government bond future 2JGBv1 extended gains after the results of an auction of 20-year bonds to 0.5 point, still working its way back after hitting a 5-1/2-month low on April 9.
"The market is expected to refocus on supply when we have increased issuance after a few months," said Tatsuo Ichikawa, fixed-income strategist with RBS Securities in Tokyo.
The euro was near a one-month low against the yen and U.S. dollar, with support for the single currency limited ahead of the next European Central Bank meeting on May 7.
The euro was up slightly on the day at $1.2930, not far from Monday's low of $1.2883
. Against the yen, the euro was up 0.3 percent to 126.97 yen EURJPY= after earlier touching a one-month low near 126 yen.
