UPDATE 3-MOVES-Fannie Mae, Tokio Marine Asset Management
2009-04-20 17:34:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Monday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The government controlled U.S. home funding company, named Michael Williams as president and chief executive officer on Monday.
Williams, most recently the company's chief operating officer and previously with KPMG Peat Marwick and DuPont Company, will succeed Herbert Allison. Allison has been nominated as assistant secretary for financial stability and counselor to the secretary at the Treasury Department. Please see [ID:nN20404086]
Ben Schachter, Brian Marshall and Yun Kim have joined the firm from UBS (
), Jefferies Asset Management JEF.N and Pacific Growth, respectively. Schachter will cover the Internet and video games, Marshall will cover hardware and enterprise storage, and Kim will cover software.
India's Axis Bank's Chief Executive Officer P.J. Nayak said he would leave the bank after disagreeing with the board's recommendation to appoint Shikha Sharma as chief executive and managing director for five years. [ID:nBMA002750]
The Japanese and Asian equities and hedge fund specialist named Paul Butler, who was previously with Goldman Sachs Asset Management for almost 10 years, as Compliance Manager.
The Wealth Management company named Oliver Tregoning, who joins from Lehman Brothers Asset Management, as head of Investment Marketing.
Hermes BPK Partners named Mark Smith-Lyons, who was previously head of operational relationship management at Invesco perpetual, as its chief operating officer.
UBS named Andy Brown as head of Asian Financial Institutions research. He previously served as chief investment officer for Asia at Cheyne Capital Management (Hong Kong). Brown will be based in Hong Kong, and his appointment took effect on April 9.
UBS also named John Tang, previously with JP Morgan Securities where he was head of Asia Small Caps Research, as China Strategist. Tang will be based in Hong Kong, and joined on April 14.
The asset manager named Madhu Gayer as head of Investment Risk and Analytical Services for the Asia-Pacific region. (Reporting by Isheeta Sanghi in Bangalore and Phil Wahba in New York; Editing by Gopakumar Warrier and Andre Grenon)
