PRESS DIGEST - British business - April 21
2009-04-20 23:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon  EDT
The European Commission is looking into alleged anti-competitive practices on transatlantic routes by seven international airlines. There are three separate ongoing investigations into the agreements between major airlines: the oneworld code-sharing agreement between British Airways BAY.L, American Airlines AMR.N and Iberia IBLA.MC; the Star Alliance partnership between Lufthansa (
), United Airlines UAUA.O, Air Canada (
) and Continental; and the Skyteam alliance between Air France-KLM (
) and Delta-Northwest. If the groups are found to have engaged in anti-competitive behaviour, they can be fined up to 10 percent of their global turnover.
TESCO'S ECONOMY RANGE HELPS TO STEM FLOW OF CUSTOMERS TO RIVALS
Confidential industry "switching" data indicates Tesco's (
) cut-price Discounter range has reduced the number of customers using lower-priced rivals since it was launched in September 2008. The supermarket has largely stopped the flow of its customers away to Aldi, Lidl and Morrisons.
) is to replace its finance director. Andrew Palmer, who has held the position since 2001, will step down later this year and several external candidates have been approached. L&G is believed to be considering an internal candidate for the promotion. The move follows a deterioration of good relations in recent months between L&G and its shareholders over a number of issues, including the decision to cut its dividend at its full-year results conference last month.
Chelsea Building Society [CHLSE.UL] has entered talks with the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority after its bonds were downgraded last week by ratings agency Moody's. The assessment took them below the minimum grade required to participate in the Bank's Special Liquidity Scheme. A Chelsea spokeswoman said: "The downgrade has affected the way we participate in the scheme. We will be talking to the Bank of England and the FSA to look at what the Moody's downgrade means."
RIO'S NEW CHAIRMAN PREPARED TO DITCH 19.5 BILLION DOLLAR INVESTMENT
) chairman Jan du Plessis says a 19.5 billion dollar strategic investment by Chinalco will be scrapped if the deal is not likely to attract shareholder support. Du Plessis, who took over the chairmanship from Paul Skinner following a meeting yesterday in Sydney, said: "If we genuinely listen to shareholders and we make an assessment of the feedback we get, I would trust we are not going to put a proposal to shareholders if we think there is any chance of that being voted down."
) in England and Wales was announced internally on Monday. Marks is expected to return to America but it is unclear whether he will be seeking employment or if there will be a job waiting for him. Barclays is expected to announce a new remuneration package for senior executives at its Annual General Meeting, which will be held on Thursday. The plans are set to include measures that will see senior executive receive a higher proportion of their pay from deferred payments made in shares.
) fell by 19.5 percent last year according to figures announced by the head the investment group, Catherine Garrett-Cox, on Monday. The group announced that the loss attributable to equity holders was 523.3 million pounds, a fall from the loss of 74.5 million pounds in the year to the end of last January. Garrett-Cox said the group's overweight cash positions had enabled it to avoid much of the turbulence seen in some markets and that she was beginning to move back into stock market investment.
Prime Minister Gordon Brown has been warned by Labour Party whips that plans to partly privatise Royal Mail have stretched the loyalty of party MPs to "breaking point". A Commons motion condemning the planned sale of a minority stake has been signed by 147 Labour MPs, which could leave Brown requiring support of the Conservative Party in order to make the plans law. Research from the think-tank Compass has also cast doubt on the amount of money that the Treasury will raise from the sale. It says a price of one billion pounds is currently realistic, given the economic conditions, compared with an estimated 1.9 billion pounds if the stake had been sold a year ago.
) has announced that a management buyout will enable it to sell its pets business. The food supplier and manufacturer is expected to sell Cranswick Pet and Aquatics in a 17 million pound deal supported by Lloyds TSB. In return for financing the deal, Lloyds TSB will be awarded an equity stake and control debt provision and working capital. The deal will mean that Cranswick keep its food division, the part of the business which makes up 90 percent of total sales to retailers and manufacturers.
BRUSSELS' ANTI-TRUST INQUIRY THREATENS BA ALLIANCE
The proposed alliance between British Airways BAY.L and American Airlines, for even closer partnerships in pricing and scheduling, has been dealt a blow after the European Commission opened an anti-trust investigation into alliances between some of the world's leading airlines. European anti-trust officials said the move was part of an investigation into two deals within the Star and oneworld airline alliances. BA said it expected the investigation in the vetting process for its proposed tie-up with AA and Iberia.
