Tata CEO says to focus on cost-cutting
2009-04-20 22:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Hangzhou Wahaha Group, China's top beverage firm, said on Sunday talks with joint venture partner French food group Danone (
Group Chairman Zong Qinghou told reporters on the sidelines of China's annual National People's Congress, or parliament, that he could not accept Danone's demands for ending the feud.
Zong said Danone has proposed that their joint venture along with the businesses at the centre of the dispute be listed as one entity and that Wahaha guarantees the value of Danone's share of the listed firm will not fall below 50 billion yuan ($7 billion).
"How can anyone guarantee a share price?" said Zong. "It's up to the market. It doesn't make any sense."
Zong said he has proposed that Danone buy his share of the joint ventures or that it be bought by a third party, but that the French company has rejected those options.
In December, Danone and Wahaha agreed to cease all lawsuits in their highly public and acrimonious dispute and enter talks to resolve the dispute.
The firms failed to resolve the issue and extended the talks for another month, a deadline that will expire at the end of March, said Zong.
"For negotiations to succeed there must be trust and benefits for both sides. These are not negotiations," he said.
"If we don't reach an agreement, then we have to go back to the courts to decide," he said.
Previously the two companies traded a series of lawsuits and countersuits that at one point had spread to California, Sweden, and China's Supreme Court.
The feud became highly personal and eventually involved several Danone executives based in the mainland as well as Zong's wife and daughter. French President Nicolas Sarkozy and his Chinese counterpart Hu Jintao also discussed the issue during a state visit last year.
The maker of LU cookies, Evian mineral water and Activia yoghurt has a 51 percent stake in a joint venture with Wahaha -- named after the sound of a laughing child.
Danone began investing in China in the 1980s and its widespread network helped sales in Asia expand almost 21 percent to 2.4 billion euros in 2006, becoming the mainland's packaged water market leader and number two in the biscuit market.
((kirby.chien@reuters.com; +86 139 1050 7516; Reuters Messaging: kirby.chien.reuters.com@reuters.net))
BEIJING, March 9 (Reuters) - Hangzhou Wahaha Group, China's top beverage firm, said on Sunday a new labour contract law was a step backward to a time of the "iron rice bowl" and changes were needed to help companies stay competitive.
"The law is overly protective of workers' rights," Zong Qinghou, Wahaha Group chairman, told reporters on the sidelines of China's annual National People's Congress, or parliament.
"Of course it is a step backward to a time of the iron rice bowl," he said referring to the system of lifetime employment common for urban workers under China's planned economy.
"It isn't reasonable," he said. "We must protect workers, but uncompetitive businesses would hurt workers even more."
It also makes it harder to fire workers, a point that Zong said could hurt competitiveness and lead to more companies going out of business.
"The final details of the law still haven't been set. The government is aware of our concerns. I think there is room for some revisions," Zong said.
"The issue now is not revision, but full enforcement," Sun Baoshu, Vice Minister of Labour and Social Security, told a news conference at the congress.
((kirby.chien@reuters.com; +86 139 1050 7516; Reuters Messaging: kirby.chien.reuters.com@reuters.net))
(C) Reuters 2008. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nPEK66661
