Statoil buys Peregrino oil vessel from Maersk
2012-06-12 11:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Jun 12 2012
Fri, May 25 2012
Thu, May 17 2012
Thu, May 17 2012
Thu, May 17 2012
Tue  EDT
) and China's Sinochem agreed to buy the Peregrino floating production, storage and offloading (FPSO) vessel from Maersk (
), the companies said on Tuesday.
The parties did not disclose the terms of the deal, which was the result of a tanker conversion project begun in 2007 that involved over $1 billion in investment, the companies said.
The vessel, with storage capacity of 1.6 million barrels of oil, is working in the Campos Basin off Brazil where Statoil and Sinochem are partners in the Peregrino field.
"We had an option to buy the ship by 2016, and we decided that it was a good time to do that as Maersk is reviewing its strategy," Statoil spokesman Bard Glad Pedersen said.
The head of Maersk FPSOs, a unit of Danish shipping and oil group A.P. Moller-Maersk, said the sale was part of efforts to optimize the company's business and portfolio, which could include divestments if the timing and conditions are right.
"Maersk Peregrino is a very well performing unit and the sale to Statoil and Sinochem represents an opportunity with the right timing and the right buyer," Stig Hoffmeyer, CEO of Maersk FPSOs, said in a statement.
) will take over operation of the FPSO after a transition period of about six months, Statoil said.
The transaction is expected to be completed during the third quarter 2012, Maersk FPSOs said and added: "The gain from the transaction will not have an impact on the A.P. Moller-Maersk Group's result."
Maersk FPSOs still owns two other FPSOs. In addition, it has one floating gas, storage and offloading unit and one jack-up production module.
(Reporting by Helena Soderpalm; additional reporting by John Acher in Copenhagen; Editing by Elaine Hardcastle)
