China ready to impound EU planes in CO2 dispute
2012-06-12 10:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China will take swift counter-measures that could include impounding European aircraft if the EU punishes Chinese airlines for not complying with its scheme to curb carbon emissions, the China Air Transport Association said on Tuesday.
The warning came as the U.N.'s aviation body expressed concern about the growing threat of bilateral reprisals.
Chinese airlines, which have been told by Beijing not to comply with the European Union's Emissions Trading Scheme, refused to meet a March 31 deadline for submitting carbon emissions data.
"Chinese airlines are unanimous on this. We won't provide the data," Wei Zhenzhong, secretary general of the China Air Transport Association, said on the sidelines of an International Air Transport Association (IATA) meeting in Beijing.
"We would not like to see a situation of 'you hold up my planes and I hold yours'," Wei said.
The Chinese airline group's members include the big three state-controlled carriers - Air China, China Southern Airlines and China Eastern Airlines.
"The government will take at least the same kind of measures, and these anti-sanction moves will be lasting," Wei said.
He added, however, "We would try to avoid any trade war."
China is among a raft of countries including India, Russia and the United States that have protested against the inclusion of all flights using EU airports into the emissions scheme.
The EU's cap-and-trade scheme will effectively in most cases charge airlines for emissions based on the length of the whole flight, rather than just the portion flown over Europe.
Critics say this amounts to interference with non-EU airspace. The EU says such action is needed to meet the bloc's environmental targets and fill a vacuum left by international failure to deal with aviation emissions.
"We are very concerned about what is happening with Europeans and China - retaliatory measures. We are very concerned about that, because we want air transport to continue growing," the International Civil Aviation Organization's (ICAO) president, Roberto Kobeh Gonzalez, told Reuters.
Most countries involved in the dispute are looking to ICAO to come up with a global plan, but preliminary technical talks have proved complicated, and some nations are seen as unwilling to negotiate under what they see as pressure from the EU.
"It's not about the money. It's an issue of sovereignty," said Paul Steele, IATA's director of aviation environment.
China, which according to Airbus and other sources in the aerospace industry is delaying plane orders worth up to $14 billion from European planemaker Airbus over the row, has asked the EU to push the scheme back by a year.
"ICAO will hold its 38th meeting in October 2013, and the EU should at least push the deadline to that time and agree to resolve this issue based on the coordination of ICAO," Wei said.
But ICAO, a body which sets the standards for safety and other vital standards that underpin global aviation, is trying to avoid getting dragged into bilateral disputes and keep the focus on a worldwide solution to the dispute.
"The EU ETS is not in the discussion of the ICAO. This is a bilateral issue at this time. But we have the mandate to develop a global scheme, and that's what we are doing," Gonzalez said.
(Additional reporting by Tim Hepher; Editing by Daniel Magnowski and Jane Baird)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Airlines should not be made scapegoats of using these polluting planes. Instead, E.U. may regulate what kind of planes that can fly to Europe or impose manufacturing standards on Airbus, Boeing, Bombardia etc. Comparing with other national carriers, the well-off Chinese are already using latest plane models. Clearly there is no justifiable groung to wage any air trade war that will result in dual losses.
Jun 12, 20123:50am EDT--
This carbon footprint B.S. is out of control. Just another way of gouging money for likely the fat cats. Good for China¡­tell the EU to go to hell !!! China buys their aircraft from the western world and we should be pleased that they bring us the business. The aircraft should be manufactured to meet whatever standards are out there. It is likely that older aircraft will need some kind of big bucks upgrade to meet the new standards which is pure B.S¡­¡­
Jun 12, 20126:30am EDT--
The Europe can enforce emission standard, not sell emission quota to airlines.
Jun 12, 20126:53am EDT--
