China says Annan's Syria efforts more important than ever
2012-06-08 04:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China called on Friday for both sides in Syria to end violence and observe a peace plan put forward by U.N. envoy Kofi Annan, whose efforts were now more important than ever, as the clamor grows to back tougher action against the Syrian government.
Ban said hopes for consolidating the peace plan were fading and Annan himself warned the U.N. Security Council that the crisis in Syria could soon spiral out of control, diplomats said. Annan, Ban's predecessor as U.N. secretary-general, called for "substantial pressure" on Damascus to stop the violence.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin did not answer repeated questions about whether China endorses Annan's call for substantial pressure, but said both sides in Syria should stop the fighting.
"I think the Syrian government and opposition should both truly shoulder their responsibility and cease fire and halt violence," Liu told a daily news briefing. "Both sides have this responsibility because they both undertook this commitment.
"In the current circumstances, we believe that the importance of envoy Annan's mediation efforts has not diminished but rather increased," he added. "The support of all sides for the envoy Annan should strengthen, rather than weaken."
Russia and China - permanent members of the U.N. Security Council with the power to veto resolutions - have stymied efforts by Western powers to condemn or call for the removal of Assad, whose forces, the U.N. says, have killed at least 10,000 people in more than a year of unrest.
"We express strong condemnation of the recent barbarity involving attacks on innocent civilians, especially women and children, and we hope that the perpetrators will be punished according to the law as soon as possible," Liu said.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Writing by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What does China know. they are do nothing except for themselves. Wait until you see what the plot to overthrow says about China. Mohammad Goldstein will stun you with the facts, Everyone knows China and the USA are headed for a showdown. you can get it for nuttin on the net look him up Obama and every politician in washington have copies. Finally someone tells the truth. Filled with insider truth.
Jun 08, 20124:37am EDT--
Sadly the USA, under the command of AIPAC, will not permit a peaceful outcome for Syria. Syria is to be destroyed to leave open the road to attack Iran.
Sadly the USA, under the command of AIPAC, will not permit a peaceful outcome for Syria. Syria is to be destroyed to leave open the road to attack Iran.
Once Syria is out of the way, it¡¯ll become the beach-head for the overland route, across the remnants of Iraq to the battlefield for the start of WWIII.
Jun 08, 20129:53am EDT--
