China wins saw blades dispute against U.S. at WTO
2012-06-08 00:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, May 25 2012
Fri, May 25 2012
Fri, May 18 2012
Fri  EDT
China's complaint, which it made in February 2011, was based on the fact that the anti-dumping duties were calculated in a way that has repeatedly been ruled as illegal under WTO rules.
The United States has said that its calculation method, known as "zeroing", is superior to the WTO's approved methodology, but it has nevertheless promised not to use it in future, after losing numerous legal rulings over the issue.
A country is usually considered to be dumping a certain product if the export price is unfairly low, which generally means below the price in the country where it came from.
The WTO's approved method uses an average price for the export product in question, while the U.S. method considers only those products that are cheaply priced, disregarding (or "zeroing") all prices that are above the home market.
That means it only takes into account the low-priced goods and effectively inflates the apparent amount of dumping, or even finds dumping where there is none.
The United States is still involved in several other WTO cases involving zeroing, including a South Korean complaint about corrosion-resistant carbon steel flat products which is currently being examined by a WTO dispute panel.
(Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Robin Pomeroy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The mass-media needs to stop publishing articles like this. There have been many times the chinese won against us in wto trade disputes, but we need to keep this info from the general population so we can keep the perception that our economic woes are somebody else¡¯s fault.
Jun 09, 201210:54am EDT--
