Kazakh head says terrorist act behind border deaths
2012-06-01 10:29:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jun 1 2012
Thu, May 31 2012
Mon, May 28 2012
Sun, May 6 2012
Fri  EDT
"I consider this a terrorist act," Nazarbayev's official site www.akorda.kz quoted him as saying during a meeting with the heads of Kazakh security bodies.
He did not elaborate on who he thought might be responsible, or why he said it was a terrorist act.
"A soldiers' barrack and an officers' house were burnt down; the dead bodies were recovered when the debris was cleared. When such incidents occur in peaceful times, this demands the most thorough investigation," Nazarbayev said.
"Central and local security bodies are doing whatever is needed to clarify all the circumstances of this case and detain the suspected criminals," Nazarbayev said.
Kazakhstan, a predominantly Muslim ex-Soviet nation of 16.7 million, shares a 1,530-km (960-mile) border with China, with which it has developed warm relations since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Last year Kazakhstan exported goods worth more than $16 billion to its neighbor last year, more than 18 percent of its total export revenues.
Nazarbayev is expected to visit China next week to take part in the summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, a regional security body which also includes Russia and ex-Soviet Central Asian neighbors Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
There has been no post-Soviet history of violence at the border since Kazakhstan gained independence in 1991, and the last time there were any major clashes on the frontier was in August 1969 when there was a brief but fierce clash between Soviet and Chinese troops.
Last Monday, May 28, was the annual Soviet-era holiday for border guards, an event still celebrated in former Soviet countries. The bodies were discovered on May 30.
(Reporting by Raushan Nurshayeva; Writing by Dmitry Solovyov; Editing by Jon Hemming)
