China media warns Philippines of 'counterstrike' in South China Sea
2013-06-28 23:29:00.0
(Reuters) - China's state media warned on Saturday that a "counterstrike" against the Philippines was inevitable if it continues to provoke Beijing in the South China Sea, potentially Asia's biggest military troublespot.
The warning comes as ministers from both countries attend an Association of Southeast Asian Nations meeting in Brunei, starting Saturday, which hopes to reach a legally binding code of conduct to manage maritime conduct in disputed areas.
Both China and the Philippines have been locked in a decades-old territorial squabble over the South China Sea, with tensions flaring after the Philippines moved new soldiers and supplies last week to a disputed coral reef, prompting Beijing to condemn Manila's "illegal occupation".
The overseas edition of the People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, said in a front-page commentary that the Philippines had committed "seven sins" in the South China Sea.
These include the "illegal occupation" of the Spratly Islands, inviting foreign capital to engage in oil and gas development in the disputed waters and promoting the "internationalization" of the waters, said the commentary.
The Philippines has called on the United States to act as a "patron", while ASEAN has become an "accomplice," said the commentary, which does not amount to official policy but can reflect the government's thinking.
"The Philippines, knowing that it's weak, believes that 'a crying child will have milk to drink'," the People's Daily said, accusing Manila of resorting to many "unscrupulous" tricks in the disputed waters.
Beijing's assertion of sovereignty over a vast stretch of the South China Sea has set it directly against Vietnam and the Philippines, while Brunei, Taiwan and Malaysia also lay claim to other parts of the sea.
On Thursday, China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi warned that countries with territorial claims in the South China Sea that look for help from third parties will find their efforts "futile", adding that the path of confrontation would be "doomed".
Last week, China vowed to protect its sovereignty over the Second Thomas Shoal, known in China as the Ren'ai reef. The Philippines is accusing China of encroachment after three Chinese ships, including a naval frigate, converged just five nautical miles (nine km) from an old transport ship that Manila ran aground on a reef in 1999 to mark its territory.
Last year, China and the Philippines were locked in a tense two-month standoff at the Scarborough Shoal, which is only about 124 nautical miles off the Philippine coast. Chinese ships now control the shoal, often chasing away Filipino fishermen.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Do it CHina no to much talking and warning!,!!! I know for a fact that you are The Devil that was in the Bible phropecy. You people have no respect of humanity.you cannot even feed your people with your vast lands and you wanted more by conquering our land .Many will die again before you get what you want, if you can get it.
Jun 28, 201312:05am EDT--
We must must allow china to continue bullying our allies, we need to provide Philippines creditable defense and few old coast guard ship won¡¯t do it. Below is recommended list of urgent need hardware for Filipinos: (2) Arleigh Burke class destroyers
We must must allow china to continue bullying our allies, we need to provide Philippines creditable defense and few old coast guard ship won¡¯t do it. Below is recommended list of urgent need hardware for Filipinos: (2) Arleigh Burke class destroyers
(~) unlimited number of Evolved Sea Sparrow, Harpoon, and AMRAAM Missiles. I am assure chinese will behavior nicely when Phillipines possess the above hardware.
Jun 28, 201312:34am EDT--
Jun 28, 201312:55am EDT--
