China, Russia on same page regarding Syria, Beijing says
2012-06-05 04:06:00.0
China, Russia on same page regarding Syria, Beijing says | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, Russia on same page regarding Syria, Beijing says
Tue, Jun 5 2012
Tue, Jun 5 2012
Mon, Jun 4 2012
Sun, Jun 3 2012
Fri, Jun 1 2012
Tue  EDT
China and Russia, both permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, have blocked efforts by Western powers to condemn or call for the removal of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad whose forces the United Nations says have killed more than 10,000 people since March last year.
Both countries have stayed in close touch on Syria and believe there should be an immediate end to violence, adding that political dialogue should begin as soon as possible, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin told a daily news briefing.
"Both sides oppose external intervention in Syria and oppose regime change by force," Liu said.
"We believe ultimately the Syrian issue should be properly addressed through consultation among different parties in Syria. This is in the fundamental interests of the Syrian people. China and Russia have been playing, in their own way, a positive role on the Syrian issue."
Russia and China, wary of any Western-led military intervention in Syria, say U.N. mediator Kofi Annan's plan is the only way forward, but have twice blocked U.N. Security Council resolutions which would have condemned Damascus and perhaps led to sanctions.
Putin is attending a summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, which also includes former Soviet states in central Asia.
Among the talks between Russia, the world's biggest energy producer, and China, the largest consumer of energy, will be a natural gas deal which Moscow hopes to finalize after years of negotiation.
Also on the table is a multi-billion dollar joint venture to build a long-haul aircraft, Russian media have said, and a state-run fund to invest in Russian and Chinese projects.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Additional reporting by Chris Buckley; Writing by Ben Blanchard)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Birds of the same feather (authoritarian ) flock together!
Jun 05, 20124:53am EDT--
