U.S. lawmakers to examine Smithfield-Shuanghui deal
2013-06-27 15:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jun 21 2013
Thu, Jun 20 2013
Thu, Jun 20 2013
Mon, Jun 17 2013
Fri, Jun 14 2013
Smithfield hams line the shelves at the Taste of Smithfield restaurant and gourmet market in Smithfield, Virginia May 30, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Rich-Joseph Facun
Thu  EDT
), the world's largest pork processor, by Shuanghui International of China at a hearing in July, Debbie Stabenow, the head of the Senate Agriculture Committee, said on Thursday.
At $4.7 billion, the proposed Smithfield-Shuanghui deal would be the largest acquisition of a U.S. company by a Chinese company. Nearly two dozen senators have urged a careful review of the sale by federal regulators.
The hearing, "Smithfield and Beyond: Examining Foreign Purchases of American Food Companies" will look at how the government review of such takeovers account for food safety and protection of American technologies and intellectual property.
Separately, two lawmakers asked administration officials to answer 17 questions about the Smithfield deal, ranging from Chinese access to U.S. trade secrets and whether other U.S. meatpackers would have fair treatment in the Chinese market, to how U.S. consumers will know if they are buying U.S.-grown or Chinese meat.
"Just as Chinese consumers question the safety and security of their food supply, so should we as public officials on behalf of American consumers," said Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Rep Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut.
Led by Stabenow, 15 of the 20 senators on the Agriculture Committee and the leaders of the Senate Finance Committee wrote last week to Treasury Secretary Jack Lew to say food security must be a factor when regulators decide whether to approve the sale. The Treasury Department heads an interagency panel that reviews foreign investment for national security threats.
China's Commerce Ministry said on Tuesday the Smithfield transaction was unrelated to food safety issues.
"We hope the U.S. will treat the merger case fairly and properly," it said in a statement that was its first response to questions raised by the lawmakers.
Smithfield and Shuanghui have filed the proposed deal with the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS), the interagency panel headed by the Treasury. Many CFIUS experts believe the deal will be cleared.
"We welcome a full review and fair consideration of the Shuanghui-Smithfield combination from the U.S. government. We believe the proposed combination does not present any national security concerns, is good for US farmers and agriculture and will advance US-China relations," Smithfield said in a statement.
In late trading Smithfield Foods was at $32.80, up 0.2 percent, on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Additional reporting by Doug Palmer, editing by Ros Krasny and Bob Burgdorfer)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Smithfield better think twice before selling to China. I know I will not buy from them if the deal goes through. All it is, is greed on the stockholders part. They could care less if China sells tainted meat.
Jun 27, 20133:26pm EDT--
