Chinese wind towers hit with U.S. tariffs
2012-05-31 04:46:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States imposed preliminary duties as high as 26 percent on a second clean-energy product from China on Wednesday, this time hitting the tall steel towers used to harvest power from the wind.
The decision by the U.S. Commerce Department is a victory for the Wind Tower Trade Coalition, a group of U.S. producers who say they are being driven out of business by low-priced imports from China and Vietnam.
The Commerce Department, in a move likely to further strain trade ties, said Chinese manufacturers received "countervailable" government subsidies ranging from 13.74 percent to 26 percent of the cost of the towers.
China criticized the move, urging Washington to adopt a more consultative approach to resolving trade rows.
"Readily resorting to protectionist measures is not conducive to China and the U.S. continuing to cooperate in the trade and economic fields," Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Liu Weimin told reporters in Beijing.
"This is an important step in remedying the harm caused by unfairly traded wind-tower exports," Alan Price, chair of Wiley Rein's International Trade Practice and lead attorney for U.S. producers, said in a statement.
), Broadwind Towers (
), DMI Industries (
) and Katana Summit, a joint venture between Katana Industries, Sumitomo Corporation of America SUMTME.UL and SC Steel Investment.
In a separate case on Wednesday, the U.S. International Trade Commission, gave final approval to duties ranging from about 21 percent to 46 percent on high-pressure steel cylinders from China in a petition for import protection filed last year by a Texas manufacturer. The United States imported about $82 million of the cylinders from China last year.
The elegant structures, which can stretch more than 300 feet into the air, are assembled on site and hold the huge blades that turn the turbines. They represent about 15 percent of the cost of the multimillion-dollar final product.
U.S. producers are particularly upset about being shut out of the 338-tower Shepherds Flat project in eastern Oregon, which is due to be completed next year and is billed as the world's largest wind farm.
Chinese firms are supplying the towers instead, U.S. producers said at a hearing earlier this year.
), the German electronics and electrical engineering giant, came out against imposing duties at an U.S. International Trade Commission hearing in January.
(Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in BEIJING; Editing by Anthony Boadle, Bill Trott and Mark Bendeich)
