Developing rule of law critical for China, says blind activist
2012-05-30 02:09:00.0
(Reuters) - The biggest challenge for China's next leaders is confronting a lawless police state nurtured by the Communist Party's own drive to put top-down control ahead of human rights, blind activist Chen Guangcheng has written.
Chen laid down his challenge to China's next central leaders, who will be unveiled at a party congress later this year, in an opinion column for the New York Times that appeared online Tuesday night east coast time.
"The fundamental question the Chinese government must face is lawlessness," wrote Chen. "China does not lack laws, but the rule of law."
Chen is in New York where he will study after escaping 19 months of house imprisonment in eastern Shandong province and taking shelter in the U.S. embassy, a drama that focused world attention on China's poor human rights record.
"This issue of lawlessness may be the greatest challenge facing the new leaders who will be installed this autumn by the 18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party," wrote Chen.
"Indeed, China's political stability may depend on its ability to develop the rule of law in a system where it barely exists," he added. "China stands at a critical juncture. I hope its new leaders will use this opportunity wisely."
Chen's comments highlighted how China's expansion of "stability preservation" and domestic security powers over the past decade has created a contentious legacy for the next party leadership, almost sure to be headed by current Vice President Xi Jinping.
The party's top domestic security official, Zhou Yongkang, also suffered a blow to his authority over a scandal around Bo Xilai, the sacked chief of Chongqing in southwest China. Zhou was widely seen as staying too close to Bo for too long.
Chen wrote that although China's legislation can appear on paper to offer citizens robust protection, in practice the police and officials can ride roughshod over the law.
"On what legal basis, following my release from prison in 2010, did they turn our home into another, equally harsh, prison?" Chen added.
Chen accused Shandong officials in 2005 of forcing women to have late-term abortions and sterilizations to comply with China's strict family-planning policies. Officials moved against him with charges of whipping up a crowd that disrupted traffic and damaged property - charges he adamantly rejected.
But he has continued to voice concern about relatives in Shandong, especially his nephew Chen Kegui, who he said faced reprisals from officials.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Nick Macfie)
