JPMorgan injects $400 million into China unit, eyes expansion
2012-05-28 12:15:00.0
JPMorgan injects $400 million into China unit, eyes expansion | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
JPMorgan injects $400 million into China unit, eyes expansion
Thu, May 17 2012
Mon, May 14 2012
Tue, May 8 2012
A sign is seen outside the JPMorgan office in Los Angeles, California, October 12, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Lucy Nicholson
Mon  EDT
) has injected 2.5 billion yuan ($394.08 million) into its China unit, the latest foreign bank to beef up its Chinese operations.
Foreign banks, including HSBC (
) and Singapore's DBS Group (
), have either injected or are planning to pump in capital into their China units which are expected to grow rapidly over the coming years even as growth in the world's second-biggest economy comes off the boil.
"The additional capital will better position the bank in the evolving regulatory environment and cement our commitment to clients in China," Zili Shao, Chairman and chief executive of J.P. Morgan China, said in a statement on Monday.
"The capital will be used to expand the bank's branch network, develop products, increase corporate lending, and recruit employees," Shao added.
The local unit, which conducts commercial banking businesses in China, has also received regulatory approval to open its 7th branch in China in Suzhou, west of Shanghai, the statement said.
) injected 2.8 billion yuan into its China unit last year, even as it laid off several hundred investment bankers in London, Hong Kong and elsewhere as part of its jobs cull to save billions of dollars.
DBS, Southeast Asia's largest bank, said in April it is planning to make an injection of 2.3 billion yuan into its China unit to increase its network and staff, and upgrade infrastructure and other technology platforms.
(Reporting by Kazunori Takada; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
May 28, 20125:26am EDT--
