Suntech says Europe could deal lethal blow
2012-05-24 06:19:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Suntech Power Holdings Co Ltd, the world's biggest solar panel maker, said Europe could follow the United States in levying punitive tariffs on Chinese solar panel imports, dealing a "lethal" blow to the industry.
The United States hit Chinese solar companies with anti-dumping tariffs of about 31 percent last week, further denting the outlook for an industry grappling with falling margins, oversupply and subsidy cuts in top European markets.
The U.S. ruling stems from a complaint filed last October by the U.S. subsidiary of Germany's SolarWorld AG, and six other U.S. companies that alleged unfair competition and had sought duties well above 100 percent.
Anti-dumping tariffs by Europe, which accounts for 70 percent of sales for Chinese solar companies, "would have a lethal impact on China's solar industry," Suntech Chairman and Chief Executive Zhengrong Shi told Reuters in an interview in Shanghai on Thursday.
The United States accounted for 34 percent of Suntech's sales in the first quarter, while Europe remained the New York-listed company's biggest market with a 44 percent share of revenue.
"European companies are preparing themselves for a trade case, anti-subsidy and anti-dumping, against China and Chinese companies," Milan Nitzsche, vice president of SolarWorld, told Reuters in Brussels on Tuesday.
"We just want to create a level playing field," Nitzsche said, without disclosing a time frame for a case.
"That could be the death of the many Chinese solar companies," said CIMB Research analyst Keith Li.
"The costs of solar developers in Europe will rise and will only slow solar development and are unlikely to solve Europe's (solar producers') problems," he said.
German solar power equipment company Q-Cells filed for insolvency in April, becoming the most prominent victim so far in an industry shake-out sparked by plunging product prices amid massive overcapacity.
"There are signs that Europe is making some moves, and also India. We have noticed that, and have made preparations for that," said Miao Liansheng, chairman and CEO of Yingli Green Energy, one of China's largest solar equipment makers.
Yingli, whose shares have fallen nearly 75 percent in New York in the past year, will announce its first-quarter results on May 30.
"The U.S. ruling was disappointing but expected," said Suntech's Shi.
At the close in New York on Wednesday, shares in Suntech and Yingli rose 2 percent, while Trina Solar gained 4 percent.
(Writing by Leonora Walet and Kazunori Takada; Additional Reporting by David Lin in Shanghai and Barbara.hm Lewis in Brussels.; Editing by Ryan Woo)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Adding tariffs to solar panel will keep us dependent on middle east oil for energy , and also slow down development of a somewhat promising alternative energy program, erasing any usa energy tax credits, and discouraging use. I am ready to buy after all these years, and now this. Had solyndra kept chugging along, maybe prices would have come down . I thought the usa was committed to cheaper energy prices. There is no competition at $285 for a 235 watt solar panel from china. Should I buy a 235 watt solar panel made in usa or europe for $700? Instead of 5 years to pay off that panel, it¡¯s 20 years. i¡¯m 57 years old. Bad move by the government. Why don¡¯t we buy oil from the highest priced seller?
May 24, 20127:12am EDT--
Well, there goes my budget for solar power all over my roof. Have to wait now and see what I can afford and if it is worth it.
May 24, 20127:27am EDT--
