China military paper warns officers to toe party line
2012-05-14 23:55:00.0
(Reuters) - China's top military newspaper warned officers on Tuesday to remain the ruling Communist Party's "most loyal" defenders in the face of what it called Western plotting, describing recent cases of ill-discipline and corruption as a "profound warning".
The commentary in the Liberation Army Daily did not specify what problems might have prompted the unusually blunt warning over laxity, waste and abuses in the Chinese military, but the Communist Party is wrestling with scandals ahead of a power succession later this year.
Its leaders appear determined to ensure that the People's Liberation Army remains the ultimate shield of their authority.
Anxieties about party control appear to have grown after the ousting of Bo Xilai, the ambitious party chief of Chongqing, a province-status municipality in southwest China, as well as corruption allegations around PLA Lieutenant General Gu Junshan.
"Hostile international forces have not slackened in their strategic plotting to Westernize and divide us," said the commentary, which said some officers have "wavered" in their loyalty to the party and its credo.
"Faced with complex and capricious ideological currents and phenomenon, leading officials must be even clearer about serving as the most resolute supporters of the Party's cause and its most loyal implementers," said the paper.
"Ensure that the gun always heads the Party's commands."
The Communist Party has always treated its grip on the PLA as a pillar of its one-party power. President Hu Jintao also serves as chairman of the Central Military Commission, which oversees the PLA, and his term in that job could extend beyond early 2013, when he is due to step down as president.
Last month, the Liberation Army Daily told troops to ignore online gossip after outlandish rumors of a foiled coup spread on the Internet. That followed the abrupt ousting of Bo, once a contender for a spot in the new central leadership to be unveiled at a party congress later this year.
Since then, there have been no public announcements about the case. Sources close to the PLA have told Reuters the probe into Gu has encountered resistance or foot-dragging from within the military.
"In recent years, there have been some cases of disciplinary violations in the military that have left painful lessons and a profound warning," said the commentary in the PLA paper, which told officers to be "models of probity and self-discipline".
PLA officers must undergo strengthened audits and inspections to prevent waste and abuses, it said.
"We must defend the bottom-line of incorruptibility and purity," said the newspaper commentary. "Regularly check the standards on honest administrative conduct to examine yourself and restrain spouses, children and staff working alongside you."
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Coming soon to a totalitarian govt. near you. Vote carefully, while you still can.
May 15, 20125:36am EDT--
Ohhhhh yes¡­ worship the ¡®holy party¡¯. Partisans are the only thing that¡¯s just about as bad as a cult ¨C they both want your money and your unquestioning loyalty. Go on¡­ drink the Kool-Aid, it¡¯s safe¡­ Partisans ¨C and cultists ¨C the same everywhere I guess.
May 15, 20125:54pm EDT--
