China accuses U.S. of cyber security hypocrisy amid Snowden dispute
2013-06-27 08:36:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jun 26 2013
Wed, Jun 26 2013
Tue, Jun 25 2013
Mon, Jun 24 2013
Mon, Jun 24 2013
Protesters supporting Edward Snowden, a contractor at the National Security Agency (NSA), hold a photo of Snowden during a demonstration outside the U.S. Consulate in Hong Kong June 13, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Thu  EDT
China fired its latest salvo two days after it rejected U.S. accusations it had helped Snowden, who is facing espionage charges in the United States, to escape prosecution by allowing him to leave Hong Kong.
Snowden's revelations of widespread snooping by the U.S. National Security Agency in China and Hong Kong have given Beijing considerable ammunition in the tit-for-tat exchange.
China's defense ministry said the Prism program "has revealed the concerned country's true face and hypocritical behavior". It did not name the country.
Documents previously leaked by Snowden reveal that the National Security Agency has access to vast amounts of Internet data such as emails, chat rooms and video from large companies, including Facebook and Google, under a government program known as Prism.
"On the one hand, (it) is seeking the advantages of the selfish misuse of information technology, and on the other hand, it is making groundless accusations against other countries," ministry spokesman Yang Yujun told reporters, according to state news agency Xinhua.
"This 'double standard' approach is not conducive to peace and security in cyber space."
China has said it was gravely concerned by Snowden's allegations that the United States had hacked into many networks in Hong Kong and China, including Tsinghua University, which hosts one of the country's Internet hubs, and Chinese mobile network companies. It has said it has taken the issue up with Washington.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As an AMERICAN patriot, CHINA is RIGHT! The USA is the BIGGEST HYPOCRITE! I don¡¯t think Snowden is anything but a traitor for running away, BUT! He is a patriot for exposing this cyber espionage! He should come back to face his judgement, BUT! He deserves a FAIR trial WITH open, PUBLIC oversight. In the meantime, USA and other countries¡­ WE ARE NOT PRISONERS! WE ARE NOT TERRORISTS! WE DEMAND OUR FREEDOM! STAY OUT OF OUR PRIVATE COMMUNICATIONS!
Jun 27, 20131:30pm EDT--
Well, as it is with many cases of U.S. getting caught with its pants down, they certainly got us there.
Jun 27, 20131:31pm EDT--
If US really wants to hold on to its ¡°world policeman¡± mentality it should behave itself. There are too many instances of its hypocrisy only that this time it was caught totally off-guard, something like god-send. Stop all the belittling, demonizing and condemnation of other world powers especially China and Russia under the pretext of free press, human rights and stop taking the world for granted. The whole world under planet earth will be a better place to live in.
Jun 27, 201310:43pm EDT--
