China summons UK ambassador over Dalai Lama meeting with Cameron
2012-05-15 07:48:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Vice Foreign Minister Song Tao summoned the British ambassador in Beijing on Tuesday to protest British Prime Minister David Cameron's meeting with the Dalai Lama, saying the meeting "seriously interfered" with China's internal affairs.
The exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, who is considered a separatist by Beijing, met with Cameron on Monday. The meeting was, however, not held at Cameron's official Downing St residence in a gesture to Chinese sensibilities.
Song summoned British ambassador Sebastian Wood and said that British leaders should fully consider the "serious consequences" of meeting the Dalai Lama, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
It said the meeting "seriously interfered with China's internal affairs, undermined China's core interests, and hurt the feelings of the Chinese people".
China's response echoed many previous statements about the Dalai Lama's meetings with foreign political leaders, suggesting that China will confine its reaction to angry words.
"British ministers believe that who they see is a matter for them," said a British Foreign Office spokeswoman in London. "If they choose to see someone, it does not necessarily indicate they support that individual's viewpoint."
The Dalai Lama told reporters on Monday that China is beset by a moral crisis, widespread corruption and lawlessness, leading millions of Chinese to seek solace in Buddhism.
The Dalai Lama denies seeking independence for Tibet, saying he wants a peaceful transition to true autonomy for the remote Himalayan region, which China has ruled with an iron fist since 1950, when Chinese troops marched in.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing and Adrian Croft in London; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Has Dalai Lama even been to Tibet or other parts of China in recent 50 years, and who is he to make all those judgement about China. He¡¯s just a actor begging money all over the world, a real shame for buddhists.
May 15, 20128:14am EDT--
Mt hotndy: For your information, the Dalai Lama was born and lived in Tibet until the 1950s. So, to answer your question, yes, he has lived in Tibet. Second of all, he is not travelling around the world begging for money. Infact, he was specially chosen to win the Templeton Award, meaning a special group of panel nominated him¨C you of course would not know about nominations and elections because you are forced to accept whatever the Chinese governement feeds you ¡ª in terms of news and political leaders. Also, if he was begging for money, he would have kept the money to himself but he is not¨C He is donating ALL of it to charity. So, please open your eyes and see the world through your own eyes, not through Xinhua News or China Daily. Don¡¯t be a communist mouthpiece¨Cyou should learn to open your horizon and most of all, you have the potential of knowing what¡¯s right and what¡¯s not.
May 15, 20129:43am EDT--
All Dalai Lama¡¯s comments about China were quite accurate.
May 15, 201210:33am EDT--
