PetroChina in talks to buy Valero's Aruba refinery-sources
2012-05-09 03:30:00.0
PetroChina in talks to buy Valero's Aruba refinery-sources | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
PetroChina in talks to buy Valero's Aruba refinery-sources
Tue, May 8 2012
Tue, May 8 2012
Tue, May 8 2012
Tue, May 8 2012
Wed, May 2 2012
Wed  EDT
) is in talks to buy Valero Energy's (
) shuttered refinery in Aruba, sources said, the latest move by China's oil giants to take advantage of a global refining downturn to beef up supply.
PetroChina, Asia's largest oil and gas producer, has made a string of overseas refinery acquisitions in the past few years to strengthen its global refinery foothold and boost its trading and marketing capabilities.
In a filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Valero said it had received a non-binding indication of interest for the 235,000 barrel-per-day Aruba plant for $350 million plus working capital, but did not identify the interested party.
Sources familiar with the negotiations said the approach had been made by PetroChina. It was the second time in two years the Chinese company had discussed the purchase of the plant, which is located near Venezuela, China's fourth largest crude supplier, sources said.
A local media website, Amigoe, reported that PetroChina signed a memorandum of understanding with the government of Aruba on April 30, 2012, but details of the deal had not been made public yet due to the sensitive nature of the negotiations.
Chinese oil giants, which have been suffering heavy refining losses at home due to state-controlled oil products prices, are pushing into the overseas refining sector to optimize their refinery operations and maximize the value of crude they produce overseas, energy bankers and analysts say.
Sinopec Group, parent of Asia's largest refiner Sinopec Corp (
), signed a deal with Saudi Aramco SDABO.UL earlier this year to build a new 400,000 barrels a day (bpd) oil refinery in Yanbu in Saudi Arabia, its first overseas refining project.
"They hold the concept of building a global trading business. The concept is it allows them to get cheaper crude to China," James Hubbard, head of Asia oil and gas research at Macquarie, said of Chinese oil firms' overseas refining strategy.
PetroChina bought a 50 percent stake in chemical group Ineos' INEOS.UL European refining business last year for $1 billion, its third overseas refinery deal after acquisitions in Singapore and Japan for more than $2 billion combined.
"PetroChina has a presence in the Venezuelan upstream. This is related to them looking for an upgrader for that heavy crude," said John Auers, a refinery specialist with Houston-based Turner Mason.
The Aruba plant has two fairly new coker units to handle the heavy Venezuelan crude as well as recently upgraded hydrotreating capability, sources familiar with the refinery said.
This would allow PetroChina to semi-process heavy crude and then ship the product to China for finishing in the mainland refineries there, which can only run lighter grades.
Venezuela is currently supplying 460,000 barrels of oil per day to China, and is set to increase its shipments to 1 million barrels per day by 2015, according to government officials.
China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC), parent of PetroChina, and PDVSA are also building a $9 billion joint refinery on China's southern coast in April, paving the way for more Venezuelan oil to flow to the world's second-largest oil user.
China has become a major partner of President Hugo Chavez's government, supplying billions of dollars in credits, some of which are being canceled with crude shipments from the South American OPEC member.
The Aruba refinery has been idled at least twice in the past few years, most recently earlier this year, due to poor profit margins that have plagued refiners in Europe, the Caribbean and on the U.S. East Coast.
Earlier this year, over 2 million barrels of refining capacity were threatened with closure across the Atlantic Basin, driving up gasoline prices on the U.S. East Coast as supplies to the region looked short ahead of the U.S. summer driving season.
But in recent weeks buyers have begun to emerge to snap up plants at low prices, with Delta Air Lines buying Conoco's (
(Additional reporting by Judy Hua in BEIJING; Editing by Leslie Gevirtz and Richard Pullin)
