GE to buy 15 percent stake in China's XD Electric
2012-05-07 11:58:00.0
GE to buy 15 percent stake in China's XD Electric | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
GE to buy 15 percent stake in China's XD Electric
Thu, Apr 26 2012
Fri, Apr 20 2012
Mon  EDT
GE, which is expanding in China as the growing middle class requires more electricity, said the companies will deliver electric transmission and distribution (T&D) and grid automation solutions to customers globally.
The joint venture gives GE access to "primary" equipment such as large transformers and breakers that modify and switch power within the grid, Bob Gilligan, president and chief executive officer of GE's digital energy business, said in an interview.
XD Electric in China, one of the fastest growing T&D markets in the world, has developed technology used on a large scale for a competitive portfolio of products, he said.
"GE is continuing to look for alternative ways to grow and expand its business," said Gilligan. "This investment helps us better serve energy-intensive industries like utilities, like mining, like steel."
GE, the largest U.S. conglomerate, will also appoint a representative to XD's board of directors.
XD Electric, traded on the Shanghai stock exchange, manufactures electricity transmission and distribution equipment. It exports products to more than 40 countries and regions throughout Europe, the United States, Asia and Africa.
GE shares were off 0.3 percent at $19.29 on the New York Stock Exchange on Monday morning, near the top of the past year's range between $14.03 and $20.42.
(Reporting By Lynn Adler in New York; editing by John Wallace and Matthew Lewis)
