Clinton urges China to help on Iran, North Korea
2012-05-03 11:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged China on Thursday to help defuse tension over Iran, North Korea and other global flashpoints, seeking to salvage talks that have been overwhelmed by negotiations over a dissident.
In her opening remarks to the two-day U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue, Clinton pressed China on human rights but avoided mention of Chen Guangcheng, a blind rights activist who sought protection in the U.S. embassy until he left under a deal to stay in China - a deal he later said he regretted.
Despite the uproar, Clinton said the United States hoped China would help rein in the nuclear activities of North Korea and Iran, and pressure the Syrian government to halt violence.
"On Iran, the United States and China share the goal of preventing Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon," Clinton told U.S. and Chinese officials gathered in the Chinese capital.
"It is critical that we keep the pressure on Iran to meet its international obligations, negotiate seriously, and prove that its nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes," she said.
China is a major buyer of Iranian crude oil, and has resisted U.S. demands for sanctions threatening energy flows.
China has also resisted calls from Washington and its Asian allies for stronger pressure on North Korea, its neighbor and long-time ally that recently launched a rocket that the U.N. Security Council said violated sanctions.
"Of course, as part of our dialogue, the United States raises the importance of human rights and fundamental freedoms," Clinton said in her remarks.
"We believe all governments have to answer our citizens' aspirations for dignity and the rule of law and that no nation can or should deny those rights."
(Writing by Chris Buckley; Editing by Don Durfee and Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Imagine that it¡¯s the Americans fault, so tired of hearing that, NO it is Mr. Chen¡¯s fault. First he wants to stay then he wants to go. We should stay out of it as we are not the world¡¯s police. Really does not matter it still always is America¡¯s fault.
Imagine that it¡¯s the Americans fault, so tired of hearing that, NO it is Mr. Chen¡¯s fault. First he wants to stay then he wants to go. We should stay out of it as we are not the world¡¯s police. Really does not matter it still always is America¡¯s fault.
Now watch the Republicans who care nothing about the American people try and use his to help them in 2012 to win the white house, ain¡¯t gonna happen. I see Rep. Christopher Smith (R., N.J.), demanded that the State Department address allegations and Rep. John Boehner (R., Ohio) already running their mouths. Remember the Republicans don¡¯t care about our people so you know why they stand up for Mr. Chen, because they USE people and nothing more for gain.
May 02, 201210:20pm EDT--
China uses people and nations to suit their own goals, does anyone really beleive that the chinese will assist in reigning in N Korea or Iran for that matter? No maam aint gonna happen Hillary! N Korea is their Israel and Iran is their source of cheap crude.
China uses people and nations to suit their own goals, does anyone really beleive that the chinese will assist in reigning in N Korea or Iran for that matter? No maam aint gonna happen Hillary! N Korea is their Israel and Iran is their source of cheap crude.
It¡¯s time for us to get out this diabolical situations and concentrate on keeping jobs in USA. Why are we even in Aghanistan for that matter?
We should look into befriending our close neighbours in C & S America, which is also hostile about our policies. This is crazy, in this day and age we are handing out funding to other countries and depriving our own citizens. Gosh just makes me mad thinking about it!
May 02, 201211:18pm EDT--
May 02, 201211:52pm EDT--
