China's Bright Food buys Weetabix
2012-05-03 09:16:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Bright Food will take control of breakfast cereal maker Weetabix, beloved by generations of British children, in the biggest foreign acquisition by a Chinese food group.
State-owned Bright Food has agreed to buy a 60 percent stake in a deal which puts a value of 1.2 billion pounds ($1.94 billion), including debt, on the private-equity owned company that coined the slogan "Have you had your Weetabix today?"
The Shanghai-based group has been on the acquisition trail, seeking to raise its profile and cater for its rapidly growing home market. Weetabix is its second foreign purchase in a year and its first in Europe after other deals fell through.
Eighty-year-old Weetabix is Britain's second biggest maker of breakfast cereals and cereal bars after Kellogg (
Its brands include Alpen muesli and Ready Break as well as Weetabix, which lays claim to being Britain's No. 1 breakfast cereal for under-5s and is made from wheat grown within 50 miles of its base in southern England.
"As China's leading food group, we are pleased to become the controlling shareholder of Weetabix," Bright Food chairman Wang Zhongnan said in a statement on Thursday. "Weetabix has an excellent product portfolio, including leading British cereal brand Weetabix and other category-leading brands."
Bright Food now sees a big opportunity for Weetabix in China, where breakfast is a very important meal and there is a trend towards healthy eating.
The group, which makes "White Rabbit" candy, bought majority stakes in Australia's Manassen Foods and New Zealand's Synlait Milk over the past two years.
Analysts expected more deals would now follow in Europe after its earlier failed attempts to buy Britain's private-equity owned United Biscuits, the McVitie's and Hula Hoops group, and a stake in French yoghurt firm Yoplait.
"This is a trend," said Ghislain de Mareuil, a Paris-based lawyer at De Pardieu Brocas Maffei. "In China, you have to set an example, and then others follow. What Bright Food has done will definitely set a trend for other Chinese food companies the way we have seen in the automotive industry."
Weetabix had sales of over 460 million pounds in 2011 and employs around 1,800 people.
It has around 7 percent of the British breakfast cereal market. As well as Kellogg, it competes with the Swiss based joint venture Cereal Partners between Nestle (
Weetabix was sold by the George family for 642 million pounds in 2004 to U.S. private equity firm Hicks Muse Tate & Furst, which later restructured and spun out its European buyout arm to form Lion Capital.
), Shanghai Haibo Co (
), Shanghai Maling Aquarius Co (
(Reporting by Samuel Shen, Melanie Lee and Pete Sweeney in China, and David Jones and Sophie Sassard in London; Editing by Matthew Tostevin)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As if Chinese food isn¡¯t poisoning enough people already. This deal should be blocked for the safety of the citizens.
May 03, 20129:14am EDT--
