Clinton leaves China as dissident Chen awaits departure
2012-05-05 03:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Secretary of State Hillary Clinton left Beijing on Saturday after a tense week of negotiations with China over the fate of blind rights activist Chen Guangcheng, who plans to travel to the United States under a deal to end the standoff.
Despite some speculation that Chen might fly out on the same plane as Clinton, the 40-year-old activist remained in the Beijing hospital he went to on Wednesday from the U.S. embassy, where he had taken refuge after a dramatic escape from 19 months under house arrest in his home village.
In a sign the dispute over the activist, which threatened to worsen difficult China-U.S. ties, might be easing, China indicated on Friday Chen would be allowed to go to the United States to study.
Later, in an interview with Radio Free Asia, Chen said he did not plan to leave his homeland for good.
"This isn't saying that when I leave it's a one-off and there's no coming back," Chen told the Washington-based news service.
"Nobody should think that I'm emigrating or anything like that. As they (the Chinese government) have recognised that I'm free, then I should also have the freedom to go where I want."
It is not clear how soon and how smoothly Chen will pass through China's procedures that would allow him to travel, and even with Washington cautiously welcoming the proposed deal, some of his supporters said they remained under house arrest or under heavy police watch.
Human rights lawyer Jiang Tianyong said both his ears were injured, and his left eardrum seemed to have ruptured, after police officers beat him about the head after he went to the Chaoyang Hospital in a bid to visit Chen.
"The worrying problem is that I haven't been allowed out of my home to see a doctor and check how serious this is," Jiang told Reuters by telephone from his home. "The state security police have told me to wait while they ask if I can go to a hospital, and there's been no answer."
The Chinese Foreign Ministry said on Friday that Chen could apply to study abroad followed his dramatic appeal to a U.S. congressional hearing on his case, when he asked to be allowed to spend time in the United States after escaping extra-judicial captivity in his home village and hiding in the U.S. embassy in Beijing for six days.
Chen left the embassy under a deal that foresaw him staying in China to study at a university. But Chen, beset by worries about the safety of his family and his own tenuous freedom, then changed his mind and said he wanted to go to the United States.
Clinton, who was in Beijing for strategic and economic talks, said the U.S. ambassador to Beijing, Gary Locke, had spoken to Chen on Friday and had confirmed that Chen planned to go to the United States.
Chen had complained that after he entered the Beijing hospital, U.S. officials were not allowed to meet him.
U.S. officials have said they now expect American diplomats and doctors to have regular access to Chen, who won fame by campaigning against forced abortions under China's "one-child" policy and other abuses experienced by rural residents.
Any more ructions with China over Chen could embolden American critics of the Obama administration's China policies. They already seized on Chen's pleas for safety and criticism of U.S. diplomats, which he later retracted as the result of misunderstandings.
"U.S. officials made a mistake by escorting Chen away from the safety of the U.S. embassy and into an uncertain fate," said Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, the Republican chairman of the House of Representatives' Foreign Affairs Committee, in an emailed comment. "We cannot assume that this saga has been resolved."
The lawyer Jiang, who campaigned for Chen's freedom, said Chen was right to leave with his family, but his departure would nonetheless be a victory for "hardliners" in the government.
"This has been a victory for the law-breakers, because Chen Guangcheng and his family saw how the agreement that would have allowed him to stay wasn't going to be honored. They avoided facing that test," said Jiang. "This is ultimately a set-back for rule of law."
In 2006, Chen was sentenced to more than four years in jail on charges, vehemently denied by his wife and lawyers, that he whipped up a crowd that disrupted traffic and damaged property.
He was formally released in 2010 but remained under stifling house arrest in his home Dongshigu Village, which officials turned into a virtual fortress of walls, security equipment and aggressive guards in plain clothes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
May 05, 20124:57am EDT--
If the ¡°I would love to kiss you, Hillary¡± Chen Guangcheng (who sweet-talked the U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton over the phone on May 2, 2012. And I translated it as best as I could from a report in Chinese.) could so casually announce to the world that he would want to fly away to ¡°freedom¡± on Hillary¡¯s airplane, then I would be bold enough to beseech the great John Grisham to write his next thriller based on the happenings in the last two plus months or so. Lets begin with the mysterious death of an Englishman in a hotel in the most midland of Chinese city, Chongqing. England has denied any suggestions that he was a English spy. His possible ¡°murder¡± has been linked to the wife of a very prominent Chinese political figure, whom many thought was only a few short jumps to being one of the top Chinese leaders. Mr. Bo Xilai was ¡°tall, dashing and charismatic ¡ª very much the opposite of most Chinese political figures (think Mr. Hu Jintao)¡± and was nicknamed as the ¡°Chinese Jack Kennedy¡± by some Westerners. And yet, Mr. Bo encouraged a nostalgia for the Red Mao era, while funneling money out of China and giving his son a very expensive overseas education ¡ª with a very expensive lifestyle ¡ª at some fancy universities in England and America. Then, out of a sudden, Mr. Bo¡¯s right-hand man, Mr. Wang Lijun, quite dramatically went to a U.S. consulate office in Chengdu with a tell-all. Meanwhile, way down south, the ¡°almost 51st state of the U.S.A¡± Philippines did a 180 degrees on Huangyuan Island, which was fondly referred to as the Scarborough Shoal. Scarborough? As in the English word ¡°Scarborough¡±? You bet. You see, the Filipinos speak by far the best English in Southeast Asia. That country, whose maps had described the Huangyuan/Scarborough as belonged to China, suddenly altered its laws and is now begging America to help make it firmly on the map as its territory. America and the Philippines even joined hands and staged a military exercise close to that island. And China and Russia did the same in the sea near the Korea peninsula. Then, this ¡°blind from a very early age¡± Chen dramatically ¡°escaped¡± all the way from his tiny farm village into the U.S. embassy in the hussle-and-bussle Beijing. A report says that Chen actually ¡°climbed over a wall¡± to escape. Seemingly, China ¡°discovered¡± his where-about only when Chen shown his face at the embassy. Questions: If Chen was being sneaked into the U.S. embassy by a non-Chinese agent, then Beijing had a lot to fear. Think of it this way: Bin Laden was surgically taken down with Pakistan not in the know; Chen was taken to the U.S. embassy with China in the blind. I don¡¯t know about you, but I am trembling. Just as the U.S.-China strategic dialogue was going on in Beijing, Mr. Li Keqiang was in Russia forging an even closer tie between these two ¡°back to back¡± nations. Way to dramatic! John Grisham, are you still there?
May 05, 20123:13pm EDT--
May 05, 201210:35pm EDT--
