China growing in power but popularity lags: survey
2013-07-18 05:42:00.0
(Reuters) - China will eventually overtake the United States as the global superpower but its rise is not making it more popular, according to a major global survey by Pew Research Center published on Thursday.
The survey, which canvassed the views of nearly 40,000 people in 39 countries, found a majority of respondents expected China, now the world's second biggest economy, to take top slot.
Slightly more than a third of respondents thought China was already the leading economic power, up from 20 percent in 2008. Over the same period the same figure for the United States dropped from 47 percent to 41 percent.
However, China's economic ascent seems to be no guarantee of making friends on the global stage.
Only half of respondents had a favorable view of China, compared to 63 percent for the United States, while far higher numbers said they saw the United States as a "partner". China's popularity has largely stalled since 2007.
However, China's investments in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa seem to have had a positive effect. Views towards China are largely positive in both regions, although the United States still outscored its Asian rival in both areas overall.
China has the edge in the Middle East, where the popularity of the United States - a staunch ally of Israel - remains low, especially in Egypt, Jordan and the Palestinian territories.
Soft power is a weak point for China, with little more than a third of respondents saying it respected its citizens' personal liberties, half the number seen for the United States.
In Latin America and Africa, China enjoys some soft power success through science and technology, with more than two thirds of respondents seeing this aspect in a favorable light.
But China still scored substantially lower than the United States in areas linked to culture, business and the spreading of ideas - all important areas for supporting U.S. popularity globally, especially among young people.
"Across all of these questions about American culture and ideas, young people regularly express more positive attitudes," said the report.
The military might of both countries is a cause for concern. Tensions in the South and East China seas has sparked anxiety in Japan, South Korea and the Philippines, while half or more of respondents in 31 countries disapproved of U.S. drone attacks.
The proportion of Americans with a positive view of China fell to 37 percent this year from 51 percent two years ago. The story is the same in China, where U.S. ratings plummeted from 58 percent in 2010 to 40 percent today.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese leaders lack completely public relation skill and thus rhetoric compare with their American counterparts. One good example is that Obama said ¡°¡­to seek additional insight beyond regular media reports.¡± in response to the revelation of spying on allies¡¯ statesmen. Obama¡¯s rhetoric is wonderfully excellent. Whereas his Chinese counterparts can never be that good. China¡¯s propaganda, i.e. governmental public relation, has to learn from the USA and try to catch them up.
Jul 18, 20136:47am EDT--
China knows and the rest of the world is figuring out, talk is cheap. The world sees what is happening n America and recognize its decline under Obama. It was not too long ago that China was predicted to over take the US economy by 2035. Now the time lessens every month.
Jul 18, 201310:17am EDT--
This is no ¡°super power¡±.
The USA goal is not for ¡°power¡±, but to advance the race, destroy dictators and the religious obsessed.
Watch and see what China does with its ¡°power¡± status.
Jul 18, 20137:09pm EDT--
