Chinese astronauts land safely after perfect space mission
2013-06-26 04:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Three Chinese astronauts returned to Earth on Wednesday, touching down in north China's Inner Mongolia after a successful 15-day mission in which they docked with an experimental manned space laboratory.
The Shenzhou 10 spacecraft, China's fifth manned space mission since 2003, completed the final trial docking with the Tiangong (Heavenly Palace) 1, critical in Beijing's quest to build a working space station by 2020.
China Central Television showed the re-entry of the capsule, dangling from an orange parachute, and its landing on flat grasslands shortly after 8 a.m. China time.
China successfully carried out its first manned docking exercise with Tiangong 1 last June, a milestone in an effort to acquire the technological and logistical skills to run a full space station that can house people for long periods.
The Shenzhou 10 was commanded by Nie Haisheng, with Zhang Xiaoguang and female astronaut Wang Yaping also on board.
The astronauts began emerging about 90 minutes after landing, helped out of the nose of the capsule by workers in white jumpsuits and into waiting chairs, smiling and waving to the TV camera.
"It's good to be home," Nie told CCTV. "Space is our dream. The motherland is always our home."
Wang gave a 50-minute televised physics lecture last week on the effects of weightlessness, widely viewed by middle school students around the country.
"This mission made me realize two dreams: my dream of flying to outer space, and my dream of being a teacher," she told CCTV. "If you have a dream, you can succeed."
The Global Times, a tabloid published by the same company that puts out the official Communist Party newspaper the People's Daily, echoed some criticism among the public about the expense of China's space programme.
"Currently, China's passion to develop space technology mainly lingers at the government level. Some even blame the government for political vanity and question whether the money couldn't be spent improving people's livelihoods," the paper said in an editorial, published before the landing.
The mission went "perfectly", Wang Zhaoyao, director of China's manned space programme, said at a news conference in Beijing.
China is still far from catching up with the established space superpowers, the United States and Russia, which decades ago learned the docking techniques carried out by the Shenzhou 10.
China must still master launching cargo and fuel via space freighters and recycling air and water for extended manned missions, state media have said. Plans call for a working space lab, the Tiangong 2, to be put into orbit in two years.
Beijing insists its space programme is for peaceful purposes, but the U.S. Defense Department has highlighted China's increasing space capabilities and said Beijing is pursuing a variety of activities aimed at preventing its adversaries from using space-based assets during a crisis.
(Reporting and writing by Terril Yue Jones and Michael Martina.; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
While the Shenzhou 10 spacecraft was in orbit, the crew conducted scientific experiments and presented a class seen by 60 million Chinese students in 80,000 schools. 50% of Chinese major in science, engineering, and technology compared to 13% in the US. The population differences mean that China produces 17 times as many students in the profit making professions as the US. Recent tests showed that Chinese students scored 1st and 1st in math and science; Hong Kong tested separately and scored 3rd and 3rd; and the US was 31st in math and 23rd in science. Wen Jiabao told the Chinese Academy of Science and Technology in 2011 that there would be ¡°freedom and democracy in academic pursuits,¡± so the West¡¯s democratic arguments for developmemt are not valid. Engineering students do not hold elections to determine the compositions of alloys, and they don¡¯t organize communities to hold debates on the tensile strengths of those alloys. In addition to space, China introduced the world¡¯s fastest super computer with a speed of 33.86 petaflops on June 17, 2013. China held a successful test of its Baidu (GPS) system that has 30 of 48 satellites or 62.5% in orbit. China sent its deep sea submersibile into global ocean depths to map them, take photographs, and capture specimens of marine creatures and minerals from the bottoms of the oceans. China made a number of scientific advances in space, on land, and in the oceans while the US dropped bombs on the country with which it was at war, dropped bombs on countries with which the US was not at war, and made proposals to drop bombs on more countries with which the US was not at war. Fortunately, the US destroys US computers, digital cameras, cell phones, and fertilizer, the basic components of smart munitions whenever the US drops bombs. The US burns billions of gallons of US gasoline, aviation fuel, and diesel fuel. The US wastes billions of US man hours in unproductive work. The self-destructive, suicidal wars of the US will leave the world in the hands of the country that chooses scientific development over scientific destruction, China. To win a war is competence; to win a war without fighting that war is genius.
Jun 28, 20135:26pm EDT--
