Exclusive: China mulls guarantees for ships carrying Iran oil
2012-04-30 02:33:00.0
(Reuters) - China is considering sovereign guarantees for its ships to enable the world's second-biggest oil consumer to continue importing Iranian crude after new EU sanctions come into effect in July, the head of China's shipowners' association said.
Tough new European Union sanctions aimed at stopping Iran's oil exports to Europe also ban EU insurers and reinsurers from covering tankers carrying Iranian crude anywhere in the world. Around 90 percent of the world's tanker insurance is based in the West, so the measures threaten shipments to Iran's top Asian buyers China, India, Japan and South Korea.
Global crude oil prices have risen nearly 20 percent since October, partly on fears over supply disruptions from Iran.
"(Ship) operators are worried that if the insurance issue cannot be resolved, they will not be able to take orders for shipping Iranian oil any longer," Zhang Shouguo, secretary general of China Shipowners' Association, told Reuters in a rare interview with foreign media.
Iran, OPEC's second-largest producer, exports most of its 2.2 million barrels of oil per day to Asia, and major buyers have yet to find a way around pending EU sanctions.
"We are paying great attention to this, the country has the need for oil and it's our responsibility to move the crude," said Zhang. "But we need a solution from the government so we can avoid such risk."
Like China, India and South Korea were also mulling sovereign guarantees for their tankers. Indian shipping firms indicated last week they would continue to transport Iranian oil even if limited insurance cover exposed them financially to a spill or accident.
Chinese insurers and shipowners would not take the risk on themselves and government intervention was necessary, Zhang said. Major ship insurer, China P&I club, told Reuters earlier this month it would not provide replacement cover for domestic tankers carrying Iranian oil.
Most of China's tanker fleet, owned by firms such as China Shipping, COSCO Group and Nanjing Tankers, were covered by European insurers, analysts said.
Several government departments were considering the industry's request, including the Ministry of Finance, China Insurance Regulatory Commission, Ministry of Transport and National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), Zhang said. He did not say when a decision might be made.
Until recently, China was Iran's top customer, taking more than 20 percent of its crude exports but customs data last week showed China halved its Iranian crude imports in March compared with the same month in 2011.
On the broader shipping market, Zhang said he expected the troubled industry would return to a normal growth path in 2014. The freight market, which includes oil tankers, dry bulk ships and container vessels, has been in one of the worst downturns in recent memory due to an oversupply of vessels and slow global economic activity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
why would they are about Iran getting nukes off the round? They¡¯re not a target.
Apr 30, 20122:42am EDT--
This is a golden opportunity for CHINA. CHINA with trillions at disposal cam buy out all the out put at a good discount and resell at a hefty margin. China is too big even for US to threaten. India is too small for china to start difficulties on the shipping route. The way western companies dominate oil trade China can control all the oil trade flowing east , which is a strategic need for china now.
Apr 30, 20126:04am EDT--
If the Chinese communists try to subvert the Western sanctions, perhaps a few of these Chinese ships deserve to mysteriously sink in the middle of the ocean.
Apr 30, 20127:53am EDT--
