China's Xi tells Vietnam wants peace in South China Sea
2013-06-19 00:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese President Xi Jinping told his visiting Vietnamese counterpart of Wednesday that maintaining peace and stability in the contested South China Sea was vital for both countries, who should remember their traditional friendship.
Beijing's assertion of sovereignty over a vast stretch of the South China Sea has set it directly against Vietnam and the Philippines, while Brunei, Taiwan and Malaysia also lay claim to other parts of the sea, making it Asia's biggest potential military troublespot.
Vietnam has accused China of harassing or attacking Vietnamese fishing boats in the South China Sea where their mutual territorial claims overlap, while China has told Vietnam to better educate their sailors to stay out of Chinese waters.
In December, Vietnam accused Chinese ships of sabotaging an exploration operation by state oil and gas company, Petrovietnam, by cutting a seismic cable.
But Xi took a more conciliatory line during his meeting with President Truong Tan Sang in Beijing's central Great Hall of the People, where Sang was given full military honors at his welcome ceremony.
"China and Vietnam must both act in a spirit of responsibility towards history and their people, put the broader picture of Sino-Vietnam friendship and bilateral development first, make up their minds to ... push for a political resolution to the South China Sea issue and prevent it from affecting ties," Xi said, according to China's Foreign Ministry.
"What is crucial is maintaining stability and promoting cooperation," added Xi, who assumed the presidency in March.
China "needs a peaceful and stable neighboring environment", he added.
However, Xi reiterated China's position that the South China Sea must be resolved by direct talks between the claimant nations, rejecting outside involvement.
China has resisted proposals for a multilateral code of conduct for the waters, preferring to try to negotiate disputes with each of the far less powerful individual claimants.
Beijing has been angered by U.S. attempts to involve itself in the dispute, and has looked on warily as Washington strengthens military ties with both Hanoi and Manila.
China has also stepped up activity in the region, including establishing garrisons on some of the disputed islands, and accused Washington of seeking to stir up trouble far from home.
Sang told Xi that Vietnam wanted to resolve their disputes through talks too, China's Foreign Ministry added.
"The two countries have a deep traditional friendship, and this is a treasure for the two peoples (to cherish)," he added.
Unprecedented arguments over the sea prevented an Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) summit last July from issuing a joint communique, the first time this had happened in the 10-member bloc's 45-year history.
Despite China giving Vietnam steadfast support against U.S. forces in the Vietnam war, ties have been testy since, and only partly because of the maritime arguments.
China invaded Vietnam in February 1979 to punish Hanoi for toppling the Beijing-backed Khmer Rouge in Cambodia one month earlier, poisoning relations for decades between the two Communist neighbors.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°China¡¯s Xi tells Vietnam wants peace in South China Sea¡± ¡­ as soon as they have pushed, starved and threatened all legitimate countries into abandoning their territory and sovereignty. It wants peace but refuses to attend it¡¯s own case at UNCLOS? What criminal would attend a trial that involves them I suppose. Amusing how they mentioned a ¡®cherished friendship¡¯. Will China now give back all of the lands of Viet Nam, up to and including Hong Kong¡­ after all, China loves to use ¡®historic claims¡¯, even falsified ones. Or is it only Chinese historic claims that are valid? (Does China support Italy¡¯s historic borders?, or the Manchu¡¯s, or the Mongolians?) China still does not understand the world it lives in now. Yet still, it tries to force it¡¯s mold upon us. Threatening, invading, killing or colonizing every neighbor it has in the last 50 years, just as it had in the last 2000 years.
Jun 19, 201312:55pm EDT--
China has what it wants in the South China Sea. In 2002, China signed the Conduct of Parties agreement with ASEAN that promised to resolve all disputes peacefully. In 2011, China signed bilateral agreements with all claimants to the South China Sea region that bound them to resolve all disputes peacefully. China buys oil, gas, and minerals from Russia, the Middle East, Africa, central Asia, Canada, central America, and South America, so it does not need the resources of the South China Sea at this time. However, the other claimants agreed to resolve disputes peacefully, and resolving disputes via diplomatic negotiations can take decades. There have been incidents in which citizens of countries have violated the agreements, and news media need new crises to sell stories. Any offenders should be reported to the maritime law enforcement agencies of the appropriate country. The only winners in a conflict between the US and China would be al Qaeda, the Taliban, and other islamic insurgents. The countries in the region need peace, prosperity, and trade to grow their economies to make up for the recession in the EU and the sluggish growth in the US. The growing Chinese navy and the China Marine Surveillance ships improve the protection of global trade while the US and NATO countries reduce their fleets and focus on the Middle East and Indian Ocean.
Jun 19, 20133:22pm EDT--
Jun 19, 201310:11pm EDT--
