China makes veiled warning to North Korea not to carry out nuclear test
2012-04-25 02:51:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Apr 25 2012
Tue, Apr 24 2012
Tue, Apr 24 2012
Mon, Apr 23 2012
Sat, Apr 21 2012
Wed  EDT
North Korea has almost completed preparations for a third nuclear test, a senior source with close ties to Pyongyang and Beijing told Reuters, an act that would draw further international condemnation following this month's failed rocket launch which the United States and others said was a disguised missile test.
"Peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in Northeast Asia bears on China's national interest and also bears on the interests of all relevant parties," Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai told a news briefing.
"China will oppose anything which might jeopardize peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in Northeast Asia, as this would damage China's national security interests and the interests of the relevant parties as well," he said, when asked about the possibility of a new nuclear test by North Korea.
China is the only major power that the impoverished North has for an ally, but even Beijing's influence over Pyongyang is limited in the diplomatic stalemate over the North's efforts to build a nuclear arsenal.
The North's brief attempt at rapprochement with the United States earlier this year quickly evaporated with its April 13 launch of a long-range rocket which resulted in yet another censure by the U.N. Security Council, which includes China.
Critics say the rocket launch was aimed at honing the North's ability to develop an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of hitting the United States, a move that would dramatically increase its military and diplomatic heft.
But Cui, in China's highest level comments yet on the possibility of a new test, said everyone shared equal responsibility.
"Maintaining peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in Northeast Asia is the joint responsibility of all sides, not just China alone," he added.
"China's basic position on this issue is that the parties concerned should work unwaveringly for peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in Northeast Asia."
Washington, Seoul and Tokyo, which have most to fear from any North Korean nuclear threat, are watching events anxiously and many observers say that Pyongyang may have the capacity to conduct a test using highly enriched uranium for the first time.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard, Editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
North Korea became more stable in economic terms. Its exports tripled in the last 5 years. NK is rich with natural resources: coal, base metals etc. The world, especially China is commodities hungry and the regime is fueled by high comm prices and demand. 5/10 years ago many analysts predicted imminent end to Kims dynasty, being starved out. At present nobody shares that view. NK has resources to buy as many grains it wants. Its population is brainwashed. Thus any not-diplomatic solution, so to speak is out of the question. Unfortunately better be prepared for status quo to prolong at least for the next 30 years. The situation will be beneficial for China even after it becomes next superpower in early 2020s, till the moment US military is out of Korean peninsula.
Apr 25, 20123:58am EDT--
Doesn¡¯t Washington, Seoul, Tokyo, France, Great Britain have a James Bond type character that could do something about this situation? Hehehe
Apr 25, 20124:03am EDT--
What China does not seem to appreciate is that when the Kim Dynasty falls, the NK people will look at China as the villain for the next thousand years. Each day China continues to support the Kims, the North Koreans will hate China that much more.
Apr 25, 20128:14am EDT--
