Tokyo governor seeks to buy islands disputed with China
2012-04-17 04:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Tokyo's controversial governor wants to use public funds to buy islands disputed between Japan and China, a plan bound to infuriate Beijing.
The islands, known as Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, have long been the centre of maritime territorial disputes between China and neighbors both citing historical and other claims over fishing areas and potential rich gas deposits.
Shintaro Ishihara, 79, announced the idea of buying the uninhabited islands in the East China Sea from private owners during his visit to Washington and the Tokyo metropolitan government confirmed the plan on Tuesday.
In a statement citing Ishihara, the Tokyo government said the islands were "extremely important" for Japan and offered great potential for development of natural resources and fisheries.
Diplomatic ties between Beijing and Tokyo hit a low point in late 2010 after Japan's arrest of a Chinese fishing boat captain near the disputed islands, though they have improved since then.
In 2008, Beijing and Tokyo agreed in principle to jointly develop gas fields near the islands, but progress has been slow and Japan has accused China of drilling for gas in violation of the deal.
Ishihara, elected for a fourth term a year ago, is no stranger to controversy, admired by some for his blunt style, a rarity in Japan, and lambasted by others for a tendency to offend.
Last year, he was forced to apologies for suggesting that the March 11 earthquake and tsunami were "divine punishment" for the "egoism" of the Japanese people.
(Reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Additional reporting by Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing; Writing by Tomasz Janowski; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As you wouldn¡¯t need to buy something you already owned this is an admission that they don¡¯t own the island.
As you wouldn¡¯t need to buy something you already owned this is an admission that they don¡¯t own the island.
Given this is all about gas and oil, why has there be no mention of joint development projects. Or does the winner have to take all?
Apr 17, 20126:21am EDT--
I guess if I propose to by entire Japan, Tokyo will automatically be considered as my torritory.
Apr 17, 20124:34pm EDT--
