Haitong considers early book close on HK offer: sources
2012-04-18 01:52:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Apr 16 2012
Mon, Apr 16 2012
Thu, Apr 12 2012
Mon, Apr 2 2012
Mon, Mar 26 2012
Wed  EDT
), China's second biggest brokerage by assets, could close the order book for its up to $1.77 billion Hong Kong stock offering one day ahead of schedule after getting more than enough orders from investors, sources with direct knowledge of the matter said on Wednesday.
The orders should give some relief to Haitong and the team of banks underwriting the deal, the biggest public offering of new shares in the Asia Pacific this year.
Underwriters of the deal could stop taking orders from institutional investors on Thursday, one day earlier than initially planned, said three sources, who were not authorized to speak publicly on the matter. No final decision had been made on closing the books early, they said.
Haitong launched the deal on Tuesday, offering 1.229 billion new shares (
) at an indicative price range of HK$10.48 to HK$11.18 each. It is slated to price the offer on Friday, with shares beginning to trade in Hong Kong on April 27.
The company got $580 million in commitments from 11 cornerstone investors, including Pan-Asia private equity firm PAG and U.S. asset manager DE Shaw & Co Ltd, according to the deal's prospectus.
The deal also got about $500 million in pledges from anchor investors, one source involved in the deal said.
Cornerstones back many Asian listings, committing to buy large, guaranteed stakes and agreeing to a lock-up period during which they will not sell their shares. Anchor investors have fewer restrictions on when they can sell stocks.
), Credit Suisse AG (
), Deutsche Bank (
), JPMorgan (
), UBS (
) and Haitong's own Haitong International are acting as joint global coordinators on the offering.
BoCom International, HSBC Holdings Plc (
), ICBC International, Nomura and Standard Chartered Plc (
(Reporting by Elzio Barreto and Denny Thomas; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Robert Birsel)
