China decries Tokyo-hatched plan to buy disputed isles
2012-04-17 06:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Tokyo's controversial governor wants to use public funds to buy islands disputed between Japan and China, prompting Beijing to denounce the plan as illegal and reassert its sovereignty.
The islands, known as Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China, have long been the centre of maritime territorial disputes between China and neighbors, all citing historical and other claims over fishing areas and potentially rich gas deposits.
Shintaro Ishihara, 79, announced the idea of buying the uninhabited islands in the East China Sea from private owners during his visit to Washington and the Tokyo metropolitan government confirmed the plan on Tuesday.
In a statement citing Ishihara, the Tokyo government said the islands were "extremely important" for Japan and offered great potential for development of natural resources and fisheries.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin said in a statement that the islands were China's, repeating the government's long-held stance.
"Any unilateral action taken by Japan on the Diaoyu and nearby islands is illegal and invalid and cannot change the reality of China's ownership," Liu said.
Diplomatic ties between Beijing and Tokyo hit a low point in late 2010 after Japan's arrest of a Chinese fishing boat captain near the disputed islands, though they have improved since then.
In 2008, Beijing and Tokyo agreed in principle to jointly develop gas fields near the islands, but progress has been slow and Japan has accused China of drilling for gas in violation of the deal.
Ishihara, elected for a fourth term a year ago, is no stranger to controversy, admired by some for his blunt style, a rarity in Japan, and lambasted by others for a tendency to offend.
Last year, he was forced to apologize for suggesting that the March 11 earthquake and tsunami were "divine punishment" for the "egoism" of the Japanese people.
(Reporting by Kaori Kaneko; Additional reporting by Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing; Writing by Tomasz Janowski; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This plan is regarded as a transfer of ownership therefore this is not a diplomatic issue but a domestic one. For Japan there is no conflicting territory amongst parties involved, because Senkaku islands are under effective control of Japanese authority and any trial for landing is treated according to Japanese domestic law. Therefore Chinese Communist Party demands covertly not to land there, because such activities would be regarded as enforcing Japanese effective control in the perspective of international law. The captain caused Senkaku incident on September 2010 is under house arrest by Chinese authority. Recently, Japanese stance which insists dividing line on maritime boundary including Senkaku islands is indirectly supported by ITOLS. See http://www.itlos.org/fileadmin/itlos/documents/cases/case_no_16/1-C16_Judgment_14_02_2012.pdf
Apr 17, 20128:53pm EDT--
It will take China a decade or two to overwhelm the US economically and catch up militarily, and the it will be the time China¡¯s Diaoyu islands, together with Liuqiu islands, come back into their motherland. What distinguishes China from other nations is that, China plans and implements a project in a time scale of hundreds of years, especially when the matter is fighting a great foreign threat. Looking back to the history, it took China four centuries and two dynasties to entirely exterminate Hsiung-Nu, and it took three centuries for China to fight back and almost eliminated Mongolia. Japan is the next one. Its destiny will depend on its choice. While the Japanese limit their eyesight to a few islands, China look further to the deep oceans and the great game of the world dominance.
Apr 18, 201210:36pm EDT--
