China summons Manila envoy over South China Sea standoff
2012-04-18 05:51:00.0
(Reuters) - China summoned a diplomat from the Philippines for a second time on Wednesday to protest Manila's claim over an area of the South China Sea, a foreign ministry spokesman said, as the standoff between the two countries showed no sign of ending.
The most recent dispute is well into its second week, with a Philippine coast guard ship and two Chinese maritime surveillance vessels faced off near the Scarborough Shoal in waters believed to be rich in oil and gas.
Vice Foreign Minister Fu Ying "urgently summoned" the Philippines Charge' d'affaires, Alex Chua, on Sunday and again on Wednesday, Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin told reporters.
"She pointed out that the Philippines military vessels' harassment of Chinese fishermen and fishing boats have drawn the close attention of China," Liu said.
"We hope the Philippines side will honor its commitment and withdraw its ships from the relevant waters immediately, so that the waters of Huangyan island can return to peace and stability."
The small group of rocky islets, known in the Philippines as the Panatag Shoal but which the Chinese call Huangyan, is about 124 nautical miles off the main Philippine island of Luzon, near a former U.S. Navy base in Subic Bay.
Liu stress Beijing's position that the islands are part of China's "inherent territory", adding that "China was the first to discover and name the Huangyan island, the first to list it into China's territory and to practice sovereign jurisdiction".
The Philippines Foreign Affairs Department said on Wednesday that "a claim by itself, including historical claim, could not be a basis for acquiring a territory".
Philippine Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert del Rosario said he summoned China's ambassador to Manila, Ma Keqing, for talks last week.
The dispute is one of myriad of conflicting claims over islands, reefs and shoals in the South China Sea that pit China against the Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Additional reporting by Rosemarie Francisco in Manila; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese bully is beginning to assert itself again in the East Philippine Sea (known by the Chinese as the South China Sea) as this developing dispute with the Philippines unfolds. For more than a week there has been a standoff between several Chinese fishing boats together with two Chinese Fisheries Protection boats and a Philippines Fisheries Protection boat located in an area close to the Philippines¡¯s coastline and many hundreds of miles from the coastline of China. Earlier, the Philippines had sent a warship to arrest the crews of the Chinese boats fishing illegally in Philippines waters but before an arrest could be made the Chinese fishing boats made a run for the protection of a nearby lagoon, implementing what can only have been a prearranged tactic by calling on the assistance of the two nearby Chinese Fisheries Protection boats that were in the area!! Given that the Chinese fishing boats were fishing illegally it is implausible to argue that the two Chinese Fishing Protection boats were in the area by chance. The two Chinese Fisheries Protection boats sealed the entrance to the lagoon causing the Philippines warship to make a decision about the use of force. As the Chinese had, no doubt calculated, this prevented the Philippines warship making the arrest. The Philippines warship has since been replaced by a Philippines Fisheries Protection boat. The East Philippine Sea (including the associated uninhabited islands) can be divided according to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea into 12 mile territorial coastal waters and the wider 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) from the coast. Where territories are closer than 400miles the distance between them is divided equally. China is a pirate and essentially rejects the approach laid out in the UN Convention (its obstinate position being that it didn¡¯t help to draft the convention) and argues that its claim in any area is a matter for China to decide unilaterally. This is the essence of the current dispute. The islands off the Philippines coast are far from China¡¯s 200mile EEZ but within that of the Philippines, nevertheless China has unilaterally decided that the islands (and the associated resources) belong to China. Similarly, China¡¯s cupidity extends to its claim over Taiwan. It has also managed to force Japan to ¡®buy¡¯ its own Senkaku islands from China
The Chinese bully is beginning to assert itself again in the East Philippine Sea (known by the Chinese as the South China Sea) as this developing dispute with the Philippines unfolds. For more than a week there has been a standoff between several Chinese fishing boats together with two Chinese Fisheries Protection boats and a Philippines Fisheries Protection boat located in an area close to the Philippines¡¯s coastline and many hundreds of miles from the coastline of China. Earlier, the Philippines had sent a warship to arrest the crews of the Chinese boats fishing illegally in Philippines waters but before an arrest could be made the Chinese fishing boats made a run for the protection of a nearby lagoon, implementing what can only have been a prearranged tactic by calling on the assistance of the two nearby Chinese Fisheries Protection boats that were in the area!! Given that the Chinese fishing boats were fishing illegally it is implausible to argue that the two Chinese Fishing Protection boats were in the area by chance. The two Chinese Fisheries Protection boats sealed the entrance to the lagoon causing the Philippines warship to make a decision about the use of force. As the Chinese had, no doubt calculated, this prevented the Philippines warship making the arrest. The Philippines warship has since been replaced by a Philippines Fisheries Protection boat. The East Philippine Sea (including the associated uninhabited islands) can be divided according to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea into 12 mile territorial coastal waters and the wider 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) from the coast. Where territories are closer than 400miles the distance between them is divided equally. China is a pirate and essentially rejects the approach laid out in the UN Convention (its obstinate position being that it didn¡¯t help to draft the convention) and argues that its claim in any area is a matter for China to decide unilaterally. This is the essence of the current dispute. The islands off the Philippines coast are far from China¡¯s 200mile EEZ but within that of the Philippines, nevertheless China has unilaterally decided that the islands (and the associated resources) belong to China. Similarly, China¡¯s cupidity extends to its claim over Taiwan. It has also managed to force Japan to ¡®buy¡¯ its own Senkaku islands from China
CCTV reported that China wishes the situation to be resolved peacefully and in a spirit of co-operation (provided, of course, that it is settled in China¡¯s favour!)
This is equivalent to a man confronting a burglar on his property who says ¡®We can settle this peacefully and in a spirit of friendship if you let me walk away with your property. This has the added benefit that you won¡¯t get hurt and, by the way, you can thank me for being so reasonable¡¯
The territorial disputes in the South China Sea are a direct result of the immaturity, obduracy and cupidity of the CCP in relation to its claim over virtually all of this maritime area. Amusingly, China says it cannot be accused of making a claim for the whole of the area (only about 95% of it!)
A CCTV interview shows smug Chinese contributors implying that it is in the Philippines interest not to challenge China because powerful China has Military and Economic strength (This is an example of the Mafia mentality of ¡®Don¡¯t mess with us¡¯)
Some possible objectives for China¡¯s provocation are:
(3) If the Chinese military has broken free of political control in the chaos of the Bo Xilai debacle it may have decided to test early the resolve of the US in its ¡®pivot¡¯ strategy by provoking a war. The Chinese military may have calculated that the US has been weakened financially by Afghanistan and Iraq and that current difficulties with Russia, Iran, Syria and North Korea have further diluted US political strength to the point where China can prevail
China has been developing ¡®Area Denial¡¯ weapons to deter any US challenge in any dispute between it and any US ally in East Asia. China may feel that it needs to challenge the US in a military capacity in the area before the US is able to build up its forces in accordance with the ¡®pivot¡¯ strategy.
Apr 18, 201212:04pm EDT--
¡°known by the Chinese as the South China Sea¡± The entire world calls the water of this area ¡®South China Sea¡¯ except the Filipinos who started to call it East Philipine Sea only a decade ago. What is the problem in your brain?
Apr 18, 20122:00pm EDT--
If you¡¯re an ordinary Chinese citizen I¡¯m sorry I¡¯ve irritated you, if you¡¯re not why has this irritated you? If you¡¯re a representative of the CCP my answer is that the Philippines is an ally of the West so why wouldn¡¯t I use their name? It¡¯s like calling the Falkland Islands the ¡°Malvinas¡± or Burma ¡°Myanmar¡±
Apr 18, 20122:48pm EDT--
