Philippines asks China to join tribunal to end sea spat
2012-04-17 06:09:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Apr 16 2012
Fri, Apr 13 2012
Thu, Apr 12 2012
Wed, Apr 11 2012
Tue, Apr 10 2012
Tue  EDT
The most recent dispute between China and the Philippines has entered its second week, with a Philippine coast guard ship and two Chinese maritime surveillance vessels faced off near the Scarborough Shoal.
"In pursuing a peaceful settlement of the Scarborough shoal issue, we fully intend to humbly invite our Chinese friends to join us in the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea," Foreign Secretary Albert del Rosario said in a statement.
"The purpose of the exercise will be to ascertain which of us has sovereign rights over the waters surrounding Scarborough Shoal, where Chinese ships are currently engaging in illegal activities within the Philippine exclusive economic zone."
Beijing has yet to comment on Manila's invitation but is unlikely to agree.
China has territorial disputes with the Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan in the South China Sea, which is believed to be rich in oil and gas and is crossed by important shipping lanes.
China has sought to resolve the disputes one-on-one but there is concern among its neighbors over what some see as its growing assertiveness in staking its claims over the sea and various islands, reefs and shoals.
(Additional Reporting By Ben Blanchard; Editing by Rosemarie Francisco and Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sounds funny. These barbarians cannot fight the PLA, have no ground for their claim of this Chinese territory, and have jumped up and down and barked cluelessly to mess things up. Now they want China to go with it to see some kind of ¡°tribunal¡±. China has owned these islands much earlier than this ¡°tribunal¡± was created. Funny is funny.
Apr 17, 201211:50am EDT--
How much is the CCP or PLA paying you to post your communist propaganda on this site? Same crap, different day.
Apr 17, 20127:44pm EDT--
According to the international law of sea, it says clearly that there is exception of the law and in the situation like these, the states involved should delineate the difference.
According to the international law of sea, it says clearly that there is exception of the law and in the situation like these, the states involved should delineate the difference.
The law of sea is design such that the coast states can benefit from it, it is not designed to use the law as excuses to gain more sea or land at a cost of potential conflict. The states should excise restrain when apply the law. If a court were to take the case, countries effected would have to withdraw from the law and there is no any benefits left to the coast states.
Apr 17, 20127:52pm EDT--
