Canada's Alderon Iron partners with China's Hebei
2012-04-13 10:25:00.0
Canada's Alderon Iron partners with China's Hebei | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Canada's Alderon Iron partners with China's Hebei
Fri, Apr 13 2012
Fri, Apr 13 2012
Wed, Apr 11 2012
Wed, Apr 11 2012
Tue, Apr 10 2012
Fri  EDT
) said on Friday it will sell a stake in itself and in its Kami iron ore project in Eastern Canada to China's top steel producer, Hebei Iron & Steel Group, for C$194 million ($195.4 million).
) a 19.9 percent stake in Alderon, which is headquartered in Vancouver, British Columbia. Hebei will also get a 25 percent interest in a new partnership that will be established to own the Kami project.
The deal puts a spotlight on efforts by Chinese steel producers to gain more control over foreign iron ore supplies, a market dominated by a handful of global miners.
India's Tata Steel (
) to develop the taconite iron ore deposit in Canada. Just months before that, No. 3 Chinese steel producer Wuhan Iron and Steel Co agreed to a joint venture with Canada's Adriana Resources.
Alderon said it plans to use the proceeds of the Hebei deal to further explore and develop the Kami project, which is located in iron ore-rich Labrador Trough along the border between the provinces of Quebec and Newfoundland and Labrador.
), which owns a substantial stake in Alderon and a 3 percent gross sales royalty on the Kami project. Altius shares rose 2.9 percent to C$11.72.
"This transaction with Hebei is a major catalyst for Alderon as it further validates and materially de-risks the Kami project," said Alderon Chief Executive Tayfun Eldem.
Hebei, in a separate statement, said this was an ideal time to invest in upstream assets as the broader market is taking a more cautious approach to iron ore demand.
Hebei's investment also reflects the company's optimistic outlook about China's iron ore demand and comes at a time when iron miners, including BHP Billiton (
), Rio Tinto (
), continue to bet on long-term demand growth in China, the world's top buyer.
The Chinese steelmaker will initially buy a near 20 percent stake in the Canadian company for C$88.3 million at C$3.42 a share, or a 0.6 percent discount to Thursday's closing price. Following that, Hebei will invest C$105.7 million, giving it the right to a 25 percent interest in Kami.
The deal will also give Hebei the right to buy 60 percent of the iron ore produced annually from Kami, once it goes into production.
"Alderon now has both the capital and the China market access to build a world-class company," Chairman Mark Morabito said in a statement.
Hebei has agreed to assist in obtaining debt financing for the Kami project from financial institutions, including Chinese banks. Upon the closing of the private placement, Hebei will be entitled to nominate two directors to Alderon's board.
Alderon and Hebei will be required to contribute to development costs not covered by initial capital contributions and project debt financing, in accordance with their respective interests.
GMP Securities was Alderon's financial advisor on the deal and its legal counsel was Cassels Brock & Blackwell LLP. Bank of America Merrill Lynch acted as Hebei's financial advisor and Davies Ward Phillips & Vineberg acted as its legal advisor.
(Reporting By Euan Rocha, Denny Thomas and Ruby Lian; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick; and Peter Galloway)
