China, Philippines both send ships as dispute simmers
2012-04-12 07:25:00.0
China, Philippines both send ships as dispute simmers | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, Philippines both send ships as dispute simmers
Wed, Apr 11 2012
Tue, Apr 10 2012
Tue, Apr 10 2012
Thu, Apr 5 2012
Tue, Apr 3 2012
A handout photo shows members of the Philippine Army inspecting one of eight Chinese fishing boats spotted in the Scarborough Shoal, a small group of rocky formations whose sovereignty is contested by the Philippines and China, in the South China Sea, about 124 nautical miles off the main island of Luzon April 10, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Philippine Army Handout
Thu  EDT
China has territorial disputes with several countries in the region, including the Philippines, over areas of the South China Sea, which is believed to be rich in oil and gas and is crossed by important shipping lanes.
China has sought to resolve the disputes on a one-on-one basis but there is concern among its neighbors over what some see as its growing assertiveness in staking its claims over the sea and various islands, reefs and shoals.
Philippine Foreign Affairs Secretary Albert del Rosario said a third Chinese vessel had arrived at the Scarborough Shoal, a small group of rocky outcrops.
"Some time today, this morning," Del Rosario told reporters when asked when the Chinese ship had arrived.
"It's a bureau of fisheries Chinese civilian ship," he said.
Both sides traded diplomatic protests on Wednesday over the dispute in an area straddling shipping lanes between East Asia and Europe and the Middle East, with China alleging harassment by the Philippine navy of its fishermen and Manila complaining of illegal fishing.
Manila sent a coastguard cutter to the shoal on Thursday to reinforce its largest warship, a U.S. Hamilton-class cutter, which on Sunday found some Chinese fishing boats anchored in the area, with one carrying illegally collected corals, giant clams, and live sharks.
Del Rosario said he had raised the matter with China's ambassador, Ma Keqing, adding he was not alarmed by the arrival of the third Chinese ship and the talks would go on.
"We're moving forward but it's still work in progress," he said.
"What I can tell you is that China's law enforcement vessels are currently protecting the safety of fishermen and their boats in these seas," said Liu, adding that the vessels were protecting the "legitimate" activities of Chinese fishermen.
Philippine officials said the navy vessel was likely to leave the area soon, as part of Manila's effort to ease tension as it had said the navy should not be involved in the enforcement of the country's maritime laws.
The shoal is about 125 nautical miles off the main Philippine island of Luzon and near Subic Bay, which once housed the largest U.S. base outside its mainland.
In March last year, Chinese navy ships threatened to ram a Philippine survey vessel in another disputed area, the Reed Bank. In response, the Philippines scrambled aircraft and ships.
That incident prompted the Philippines to seek closer ties with its main ally, the United States, offering it greater access to air fields and military facilities.
Asked if the Philippines had sought the U.S. help with the latest dispute, a foreign affairs spokesman said: "It is not appropriate at this time to seek help from other countries."
Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan also have claims in the South China Sea that China disputes.
(Addtional reporting by Bejing bureau; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Phillipines has no historical claim. any basic wiki search on spratly history will prove it. their claim is based on 200 nautical mile from UNCLOS in EEZ. first, EEZ is not territorial waters. that is 12 nautical miles.
Phillipines has no historical claim. any basic wiki search on spratly history will prove it. their claim is based on 200 nautical mile from UNCLOS in EEZ. first, EEZ is not territorial waters. that is 12 nautical miles.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Convention_on_the_Law_of_the_Sea#UNCLOS_III second, 200 is the max, you dont magically get the max. third, that was only a guideline. you dont get it if there are disputes. fourth, upon ratification of UNCLOS both China and Vietnam said it would NOT affect their claims. On China’s agreement in UNCLOS:
3. The People’s Republic of China reaffirms its sovereignty over all its archipelagos and islands as listed in article 2 of the Law of the People’s Republic of China on the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, which was promulgated on 25 February 1992.
http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_declarations.htm#China%20Upon%20ratification fifth, the last one who controlled the islands was JAPAN. it was called shinnan shoto and they administered it through TAIWAN.who still possesses the biggest island, Taiping, in spratly. During the occupation, these islands were called Shinnan Shoto (新南Tu), literally the New Southern Islands, and put under the governance of Taiwan together with the Paracel Islands (西沙群岛).
Apr 12, 20126:56am EDT--
If History is the basis not the law China might claim Philippines, Mongolia,etc….. as part of their sovereignty. China is not good neighbor even India, Nepal,Invaded by these slanted eyes people. Philippines became a sovereign country in January 23, 1899. United States not even inclined Philippines as part of their territory. Macao, Honkong was given to China even history tell us that Britain and Portugal occupied and improved the lives of the people there. 200NM is not the Max. China is 500 miles away from these area. Law must govern not history, you cannot enforce history. Bring the dispute to the U.N and showed your historical claim.North Korea clearly is on your side.
Apr 12, 201210:48pm EDT--
