Hu wants Cambodia help on China Sea dispute, pledges aid
2012-03-31 04:44:00.0
Hu wants Cambodia help on China Sea dispute, pledges aid | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Hu wants Cambodia help on China Sea dispute, pledges aid
Fri, Mar 30 2012
Thu, Mar 29 2012
Wed, Mar 28 2012
Wed, Mar 7 2012
China's President Hu Jintao (L) and Cambodia's Prime Minister Hun Sen (R) drink champagne after witnessing a signing ceremony at the Peace Palace in the Office of the Council of Ministers in Phnom Penh March 31, 2012. Hu visits Cambodia from March 30 to April 2. Credit: Reuters/Tang Chhin Sothy/POOL
Sat  EDT
Cambodia holds the rotating chair of the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) this year, giving it influence over the agenda and talks over resolving growing tensions in the disputed maritime area.
Hun Sen told Hu that while other ASEAN countries would likely raise the issue at the body's two-day summit in Phnom Penh starting on Tuesday, Cambodia shared China's belief that the issue should not be "internationalized," according to Sri Thamrong.
Hu told Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen that China wanted to move toward finalizing a code of conduct in the South China Sea but not "too fast" so that the dispute does not threaten regional stability, Hun Sen's advisor Sry Thamrong told reporters after the leaders' meeting in Phnom Penh.
China, which says it has sovereignty over the sea and the islands within a looping "nine-dashed line" on its maps, rejected a Philippine proposal within ASEAN in November to define contested areas and allow joint development.
The two leaders agreed to target a doubling in bilateral trade to $5 billion by 2017, according to Cambodia's top government spokesman Khieu Kanharith.
China has pledged more than $2 billion in aid to Cambodia since 1992, mostly in soft loans, Cambodia's government says.
China's foreign direct investment in the country was $1.19 billion in 2011, almost 10 times that of the United States, according to an estimate by the government's Council for the Development of Cambodia.
(Writing by Stuart Grudgings; Editing by Ed Lane)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Cambodia has been for sale for as long as I can remember. China sea, Mekong river, forests, precious metals, minerals, you name it. Next will be the oil reserves. This isn¡¯t the unfortunate part as many countries do this but this will only benefit the Cambodian politicians, Cambodian military generals(i.e. business men), and China. The rest of the country will see everything sold off and no increase in quality of life.
Mar 31, 20125:48pm EDT--
Cambodia is not next to the S. China Sea. Hu just convinced Cambodia to stand clear from the South Sea dispute, and avoid helping its neighbor and enemy Vietnam.
Apr 04, 20128:09am EDT--
