Annan due in China, Russia says Syria peace takes time
2012-03-25 18:33:00.0
(Reuters) - International peace envoy Kofi Annan was expected to head to China on Monday after asking Russia to back his mission to end fighting in Syria despite Moscow's differences with Western and Arab states over who is to blame for the conflict.
It also suggested foreign support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's foes was the main obstacle to peace, while Western and Arab officials prepared for a "Friends of Syria" meeting on ways to help the disparate opposition.
Forces loyal to Assad pounded Homs and clashed with rebels in other opposition strongholds on Sunday, fighting which Syrian activists said killed 27 people, 15 of them civilians. Syrian state media said six "terrorists" had died.
Annan's spokesman, Ahmad Fawzi, said he had "very candid and comprehensive discussions" in Moscow. Annan was "grateful for Russia's firm support for his mediation efforts in order to reach a swift and peaceful solution to this bloody conflict" and asked Russia to continue providing support.
It was not clear whether Moscow would increase pressure on Assad to comply with Annan's peace plan, which includes demands for a ceasefire, the immediate withdrawal of heavy armor from residential areas and access for humanitarian aid.
Russia and China have shielded Assad from U.N. Security Council condemnation by vetoing two Western-backed resolutions over the bloodshed, but approved a Security Council statement this week endorsing Annan's mission.
The former U.N. chief was expected to leave Moscow for China, which joined Russia in the vetoes, on Monday.
Waleed al-Faris, an opposition activist from Homs, told Reuters Sunday's shelling, using tank and mortar fire, was the worst he had seen. "There are ten dead and hundreds wounded," he said.
Government forces and rebels also clashed in the southern province of Deraa, birthplace of the revolt.
"Thousands of soldiers and over a hundred military vehicles are attempting to enter the area of Lahat in Deraa province today, but they are clashing with rebels," said Rami Abdelrahman, head of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
A U.S.-based human rights group accused Assad's forces of using human shields in northern Syria in their efforts to crush the rebellion, which began more than a year ago.
"The Syrian army's use of human shields is yet another reason why the UN Security Council should refer Syria to the International Criminal Court," said Ole Solvang, a HRW emergencies researcher.
The United Nations says around 8,000 people have been killed. Syria says rebels have killed about 3,000 members of the security forces and blames the violence on "terrorist" gangs.
LAST CHANCE?
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, who will join U.S. President Barack Obama for a nuclear security summit in South Korea on Monday, told Annan, the Syria envoy for the United Nations and Arab League, he appreciated his efforts.
"This may be the last chance for Syria to avoid a long-lasting and bloody civil war. Therefore we will offer you our full support at any level and in various ways in those areas, of course, in which Russia is capable of providing support."
Obama, already in Seoul, discussed how to get non-lethal aid to the Syrian opposition on Sunday with Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan.
Western and Arab states have urged Assad to step aside to end the violence. Russia, a close ally of Assad, said he is ready to talk to his foes about reform and it is the rebels who must be pressed to negotiate.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Gennady Gatilov said Annan's mission must be given more time before the Security Council considers further action. The Security Council statement this week threatened Syria with unspecified "further steps" if it failed to comply with Annan's plan.
"There are no deadlines, we need to see how the situation develops," the Interfax news agency quoted Gatilov as saying.
(Additional reporting by Alexei Anishchuk; writing by Philippa Fletcher; Editing by Andrew Heavens)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Russia (Putin) you are not fooling any person on the earth. You are one of the largest components and reason for this problem. Hopefully the good Syrian people will prevail, and then turn on Russia and China for failing to help them get rid of the criminal killing them to remain in control. Having poorly managed countries (with veto power) in the U.N. makes it useless. In this case only Russia and China voted against the world and allowed the slaughter of 10.000 or more innocent people. They have demonstrated they are inept and should have low class authority at the UN.
Mar 25, 201211:47am EDT--
The take-home message to dictators all around the world from the events of the Arab spring is this: if you step down without resorting to military violence you will be prosecuted and possibly executed, if you use the full force of the military against the civilian population you will prevail ¨C provided you remember to bribe Russia and China so they veto resolutions against you in the UN security council.
Mar 25, 20121:00pm EDT--
I ask again, why is ANNAN representing anyone? This man is a crook and has no international reputation at all. Who would trust him? If I were you , I would check all of his bank accounts to see who is buying him off. Please question the reasons that this man is being sent as a trusted diplomat. He sells himself to the highest bidder!!
Mar 25, 20126:53pm EDT--
