Stora Enso to invest 1.6 billion euros in new China mill
2012-03-20 11:03:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Juha Vanhainen, head of Stora Enso's publication paper unit, speaks to reporters at the Reuters Paper and Packaging Summit in Helsinki August 25, 2009. Paper demand has stabilized but at very low levels and its future is uncertain, Stora Enso, the world's second largest paper and packaging firm by capacity, said on Tuesday. Credit: Reuters/Bob Strong
Tue  EDT
) plans to invest 1.6 billion euros ($2.1 billion) to build a new mill in China, banking on growth in the Asian market as it faces weakening demand and overcapacity in Europe.
Stora Enso said on Tuesday that it would build an integrated board and pulp mill in Guangxi, southern China, with a paperboard capacity of 900,000 tons. Production is scheduled to start in the fourth quarter of 2014.
"Obviously a very significant part of that will be Asia, especially China. We say about one half of the total growth is in China," Karvinen told a conference call.
"This investment has been long-awaited and was not surprising. This is in line with their strategy of getting growth from emerging markets," Evli analyst Markku Jarvinen said.
Stora Enso has been building plantations around Guangxi since 2002. The company's other operations in China include a coated fine paper mill in Suzhou and an uncoated magazine paper mill in Dawang.
The latest project will be financed by around 60 percent debt and 40 percent equity, the company said. Rating agency Moody's affirmed Stora Enso's Ba2 credit rating and stable outlook, saying the investment would make it less dependent on the declining European paper market.
The mill is due to be operated as a joint-venture with state-owned Guangxi Forestry Group, which will hold 15 percent of the equity.
Shares in Stora Enso were 0.3 percent lower at 5.75 euros by 1401 GMT, off the lows of 5.62 euros, while rival UPM-Kymmene (
(Reporting by Terhi Kinnunen and Eero Vassinen; Editing by Helen Massy-Beresford)
