IADB and China launch $1 billion Latam investment fund
2012-03-19 15:54:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the Inter-American Development Bank said on Monday they are starting a $1 billion fund to invest in Latin America, though the Asian giant's latest push to expand its influence in the region prompted words of caution from Brazil.
To feed its fast-growing economy's voracious appetite for raw materials, China has invested tens of billions of dollars in the region, from Mexico to Argentina, over the last decade to acquire strategic assets or companies in sectors such as oil, minerals and food products.
"This shows the enormous interest that China has in the Latin American region," IADB President Luis Alberto Moreno told reporters at the IADB's annual meeting in Montevideo.
But some countries, namely Brazil, Latin America's largest economy, have been wary about China's deep pockets and labor practices even as Brazil has ramped up exports to Beijing.
"We need to look at these kind of proposals cautiously because the Chinese presence in some places has meant that they bring over their own workers and practices," Brazil's planning minister, Miriam Belchior, told Reuters at the IADB meeting.
Brazil and China have clashed over trade and investment rules as the two, both members of the BRICS group of emerging economies, race to protect local industries from foreign competition and a slowing global economy. Brazil has raised taxes on some imports and last week succeeded in getting Mexico to rework a decade-old trade deal by agreeing to quotas on exports, raising fears of protectionism in the emerging-markets world.
China has not given full clearance for Brazil's Vale SA VALE.SA, the world's largest iron ore producer, to dock its giant "Valemax" iron ore ships in Chinese ports. Analysts say it could be a roundabout effort to protect Chinese shipbuilders.
Latin America's leaders have looked to Beijing for trade and investment deals to offset slow economic growth in the United States and Europe.
China has free-trade pacts with Chile and Peru. But a slowdown in the Chinese economy is seen as a risk to commodity prices for many Latin American nations like Brazil, Chile and Peru.
In addition to the fund with China, the IADB said it would make available more than $300 million to help improve the capacity of public security and anti-crime strategies in a region with more than 30 percent of the world's murders but only 8 percent of the global population. Crime has risen despite economic growth, Moreno said.
(Additional reporting by Terry Wade and Guido Nejamkis; Editing by W Simon, Dan Grebler, Leslie Adler)
