UBS, StanChart buy China Cinda stake ahead of IPO
2012-03-16 05:27:00.0
UBS, StanChart buy China Cinda stake ahead of IPO | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
UBS, StanChart buy China Cinda stake ahead of IPO
Thu, Mar 15 2012
Tue, Mar 13 2012
Sun, Mar 11 2012
Thu, Mar 8 2012
Wed, Mar 7 2012
Fri  EDT
), Standard Chartered (
), CITIC Capital and the National Social Security Fund, China's biggest pension fund, would own 16.5 percent of its equity after the investment. The stake sale values Cinda at almost $10 billion.
) was sole financial adviser to Cinda, according to a source involved in the transaction who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter.
Cinda is one of four giant asset managers set up by China in 1999 to remove an estimated 1.4 trillion yuan worth of bad loans from China's top four lenders in one of the world's largest bank bailouts.
). The other three asset managers are Orient Asset Management, Great Wall Asset Management and Huarong Asset Management.
"We will be listed at the right time in future. Preparation is underway, but there is no firm timeline," said Zhang Weidong, a board secretary at Cinda.
Cinda's listing plan is in line with ambitions of China's four bad loan managers to move beyond repackaging and selling bad debt to become fully-fledged financial services firms.
Their transformation has been slow, in part because analysts suspect they have recovered or sold less than half of the bad debt they bought in 1999.
Zhang said Cinda's new investors would help the firm build its asset and wealth management, investment banking, financing and financial leasing businesses.
The company had 172.4 billion yuan in assets at the end of 2011 and posted net profit of 6.38 billion yuan last year, according to a statement.
The National Social Security Fund was Cinda's biggest investor this time, buying an 8 percent stake for 5 billion yuan. Cinda said all four new investors are barred from selling their stakes in the next three years.
Cinda issued new shares as part of the deal. The asset manager said China's Ministry of Finance remains its biggest shareholder and its stake was not diluted.
Aside from China Construction Bank, the other top Chinese banks are Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
(Reporting by Shen Yan and Koh Gui Qing; Additional reporting by Elzio Barreto in HONG KONG; Editing by Matt Driskill)
