U.S. should welcome Chinese investment: minister
2012-03-18 06:12:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States should open up its economy wider to Chinese manufacturers and investors to help narrow the country's trade deficit, China's commerce minister said on Sunday.
"We hope the United States will open up so that Chinese firms can invest there and thereby increase U.S. export capacity," Chen Deming told an economic forum in Beijing.
"The productivity of the United States is very high and the quality of its work force is very good. If the United States allows China's manufacturers to develop there, the overall U.S. trade deficit will fall."
Chen's appeal is the latest from Beijing, which often complains about political barriers to investing in U.S. industries and about export restrictions Washington puts on certain technologies Chinese companies want to buy.
The United States restricts the sale to China of over 2,000 products with possible military use. Washington has said previously that it would review the export-control list, with an eye to increasing high-tech exports.
"The United States has repeatedly told us that they will open up and come with a list of products for China, but I have been hearing such talk for nearly three years and I haven't seen it," said Chen. "Previously, there was sound on the stairs but now I cannot hear it."
He said China has taken steps to reduce its reliance on exports, with trade surplus as percentage of GDP falling to just over 2 percent last year.
China's trade balance plunged $31.5 billion into the red in February as imports swamped exports to leave the largest deficit in at least a decade.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The U.S. doesn¡¯t have a shortage of investment capital needed for increasing our manufacturing/industrial capacity. To the contrary, we have EXCESS industrial capacity in the U.S.. Until we work off that excess capacity, it is irrational for any busines owner to add capacity. Happily U.S. capacity utilization rose from 67.3% in 2009 to 78.8% in January 2012. Unhappily it dropped in the latest month (February) by .1% ¡ª the first drop in 2 years, and remains well below the more than 85% that it hit during the last year of Reagan¡¯s Presidency and during the Clinton years. So, foreign owners who build new U.S. industrial capacity will only be creating more unneeded capacity, making business even tougher for existing U.S. producers. And, if those new business are built using artificially cheap capital from China¡¯s government-backed banking sector, these State-subsidized businesses will drive existing, unsubsidized U.S. businesses out of business. By the way, this Chinese Commerce Offial is merely repeating a mistaken notion already being spread by the vast majority of right-wing pundits in the U.S., that we have a problem of too little investment capital ¡­ a problem that can be solved by giving more money to the ¡°job creators¡± who then will invest it building more factories. Those who diagnose the U.S. economic dilemma as a ¡°supply side¡± problem that can be solved by increasing investment and production miss this point. Their schemes to increase direct foreign investment, repatriate U.S. funds from overseas, or increase the U.S. savings rate fail to address the fundamental problem of excess industrial capacity and, therefore, can do nothing to solve the problem of slow growth and lagging jobs. Those who advocate a Keynesian approach to soak up excess capacity are equally wrong. Pumping money into the economy to solve the problem of excess industrial capacity cannot work because the excess capacity is not the result of any shortage of consumer demand. Demand is booming for foreign goods and commodities ¡ª to the tune of a half trillion dollars every year. If that money were spent on U.S. manufactured goods instead, our factories would be running on full steam, and U.S. businesses would be growing far faster than the currrent meager rate. So, the problem isn¡¯t simply one of demand, but, rather net demand for U.S. produced goods (incidentally, we actually run a net surplus for services). There are two major reasons for this net deficit in domestic demand: U.S. petroleum product imports (which run about 49% of total U.S. petroleum product consumption) and foreign trade ¡ª particularly with China. Each is equal to about half of our foreign trade deficit. So, instead of China trying to foist on us the idea of further increasing subsidized foreign manufacturing, how about giving a living wage to their people so that they can have enough money to start becoming consumers of U.S. and Chinese products. The best thing they could do to help the U.S., Europe and their own people would be to speed up their transition from a subsidized export economy to a truly free consumer economy. And, of course, both nations could benefit from cooperation to find alternatives to imported oil form the Middle East.
Mar 19, 20121:40am EDT--
