Senators renew push against China currency 'manipulation' despite yuan's rise
2013-06-06 12:51:00.0
(Reuters) - A bipartisan group of senators on Wednesday introduced legislation to give the United States new tools to fight currency manipulation, an effort aimed mainly at China, just days before President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping will meet for an informal retreat.
The bill is similar to legislation the House of Representatives and the Senate passed separately in 2010 and 2011, but which failed to win final congressional approval.
Obama and Xi are to meet at a luxury resort near Palm Springs this weekend for an informal meeting aimed at easing mistrust between the world's two biggest economies.
"The single biggest step we could take today to create jobs in American manufacturing is to tackle China's currency manipulation," Senator Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, said in statement.
"That's why we're making a renewed, bipartisan push to get this bill passed and on the President's desk, and send a strong message to the Chinese government that the rigged game must come to an end," Schumer said.
A bipartisan group of House lawmakers in March restarted an effort to pass the bill, which House Speaker John Boehner, the top U.S. Republican, has blocked on the grounds that it could start a trade war with China.
On Tuesday, the People's Bank of China fixed the yuan's mid-point versus the dollar at 6.1735, the highest since a landmark revaluation in 2005.
Still, the persistently high U.S. trade deficit with China set another record in 2012 at $315 billion, fueling a perception in Congress that China is an unfair trader.
The department has refused to take that step, even though many lawmakers believe it already has the authority to treat undervalued currencies as an illegal trade subsidy.
Another provision would require the Treasury Department to designate countries with "fundamentally misaligned currencies," including those that it is targeting for "priority action."
To the frustration of many lawmakers, the Treasury has not cited any country for currency manipulation for two decades.
"It is universally accepted that China and other major countries intentionally manipulate their currency to create an advantage for themselves in the marketplace" said Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican.
Other co-sponsors of the bill include Senators Jeff Sessions, a Alabama Republican, Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat, Debbie Stabenow, a Michigan Democrat, Richard Burr, a North Carolina Republican, Susan Collins, a Maine Republican, and Robert Casey, a Pennsylvania Democrat.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Dan Grebler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese yuan has increased 25.64% against the US dollar since 2005. The US Treasury Department wrote that the yuan had risen 40%, including inflation, against the dollar. My figures are 8.2500 yuan per dollar on 1-1-2005 versus 6.1347 yuan per dollar on 5-31-2013. However, most economists in late 2004 predicted that China¡¯s GDP would pass US GDP by 2030, so China began raising the value of their currency to equal the US dollar by 2030. The US Financial Scandal of 2008 to the present revealed massive criminal activities by large US financial institutions that raised doubts about the true worth of the US economy, and these doubts persist to the present day. The US Dot Bomb Bubble of 2000, the US Accounting Scandal of 2001-2003, and the US Financial Scandal of 2008 to the present revealed that US technology, corporate, and financial leaders were liars, thieves, and criminals. The failures of US regimes to prosecute the crimes did not make them disappear; they made the Bush and Obama regimes ¡°accessories after the fact¡± to the crimes. The US economy remains in the hands of criminals; the Bush regime was a criminal organization; and the Obama regime is a criminal organization. China has continued to raise the value of its currency, but doubts remain about the true value of the US economy. This makes it difficult to know where China should place the value of its currency with respect to the US dollar until thorough investigations, with criminal charges against US economic criminals, are pursued. Until the US cleans its own economy and political system of criminals, China will pursue the best currency policy that it can determine for itself.
Jun 06, 20131:52pm EDT--
What¡¯s costing jobs in manufacturing is what the Senators and US establishment are just dying to increase: H1-B high tech visas, of which China is the second biggest user. ¡®¡­American prosecutors, who last month charged three Chinese scientists at the New York University School of Medicine with taking bribes to share research findings with their real employers: the Shenzhen institute and a separate Shanghai medical technology company. Though considerable attention has been focused on Chinese cyberespionage efforts, the institute is at the vanguard of a related push to bolster China¡¯s competitiveness by acquiring overseas technology directly from Chinese scientists working in the United States and other developed countries, say American officials and analysts.¡¯ http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/world/asia/wide-china-push-is-seen-to-obtain-industry-secrets.html
What¡¯s costing jobs in manufacturing is what the Senators and US establishment are just dying to increase: H1-B high tech visas, of which China is the second biggest user. ¡®¡­American prosecutors, who last month charged three Chinese scientists at the New York University School of Medicine with taking bribes to share research findings with their real employers: the Shenzhen institute and a separate Shanghai medical technology company. Though considerable attention has been focused on Chinese cyberespionage efforts, the institute is at the vanguard of a related push to bolster China¡¯s competitiveness by acquiring overseas technology directly from Chinese scientists working in the United States and other developed countries, say American officials and analysts.¡¯ http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/world/asia/wide-china-push-is-seen-to-obtain-industry-secrets.html
Jun 06, 20132:55pm EDT--
H1-B: The Good News: An increase in high tech jobs. The Bad News: The jobs are in China¡¯s ¡®designated technology transfer centers.¡¯ ¡®The technology is converted into products and equipment across China, including in designated technology transfer centers. Shanghai alone has 10 such centers, and a single center may have a bank of thousands of projects, the authors wrote. One, the Shanghai New High Technology Service Center, offers ¡°one-stop shopping¡± for government and business customers. Another, the Shanghai National Technology Transfer Center, has about 7,500 employees spread across laboratories, research institutes and offices in the region who are engaged in the ¡°conversion¡± of foreign technology, including in microelectronics, lasers and nuclear technology, the authors wrote.¡¯ http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/world/asia/wide-china-push-is-seen-to-obtain-industry-secrets.html
Jun 06, 20132:57pm EDT--
