U.S.-China climate deal called breakthrough but no long-term cuts yet
2013-06-11 16:54:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the United States took a major step in the fight against climate change over the weekend, but what was termed a "breakthrough" might not do much in the longer term to lock in legally binding carbon emission cuts from the world's two biggest emitters of greenhouse gases.
Still, environmental groups and some U.S. and global policymakers said the agreement could give fresh momentum to the United Nations' arduous process of finalizing a global treaty to replace the Kyoto Protocol on climate change by 2015.
In their first talks, U.S. President Barack Obama and Chinese Premier Xi Jinping agreed to phase out production and consumption of the gases known as hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), working under the U.N's 1987 Montreal Protocol.
Used mostly in air conditioners and refrigerators, ozone-harming HFCs make up roughly 2 percent of greenhouse gas emissions, but are rising at a rate of up to 9 percent annually.
The White House said a global phase-down could reduce the carbon dioxide equivalent of 90 billion tons by 2050, roughly two years worth of global greenhouse gas emissions.
"We see that as just the first step of a long and robust international climate agenda in the second term," Heather Zichal, deputy assistant to the president for energy and climate change said on Tuesday.
One official close to the negotiations said the agreement was a political breakthrough, but the road ahead to a global deal on climate change would still be long.
The official said the weekend agreement, which followed earlier talks between Secretary of State John Kerry and Xie Zenhua, a vice chairman in China's top economic development body, can inject a dose of optimism into the U.N. climate talks. But the deal represents a powerful example of what can be done when two major powers work together, the official added.
Experts have said addressing HFCs under the separate Montreal Protocol, regarded as a successful international treaty, can lead to major emissions reductions while negotiators hammer out parameters of a workable new climate treaty by 2015.
"This is the biggest, fastest, most effective climate mitigation that could happen in the near term," said Mark Roberts, international policy advisor of the Environmental Investigation Agency, a group involved in climate issues.
Unlike carbon dioxide, the most prevalent and longest-lasting greenhouse gas produced across many sectors of a country's economy, HFCs are short-lived and confined to just a handful of sectors, making them easier to tackle.
The United States, Mexico and Canada first proposed the phase-out of HFCs under the Montreal Protocol in 2009. At that point China, India and Brazil opposed the plan, arguing that HFCs should be addressed in U.N. climate negotiations.
Durwood Zaelke, founder of the Institute for Governance and Sustainable Development, said the constraints of U.N. climate talks have created the need for diplomatic moves outside of that process, such as the new U.S.-China agreement.
"This is the beginning of a movement to enlist more climate mitigation from parallel venues," he said, adding that such deals take some pressure away from U.N. climate talks and open the way for other solutions.
The HFC agreement is "rebuilding an urgent sense of optimism" in the multilateral process that can pave the way for agreements on other short-lived greenhouse gases, such as black carbon, the soot emitted from cook stoves and diesel engines, Zaelke said.
More of these kinds of agreements could be on the horizon, those familiar with climate negotiations have said.
(Additional reporting by Patrick Rucker and Ayesha Rascoe; editing by Ros Krasny)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
At the Durban Climate Change Conference in 2011, China presented a $17 trillion, 5 year plan ($340 billion per year) to address pollution. The program should have serious results by mid-2014 and continue through 2016 when a new 5 year pollution plan should start. China¡¯s leaders always claimed that they would address pollution when they had the resources to do so without harming the economic advancement of their people. In 2013, China chose a president with a degree in chemical engineering who could oversee the project intelligently. China also has a twenty year, continental sized, irrigation plan to move water, naturally desalinated by typhoons, from the south and east coasts to the north, center, and west. This allows land reclamation of desert and mountainous regions and irrigation for crops and forests. Former president Hu Jintao has a degree in hydraulic engineering for effective monitoring of progress. The growth in crops and forests will help reduce pollution as the plans progress to completion. China will be able to feed between 3 and 4 billion people by 2020 to 2025 while increasing plants in crops and forests will help reduce CO2 in the air. These efforts are works in progress, so clearer results may not be seen before 2016 to 2020.
Jun 12, 20133:38pm EDT--
Jun 12, 20136:18pm EDT--
Jun 12, 20138:59pm EDT--
