Pentagon says aims to keep Asia power balance
2012-03-08 00:22:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States is shifting more military muscle, including another aircraft carrier, to the Pacific to protect the status quo in a region facing China's growing clout, the Pentagon's second-ranking official said on Thursday.
In coming years, 60 percent of U.S. Navy ships will be in the Pacific, up from 52 percent now, including a net increase of one carrier to six, Deputy Defense Secretary Ashton Carter told an industry conference hosted by Credit Suisse and McAleese and Associates, a consultancy.
The U.S. Army and Marine Corps are also working on stepped-up rotations, "so they'll be seeing more of the U.S. Army in the Asia Pacific region not less," Carter said.
Elaborating on military priorities that President Barack Obama announced in January, Carter said U.S. forces had played a crucial role in preventing conflict in the Pacific region for roughly the last 60 years.
"We don't want that to change. We want to continue to have that role and that's really what our investments are aimed at," Carter said when asked whether the goal was to pre-empt, deter or hedge against China.
Navy Secretary Raymond Mabus, speaking to the conference after Carter, said the Navy planned to achieve the buildup using new ships as they roll out of shipyards.
In response, the United States is laying the groundwork for a more widely distributed footprint in Asia through strengthened alliances and partnerships, including with Australia, Singapore and the Philippines.
Carter cited a range of upgrades and new programs that he said were directed to the region, including radar sets, antisubmarine warfare improvements and development of a new long-range, nuclear-capable bomber. The programs were largely outlined in a five-year spending request that Obama sent to Congress last month.
The United States also is moving to protect fixed bases in the region, he said. Such installations are increasingly vulnerable to Chinese ballistic missiles, according to the Pentagon.
(Reporting By Jim Wolf; Editing by Vicki Allen)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It is normal shift of power projection after Cold War. Before 1990 the main threat was Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries. The majority of the latter are now NATO member and Russia only in 2010 achieved close to 1/4 of Soviet Union pre 1990 military budget. Why so late the move ? There was no other threat, and change of forces deployment is costly and what most important questions could arise from that nasty civils, why we have 50,000+ soldiers in Germany, 20 years after Fall of Berlin Wall ? Who pays for this ? Etc.
It is normal shift of power projection after Cold War. Before 1990 the main threat was Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries. The majority of the latter are now NATO member and Russia only in 2010 achieved close to 1/4 of Soviet Union pre 1990 military budget. Why so late the move ? There was no other threat, and change of forces deployment is costly and what most important questions could arise from that nasty civils, why we have 50,000+ soldiers in Germany, 20 years after Fall of Berlin Wall ? Who pays for this ? Etc.
After 2001 there was years of convenient ¡°war on terrorism¡±. Convenient for China and US military complex, out of totally different causes ;-)))
With uneasy Japan, US has no other choice or Japanese will finally turn into Samurai¡¯s again, after 60 years of self-contempt of being Ronin¡¯s and will built their own, independent and nuclear military force. I think it is inevitable. US assuring presence in Pacific can only delay it.
Mar 08, 20125:17pm EST--
I could see Asia will be such an unrested region in the 21th, since it is a crowded stage for so many super powers: the US, Japan, China, Russia, ¡­ Seems that the US will be more and more busy dealing with increasing amount of international affair.
Mar 09, 20122:18am EST--
