GSK fires China research head over 'misrepresented' data
2013-06-11 16:34:00.0
GSK fires China research head over 'misrepresented' data | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
GSK fires China research head over 'misrepresented' data
Sun, Jun 2 2013
Thu, May 30 2013
Wed, May 29 2013
Tue, May 28 2013
Mon, May 20 2013
A GlaxoSmithKline logo is seen outside one of its buildings in west London, February 6, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Toby Melville
Tue  EDT
A company spokesman said on Tuesday that Jiangwu Zang had been dismissed and three other individuals had been placed on administrative leave, while a further employee had resigned.
"Regretfully, our investigation has established that certain data in the paper were indeed misrepresented," Britain's biggest drugs group said in a statement.
"We've shared our conclusion that the paper should be retracted and are in the process of asking all of the authors to sign a statement to that effect, according to Nature Medicine's procedure."
The study, which looked at the role of a protein in multiple sclerosis, involved early-stage research and did not directly involve patients, although some blood samples were used.
However, the work did inform GSK's development of an experimental medicine for multiple sclerosis, known as GSK2618960, which has reached the stage of initial testing in healthy volunteers.
The early clinical tests of the product have now been suspended as a precaution, although there is no signal of a safety issue with the medicine, the spokesman added.
GSK, like many other large Western drug companies, is increasing its research presence in China. But its Chinese R&D centre is still small compared to operations in Europe and the United States.
(Reporting by Ben Hirschler; Editing by Bernard Orr)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let¡¯s think about this. The Chinese society is infamously known for creating fake and unauthorized products throughout every sector of life. From movies to contaminated milk to re-used cooking oil to disguised rat meat to ¡°European¡± wine to sporting apparel to entire Apple stores. As Chinese society has no morals nor values, is it really wise for the West to continue to engage China in such sensitive topics as pharmaceutical and medical research??
Jun 12, 201310:09am EDT--
