Goldman free to sell ICBC stake: president
2012-03-06 08:53:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Mar 5 2012
Fri, Mar 2 2012
Mon, Feb 27 2012
Wed, Feb 15 2012
A man carries a case as he walks past the new branch of China's Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) in central Madrid January 24, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Juan Medina
Tue  EST
) as the lock-up period has ended, the Chinese bank's president said, as a report that the Wall Street firm could further water down its stake hit shares of the Chinese lender.
Goldman has repeatedly told ICBC that it considers the Chinese bank a good investment, and would like to keep some of it, Yang Kaisheng, ICBC's president, told reporters on the sidelines of China's annual parliamentary meeting.
"To my understanding, Goldman has always felt that ICBC is a worthy investment," Yang said. "Previously, they've cut their holding in our bank when they faced problems, but they have always communicated with us before doing anything."
) and JP Morgan Asset Management to sell up to $1 billion worth of ICBC shares, citing people familiar with the matter that it did not name.
This pushed ICBC's Hong Kong-listed shares down more than 3.8 percent on Tuesday. By comparison, the benchmark Hang Seng Index
If sold, it would be the fourth sell-down of the world's biggest bank by market value. Goldman, which first invested in the Chinese bank before its IPO in 2006, last sold $1.54 billion worth of ICBC shares in November.
), RBS (
). All of them have sold or watered down their investments over the years, mostly to deal with trouble back home.
Separately, Yang also said the lion's share of local government loans held by China's biggest bank are backed by sufficient cash flow, brushing off concerns over the viability of the debt.
About 0.73 percent of all local government loans were classified as non-performing at the end of 2011, better than the 0.94 percent for the overall loan book, he said.
China's local governments borrowed freely over the past few years, often through special funding vehicles, to finance building that helped China stave off the global economic crisis.
Some 90.4 percent of the local government loans held by ICBC are for projects with sufficient revenue streams to meet payments, Yang said.
Another 6.4 percent can "mostly" pay for themselves, he said, meaning that cash flows cover more than 70 percent of the principle and interest payments.
"If I can quote Premier Wen Jiabao in his work report, I would say that local government debt levels are under control and safe," he said.
(Reporting by Kelvin Soh and Zhou Xin; Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
