China lead pollution poisons 160 children: report
2012-03-05 11:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Lead emission from factories and the natural environment in China's manufacturing heart of Guangdong has poisoned 160 children, Xinhua said on Sunday in the country's latest case of unfettered industrial toxins.
Children from Dongtang town in Renhua country were found to have "elevated" levels of lead in their blood after inhaling lead-contaminated air and eating food tainted with lead, Xinhua said.
The natural level of lead in Dongtang is also higher than usual as the town sits on a lead-zinc ore belt which raises the lead content in the soil, Xinhua said.
To counter widespread public anger, Beijing has promised to crack down on lead pollution. An industry body said last May China could shut three quarters of lead-acid battery plants in the next two or three years to cut local lead demand.
China is the world's largest consumer of refined lead, with 70 percent used for making batteries.
Lead poisoning builds up through regular exposure to small amounts of lead and damages the nervous and reproductive systems, kidneys, as well as causing high blood pressure and anemia.
In 2009, protesters broke into one smelting plant they blamed for the lead poisoning of more than 600 children, smashing trucks and tearing down fences before the police stopped them.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Wow, what a misleading story. 160 kids sure sounds like a lot, except: - China as 1.3 BILLION people, do the math even if the 160 figure is utterly unreported by 10 folds, China¡¯s childhood lead poisoning is still well below US, according to national childhood lead poisoning data reported by the CDC. - Guangdong is one of the most industrialized province, indicating the higher number isn¡¯t representative of China as a whole.
Mar 05, 20123:07pm EST--
