China says told Syria, other parties, to stop violence
2012-03-08 04:36:00.0
(Reuters) - China's envoy to Syria told President Bashar al-Assad's government and other parties to stop the violence and help the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross send aid to strife-hit areas, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said on Thursday.
The trip by envoy Li Huaxin appears to be the latest initiative to counter accusations from Western and Arab governments that China, along with Russia, abetted expanding violence by Assad's forces by vetoing two UN resolutions aimed at pressuring him out of office.
"He urged the Syrian government and other concerned parties to stop the violence immediately, actively cooperate with the U.N. and ICRC to ease the humanitarian situation, in particular in Homs," Liu said, summarizing Li's talks with Syrian officials this week.
Li's comments build on a six-point statement issued by Beijing over the weekend. China warned other powers not to use humanitarian aid for Syria to "interfere" and urged Assad's government and other sides to "immediately, fully and unconditionally" stop fighting.
"The Syrian government spoke positively of China's six-point proposal. The Syrian government side states it would like to cooperate with the UN agencies in the humanitarian field, on the basis of respecting Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity," said Liu in his account of the envoy's talks.
Liu said that Li met the Syrian foreign minister, deputy foreign minister and representatives of three opposition groups. He did not name the groups.
As one of the U.N. Security Council's five permanent members, China has the power to veto any resolutions, and it joined Russia to exercise that veto power on Syrian measures in October and February.
The United Nations says Syrian security forces have killed more than 7,500 civilians since the revolt against the Assad family's four decades in power began a year ago.
China abstained from the Libya resolution, letting it pass, but it later suggested NATO powers exceeded the U.N. mandate through their expanded bombing campaign.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Writing by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ken Wills and Nick Macfie) (This version corrects headline and first and fourth paragraphs to show China called on all parties, not just Syrian government, to end violence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The government of China has their own perspective in this situation, and it is because they view the U.S. approach as hypocritical. Is that astonishing? The U.S. has offered an opinion having to do with Tibet and the Free Tibet movement, citing human rights concerns. In the minds of the Chinese government, the Free Tibet movement is akin to a group of southern states seceding from from the United States. Should the United States have aggressively acted to reclaim these southern states and assert federal power over them, or should the United States be concerned about their human rights and enter into peace talks with the new Confederate States of America, which China is ready to recognize? As far as the Chinese are concerned, the Syrian protest movement mirrors the Chinese democratic movement of 1989, or the Free Tibet movement, or the secession of the southern United States.
The government of China has their own perspective in this situation, and it is because they view the U.S. approach as hypocritical. Is that astonishing? The U.S. has offered an opinion having to do with Tibet and the Free Tibet movement, citing human rights concerns. In the minds of the Chinese government, the Free Tibet movement is akin to a group of southern states seceding from from the United States. Should the United States have aggressively acted to reclaim these southern states and assert federal power over them, or should the United States be concerned about their human rights and enter into peace talks with the new Confederate States of America, which China is ready to recognize? As far as the Chinese are concerned, the Syrian protest movement mirrors the Chinese democratic movement of 1989, or the Free Tibet movement, or the secession of the southern United States.
In the U.S., one of our primary concerns is the Syrian government has been an ally of Iran, they have supported Hizb Allah in Lebanon and they are technically still at war with Israel because Israel occupies the Golan Heights. The U.S. government does not like the Syrian government for good reason, as far as we¡¯re concerned. Whatever new government comes to Syria, the U.S. wants it to no longer be a conduit between Iran and Hizb Allah operations in Lebanon. That¡¯s an extremely unlikely scenario. A new Sunni-dominated government might cool ties with Iran, but popular hatred of Israel goes too deep for any new government to let off support of anti-Israel operations in Lebanon (or elsewhere).
To complicate things even further, minorities within Syria are more protected now than they would be under any possible replacement government that might come to Syria. Bashar Assad is Allawi, and the Baath government will allow people to practice any religion they like freely, without interference. However, the people are absolutely forbidden to have any political opinion (other than 100% support for the Baath government). It¡¯s an unpleasant position for the U.S., and it shouldn¡¯t surprise us that China is intervening on behalf of Assad¡¯s government. Thank you.
Mar 08, 20126:48am EST--
