Smithfield profit plunges after China blocks imports
2013-06-14 11:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Jun 12 2013
Thu, Jun 6 2013
Thu, Jun 6 2013
Tue, Jun 4 2013
Tue, Jun 4 2013
A sign advertising Smithfield hams hangs at the Taste of Smithfield restaurant and gourmet market in Smithfield, Virginia May 30, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Rich-Joseph Facun
Fri  EDT
), subject of a $4.7 billion bid from China's Shuanghui International, posted a 63 percent drop in quarterly profit as costs rose and exports to China fell due to a ban on an additive it feeds to pigs to produce lean meat.
Smithfield has already started to wind down its use of the additive, ractopamine, and resumed shipments to China in March.
But it said double-digit declines in exports to China and Russia, which also banned the additive, had pushed production onto the domestic market in the fourth quarter, hitting its hog production and fresh pork businesses.
Smithfield, which does not provide a breakdown of revenue by country, also said exports to Japan fell due to a weaker yen.
The company did not provide an update on the takeover, which analysts and politicians have said could face land ownership issues in several states as well as scrutiny from a federal government panel that assesses national security risks.
The panel is not expected to block the sale, which if completed would result in a jump in Smithfield's exports to China, the world's biggest consumer of pork.
The company, whose products include Smithfield bacon and Eckrich sausages, said its net income fell to $29.7 million, or 21 cents per share, in the fourth quarter ended April 28, from $79.5 million, or 49 cents per share, a year earlier.
Last year's fourth-quarter profit included a $16 million benefit related to a litigation settlement.
Analysts on average were expecting a profit of 43 cents per share on revenue of $3.27 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Smithfield shares were little changed at $32.83 in morning trade on Friday on the New York Stock Exchange, below Shuanghui's offer price of $34 per share.
(Reporting by Aditi Shrivastava and Lisa Baertlein; Editing by Saumyadeb Chakrabarty)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The media is a corrupt cesspool. They want to mislead the American people so that they don¡¯t oppose the Smithfield deal to the Chinese but fail to mention that just last year the Chinese company that is trying to buy it was caught selling meat with the toxic lean meat powder clenbuterol. Not only that but Smithfield Foods is the largest pork producer and processor in the world. It has facilities in 26 U.S. states and it employs tens of thousands of Americans. It directly owns 460 farms and has contracts with approximately 2,100 others. Are we really that stupid to not only allowed our food supply to potentially be poisoned but to allow corrupt foreign powers have this type of power and influence in our communities? It must be opposed and fought! If this deal is somehow allowed to go through by our corrupt government leaders then some suggest that all Smithfield workers should engage in sabotage to bankrupt these foreigners and drive them out of our land!
Jun 14, 201310:29am EDT--
Jun 16, 201311:37pm EDT--
I don¡¯t understand something. Why didn¡¯t the Chinese simply hack into the pork industry¡¯s systems and duplicate what Smithfield and other meat processors already employ to create such tasty pork products? I¡¯m upset that there stands a real strong possibility that the prices of my sausage links and kielbasa will be headed up again!! Look what the Chinese did to Hong Kong¡¯s prices of infant milk, hospital wards, and real estate. This is probably just the beginning of a long trend of Chinese acquisitions. At least we know what the Chinese lack; the ability to feed itself.
Jun 17, 20131:26pm EDT--
