AB-InBev on shortlist for China brewery deal: sources
2012-03-02 07:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Mar 1 2012
Thu, Mar 1 2012
Wed, Feb 22 2012
Tue, Feb 21 2012
Tue, Feb 21 2012
A man walks near the entrance of Anheuser-Busch InBev headquarters in Leuven March 3, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Yves Herman
Fri  EST
), the world's biggest brewer, and two Chinese brewers are on the shortlist to buy most of the operations being sold by China's Kingway Brewery Holdings Ltd (
), sources with direct knowledge of the matter said.
The deal value could be as high as $700 million and the short-listed bidders are expected to conduct due-diligence over the next two months, one of the sources said.
), which owns Snow beer brand, and Beijing Yanjing Brewery Co Ltd (
) are among the other companies that have advanced to the next round, the sources said.
Foreign and Chinese brewers are jostling to grow their market share in China, the world's biggest beer market, and Kingway's planned sale is one of the few sizeable brewery assets that has come up for sale in recent times.
The eventual winner can benefit from strong growth in China's beer consumption. China's beer demand hit 450 million hectoliters in 2010, nearly twice that of the United States, and is expected to grow 5 percent per year in coming years, double the 2.5 percent growth forecast for the global market for 2011.
Kingway, with a market value of about $655 million, has said it does not plan to sell an equity stake in the company. The stock was trading up 2.0 percent on Friday afternoon, outperforming the 1 percent gain of the broader market
Kingway Brewery has invited bids for equity stakes in six breweries, all beer and beer-related trade marks, domestic and overseas distribution networks, the sources said. The company plans to retain two of its production facilities, one of the sources said.
Anheuser-Busch and China Resources declined comment, while Kingway and Yanjing officials were not immediately available for comment. The sources declined to be identified as the discussions were private.
AB-InBev was the third-biggest brewer in China with a market share of 11.4 percent in volume terms as of 2010, according to data compiler Euromonitor. Its main breweries are in Fujian Sedrin in southeast China, and Harbin in the northeast.
China's largest brewer China Resources Snow is a joint venture between China Resources and SABMiller Plc (
SABMiller has said that any deal in China would be through its CR Snow joint venture, in which it own 49 pct with the rest owned by China Resources Enterprise.
In April last year, GDH Ltd, a unit of state-backed Guangdong Holdings Ltd, had exercised the right to buy the 21.37 percent stake in Kingway held by a Heineken NV (
) joint venture in China, blocking a bid from China Resources.
GDH paid 1.08 billion yuan ($164.94 million) for the stake, increasing its holding to 73.82 percent.
Kingway was previously jointly controlled by Asia Pacific Breweries Ltd (APB) APBB.SI, a unit of Singapore food and property conglomerate Fraser and Neave Ltd (
), and the world's third-largest brewer Heineken.
(Additional reporting by Philip Blenkinsop in LUXEMBOURG, David Jones in LONDON; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Muralikumar Anantharaman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good move by InBev. China is intent on developing a consumer based economy and is poised to surpass the US as the leading global economy, albeit 2025-ish. The move is a sound, strategic investment that lines up with China¡¯s economic expansion plans. Just hoping Budweiser will still be proudly made in the USA.
Mar 02, 20129:08am EST--
I don¡¯t like Bud¡¯s beers, which are like tap waters. I hope they are outbid and can¡¯t dump their poor beers onto the Chinese consumers. Dumping in that market is a form of colonizing.
Mar 02, 20129:19am EST--
