HSBC counts cost of emerging market success
2012-02-27 11:50:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Feb 23 2012
Wed, Feb 22 2012
Tue, Feb 21 2012
Thu, Feb 16 2012
Fri, Feb 10 2012
Sun, Feb 26 2012
An HSBC bank branch is seen near the Burj Khalifa tower in Dubai, February 5, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Jumana El Heloueh
Mon  EST
) said a $1 billion increase in its wages bill in Brazil, China and other emerging markets was the price of avoiding the stagnant growth which has dogged some rival lenders more dependent on Europe.
Posting a pretax profit just shy of $22 billion, the largest in 2011 by a western bank, HSBC (
) said on Monday it was confident growth in Asia, Latin America and the Middle East would continue to offset sluggish conditions in Europe.
However, with costs rising 10 percent in 2011, due partly to surging wages in emerging markets, Chief Executive Stuart Gulliver told reporters it would be a challenge to meet the bank's 2013 target for reducing costs as a proportion of income.
Banks across Europe have been posting hefty losses as the euro zone sovereign debt crisis has hit their trading profits, and as they strive to meet tough new rules aimed at preventing a repeat of the 2007-09 banking crisis.
HSBC, Europe's biggest bank and which makes over three quarters of its profits outside Europe and north America, has been relatively unscathed thanks to its strength in faster-growing emerging markets.
It said it expected that trend to continue, despite fears some of these economies were overheating and could see an abrupt slowdown.
"We remain comfortable with the (outlook in) emerging markets and are confident that GDP growth in emerging markets will be positive and China will have a soft landing," Gulliver said.
In contrast, the euro zone economy would flatline this year, with "marked recessions" in some southern countries, he added.
HSBC, with 89 million customers in 85 countries, said pretax profit rose 15 percent to $21.9 billion in 2011 compared with a forecast for $22.2 billion in a Reuters poll.
The figure fell short of the group's record profit of $24.2 billion in 2007, but beat all other western banks that have reported so far for last year, including U.S. rival J.P. Morgan (
), which made $19 billion.
The world's most profitable banks in recent years have been Chinese groups ICBC (
), which made a 215 billion yuan ($34.2 billion) pretax profit in 2010, and China Construction Bank (
), which made 175 billion yuan ($27.8 billion).
HSBC's profit was boosted by a $3.9 billion accounting gain on the value of its debt. Stripping that out, underlying pretax profit fell 6 percent to $17.7 billion.
At 1415 GMT, HSBC shares in London were down 4 percent at 551.9 pence, lagging a 1 percent decline in the UK's benchmark FTSE 100 index
"There's a slight miss (on profits) and the market isn't that impressed with the message on costs," said Alex Potter, analyst at Berenberg Bank.
HSBC said it paid out $4.2 billion in bonuses, down 2 percent on 2010. Banks are coming under intense pressure from politicians and the public to rein in pay awards because of the role of the sector in the world's economic problems.
Gulliver was paid 8 million pounds ($12.7 million) last year - including a 2.2 million bonus - down from 8.4 million in 2010, when he ran HSBC's investment bank. Another banker, whom HSBC declined to name, netted 7 million pounds, while 192 employees were paid over 1 million pounds each, including 64 in Britain.
Gulliver said HSBC would continue to pay competitively, particularly in emerging markets, as the growth being delivered made the investment worthwhile.
"Wage price inflation and competition for staff is very high. We are not the only people to work out that the emerging markets have high GDP growth and there's a limited pool of talent," he said on a conference call.
While HSBC remained on track to hit its return on equity target of 12 to 15 percent by the end of 2013, it would be a "challenge" to achieve its cost-to-income goal of 48 to 52 percent by then, Gulliver said, adding this was mainly due to a difficult macro-economic backdrop.
In the last year HSBC has cut 11,000 jobs and sold 19 businesses as part of Gulliver's business plan. Deals already struck will cut $50 billion in risk-weighted assets from its balance sheet.
"This is a redesigning of the group, not a shrinkage. It's to get ourselves on the front foot," Gulliver said.
HSBC, which lifted its 2011 dividend by 14 percent to 41 cents a share, said profit at its investment bank fell 24 percent to $7 billion as the euro zone debt crisis slowed capital markets activity in the second half of the year.
Loan impairment charges and other credit risk-related provisions, however, fell $1.9 billion to $12.1 billion.
HSBC's star division was commercial banking, where profits jumped 31 percent to $7.9 billion. In a throwback to its roots as a bank specializing in trade finance, last year's growth was led by increased business in Brazil, Hong Kong, China, Mexico, Argentina and Singapore.
(Additional reporting by Sudip Kar-Gupta and Kelvin Soh; Writing by Mark Potter; Editing by David Holmes)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Stephen Harper, Rob Nicholson, John Baird, Jim Flaherty, Diane Finley and Vic Toews, along with the rest of the Conservatives are liars, cheats and thieves! Bill-C10 threatens to throw many in jail longer and needlessly! Bill C-11 would strip Canadians of even more rights to what we already own and censor our flow of information! Bill-30 will strip us of our privacy! Now lets not forget the G20 fiasco, Vic Toews immortal speech about Canadians being pedophiles, the planned pension cuts, they place gag orders on those they appoint to various studies so that if the studies turn up data contradicting their ideals, they can suppress the data, or their election fraud, and now they can¡¯t even get our budget out on time, as if we don¡¯t know their motivations!
Stephen Harper, Rob Nicholson, John Baird, Jim Flaherty, Diane Finley and Vic Toews, along with the rest of the Conservatives are liars, cheats and thieves! Bill-C10 threatens to throw many in jail longer and needlessly! Bill C-11 would strip Canadians of even more rights to what we already own and censor our flow of information! Bill-30 will strip us of our privacy! Now lets not forget the G20 fiasco, Vic Toews immortal speech about Canadians being pedophiles, the planned pension cuts, they place gag orders on those they appoint to various studies so that if the studies turn up data contradicting their ideals, they can suppress the data, or their election fraud, and now they can¡¯t even get our budget out on time, as if we don¡¯t know their motivations!
The fascist Conservatives would turn our country into an Orwellian nightmare! How can they even call themselves a legitimate government?! How dare they act like they have our best interests in mind! Who do they think they are telling us what we need and how to live our lives?! They¡¯re the middle management and we¡¯re the ones who hired them! We should be telling them what we want and how we want it!
Canada needs to rise up march on Ottawa and occupy the parliament! We need to take back our country, remove the Conservatives from power! Our government, as a whole needs to be dismantled and rebuilt (that goes for those other parties as well. I¡¯m looking at you Liberals and NDP. Fat load of good they¡¯ve ever done for the country)! All our political parties have ever really done to us has been to divide Canadians. This only serves to make us easy prey for predators in the night! I say no more! Canadians need to stand up as one, divided by zero! Those that would appose the will of the people need to be taught a lesson, followed by some good old fashion tarring and feathering, finish with banishing traitors from Canada! Finally Canadians need some laws that allow us to force referendums on the government and punish corrupt politicians who think they can screw with their people, their employers, you and me! Fellow Canadians I implore you raise up and shout out your discontent for the horrible state of our country and the world for that matter. Shout from every mountain top (email, letters, phone calls, blogs, forums, twitter, youtube, ect¡­), ¡°WE WILL NOT STAND FOR CORRUPTION WITHIN OUR GOVERNMENT! WE WILL NOT GO QUIETLY INTO THE NIGHT AS OUR FREEDOMS ARE SLOWLY ERODED! WE¡¯RE COMING FOR YOU HARPER REGIEM! EXPECT US!¡± Let the voice of the masses resinate as one, thundering and deafening our oppressors. Keep screaming and screaming, every day, all day, don¡¯t stop screaming until this country is ours again!
¡®Things have got to change. But first, you¡¯ve gotta get mad!¡­ You¡¯ve got to say, ¡°I¡¯m as mad as hell, and I¡¯m not going to take this anymore!¡± Then we¡¯ll figure out what to do about the depression and the inflation and the oil crisis. But first get up out of your chairs, open the windows, stick your head out, and yell, and say it: ¡°I¡¯M AS MAD AS HELL, AND I¡¯M NOT GOING TO TAKE THIS ANYMORE!¡±
¡®People shouldn¡¯t fear the government, the government should fear the people!¡¯
Feb 26, 20129:54pm EST--
bail outs, austerity, ECB 1% loans to banks¡­ bank $20 BILLION PROFIT¡­ speechless¡­¡­¡­¡­.
Feb 27, 20124:38am EST--
Feb 28, 20128:30am EST--
