China, Russia may be shifting on Syria: Arab League
2012-02-20 13:50:00.0
China, Russia may be shifting on Syria: Arab League | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, Russia may be shifting on Syria: Arab League
Fri, Feb 17 2012
Thu, Feb 16 2012
Wed, Feb 15 2012
Wed, Feb 15 2012
Sun, Feb 12 2012
Mon  EST
"There are indications coming from China and to some extent from Russia that there may be a change in position," League Secretary-General Nabil Elaraby told a news conference in Cairo.
China and Russia's blocking this month of a draft U.N. Security Council resolution that backed an Arab plan demanding that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad step aside angered the West and Arab states.
China has sent envoys to the region, stung by Western criticism that by vetoing the resolutions it was allowing the violence in Syria to increase.
"We know there are difficulties in the Security Council but I think we cannot stay silent and have to exert the utmost pressure so that the (Syrian) government implements what was agreed upon, or make the Security Council look into the matter more seriously because it is dangerous and there are big violations," he said.
"The international community cannot remain silent in such a dangerous case as Syria's," he added.
(Reporting by Shaimaa Fayed; Writing by Edmund Blair)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
i guess this is one of the problems of owning your own country: you have to make everyone happy to keep them quiet but there¡¯s not enough money to do it if you want keep most of it for yourself, your family and friends.
Feb 20, 20123:44pm EST--
