China sends man to labor camp for SARS rumor
2012-02-27 04:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Feb 15 2012
Fri, Feb 3 2012
Tue, Jan 31 2012
Mon  EST
The man, surnamed Liuman's full name, was sentenced on Sunday to labor re-education "in accordance with the law," according to a police statement in Baoding city in Hebei province. The announcement was published on the Baoding public security bureau's website, which did not disclose the
Liu worked as an administrator for a website and in a bid to improve traffic spread "false information" that a Baoding hospital had confirmed a case of SARS, the statement said.
"The false information ... had an impact and disrupted the social order," the statement said.
In 2003, Chinese officials covered up the spread of "Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome" for weeks before a growing death toll and rumors forced the government to reveal the epidemic, apologize and vow full candor in future disease outbreaks.
The disease, which emerged in southern China in late 2002, spread rapidly from south China to other cities and countries in 2003. Over 8,000 people were infected and 775 died.
In the latest incident, China's health ministry denied that SARS had resurfaced in Hebei after Hong Kong's health authorities asked them to ascertain the rumor, Hong Kong's Department of Health said last Thursday.
Several people were hospitalized in a Baoding hospital for a common cold virus called an adenovirus, China's health ministry said last Saturday, adding that it had ruled out SARS and avian flu as the cause.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee, Additional reporting by Tan Ee Lyn in Hong Kong; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It may sound dragonian and harsh but the reality and experience of actual SAR causulties can never be underestimated. This tantamounts to worse terrorist¡¯s threats on urban space. He deserves punishment for webbing his e-page.
Feb 27, 20129:33pm EST--
It may sound dragonian and harsh but the reality and experience of actual SAR causulties can never be underestimated. This tantamounts to worse terrorist¡¯s threats on urban space. He deserves punishment for webbing his e-page.
Feb 27, 20129:33pm EST--
