EU free-trade states urge quick resolution of Chinese solar dispute
2013-06-14 09:00:00.0
(Reuters) - A group of free-trading northern European nations urged the EU's trade chief on Friday to contain a growing dispute with China or risk a negative spiral that could choke exports.
Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands said EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht needed to find a diplomatic solution with Beijing to avoid a tit-for-tat trade war, after Brussels imposed tariffs on Chinese solar panels and Beijing retaliated with an investigation into European wine.
"It is not the right way to go. When the one side begins to close up, the other continues. And then we have a negative spiral that doesn't stimulate trade," Swedish Trade Minister Ewa Bjorling told reporters at the start of a meeting with De Gucht and fellow EU ministers in Luxembourg.
Britain and Ireland will also press De Gucht on Friday on the issue, their diplomats said.
De Gucht, who handles trade issues for the European Union's 27 countries, went ahead with sanctions against Chinese solar panels on June 6, despite opposition from 18 of the bloc's governments, who fear retaliation from Beijing.
The European Commission, the EU executive, accuses Beijing of dumping billions of euros of solar panels at below the cost of production, unfairly winning 80 percent of the EU market.
However, De Gucht softened his earlier plan to levy punitive tariffs averaging 47 percent immediately, and went ahead with tariffs at 11.8 percent for two months, leaving a window for Brussels and Beijing to reach a negotiated solution.
Still, China responded with a decision to investigate accusations of dumping of EU wine, an apparent attempt to target France and Italy, the two countries most in favor of European tariffs on Chinese solar panels.
"There is still time to resolve this if the Commission and the Chinese move forward on the (solar) issue," Dutch Trade Minister Lilianne Ploumen told Reuters.
EU ministers will discuss the issue over lunch in Luxembourg, and Denmark said it would make it clear it doubted if there was evidence of illegal Chinese trade subsidies.
"We're very much against using trade defense mechanisms unless we can really show there is evidence that they are using subsidies, and we cannot do that," said Danish Trade Minister Pia Olsen Dyhr.
(Writing by Robin Emmott; Editing by Jon Boyle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The biggest losers in the global economy want the biggest winner in the global economy to follow the policies of the losers. How will that help anyone? When you are losing, you study the game played by the winner, determine how he is doing it, determine how to do it better, and beat him at his own game. That is how the human race advances. In Texas, ¡°cheater, cheater, cheater¡± is what the loser says to the winner. Some people want the West to lose and want China to win, but others want to study the competition, find better strategies, and compete to win. Ultimately, that way lets everybody win better lives in the end.
Jun 14, 20133:26pm EDT--
There is no way to beat China when it comes to manufacturing anything. Unless you are willing to work for less than 172 ¨C 190 dollars a month, work 60+ hours a week, and also live in a dorm at your job, then China will always be able to produce everything much much cheaper than the rest of the idustrialized world. These companies like GE and others are stupid enough to make deals with China to manufacture products like this over there so they can have access to their 1+ billion people. Then they seem shocked when a state supported company in China they partnered with then starts manufacturing the same products in their own factories and starts taking their markets away from them all over the world because China can afford to dump the much cheaper manufactured goods around the world. So I would like for you to explain to me how anyone is supposed to beat China at their own game?
Jun 14, 201311:41pm EDT--
