China rebukes Iran for France, UK oil ban
2012-02-20 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China rebuked Iran on Monday for stopping oil sales to British and French companies at the weekend, calling for renewed efforts at dialogue over an escalating stand-off over Tehran's controversial nuclear program.
China has repeatedly called for talks over Tehran's efforts to enrich its own uranium, which Western countries suspect is aimed at obtaining nuclear weapons. Iran has said the enrichment is for power generation.
"We have consistently upheld dialogue and negotiation as the way to resolve disputes between countries, and do not approve of exerting pressure or using confrontation to resolve issues," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said when asked about Iran's ban on oil sales to British and French firms.
China "hopes all sides can get back onto the correct path of dialogue as soon as possible," Hong told a daily news briefing.
China is one of the largest users of Iranian oil, buying around 20 percent of total exports.
The European Union enraged Tehran last month when it decided to impose a boycott on its oil from July 1. Iran, the world's fifth-largest oil exporter, responded by threatening to close the Strait of Hormuz, the main Gulf oil shipping lane.
On Sunday, its oil ministry went a step further, announcing Iran has now stopped selling oil to French and British companies, a move which will however have little or no impact on supplies reaching France or Britain.
"Attacking Iran militarily would only worsen the confrontation and lead to further upheaval in the region," he said.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Sabrina Mao; Editing by Ed Lane)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
How did China ¡®rebuke¡¯ Iran? You must be a little confused as to the meaning of rebuke reuters¡­ When you say something you should have a quote, some evidence, anything, to actually support it maybe. This is one of the sneakiest, sleaziest articles I¡¯ve seen in a while.. trying to turn his utterly general statement as being directed at Iran. Is it your first day or something Benny boy??
Feb 20, 20126:11am EST--
As I¡¯m trying to raise awareness to this subject, make sure to follow and share your thoughts by tweeting to me #nuclearpeace or #nuclearwar
As I¡¯m trying to raise awareness to this subject, make sure to follow and share your thoughts by tweeting to me #nuclearpeace or #nuclearwar
Why is Iran being repeatedly threatened with sanctions?
The only people who know for sure whether Iran is dangerous or not are its leaders, but it is not easy to understand what they believe, know and intend. This is a compilation I made of quotations that left me rather uneasy. http://youtu.be/tb13psZGPuw Help me share this!
Feb 20, 20126:28am EST--
Feb 20, 20121:05pm EST--
