China's latest manned space mission to launch this month
2013-06-03 17:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China will launch its next manned rocket in the middle of this month, carrying three astronauts to an experimental space module, state media said on Monday, the latest stage of an ambitious plan to build a space station.
The Shenzhou 10 space ship and its rocket had already been moved to the launch area at a remote site in the Gobi desert, the official Xinhua news agency reported.
Once in orbit, the Shenzhou 10 will link up with the Tiangong (Heavenly Palace) 1 module, which was moved into the correct orbiting position last month.
Rendezvous and docking exercises between the two vessels are an important hurdle in China's efforts to acquire the technological and logistical skills to run a full space lab that can house astronauts for long periods.
China is still far from catching up with the established space superpowers, the United States and Russia. The Tiangong 1 is a trial module, not the building block of a space station.
But this summer's mission will be the latest show of China's growing prowess in space and comes while budget restraints and shifting priorities have held back U.S. manned space launches.
It will be China's fifth manned space mission since 2003 when astronaut Yang Liwei became the country's first person in orbit.
China also plans an unmanned moon landing and deployment of a moon rover. Scientists have raised the possibility of sending a man to the moon, but not before 2020.
While Beijing insists its space program is for peaceful purposes, a Pentagon report last month highlighted China's increasing space capabilities and said Beijing was pursuing a variety of activities aimed at preventing its adversaries from using space-based assets during a crisis.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China plans to build a space station, and the current launch will conduct further tests of manned docking procedures. Unmanned and manned docking with the module was conducted successfully in earlier launches. In addition, the Jiuquan Space Center and surrounding areas look less like desert with each day. China uses land reclamation and irrigation to transform deserts into pastures and forests.
Jun 04, 20131:22pm EDT--
Xinhua points out that their astronauts will practice docking, perform scientific experiments, and teach lessons to students in China from the Tiangong 1 module. It would be interesting to sit in a classroom and watch some of the students taking notes. This will inspire more Chinese to major in science when 50% already major in the sciences. America should consider how it will compete when only 13% of American students major in the sciences.
Jun 04, 20133:58pm EDT--
You want to know why science is not a popular study for Americans? It is because you can study subject matter much easier and profitable aka economics and work in high finance robbing society legally
Jun 04, 201312:15am EDT--
