Islamic al-Azhar calls for bold Arab action on Syria
2012-02-14 13:14:00.0
(Reuters) - The head of Egypt's influential seat of Islamic learning, al-Azhar, called on Tuesday for bold Arab action to stop the Syrian government's "hellish killing machine" while scolding China and Russia for blocking a peace plan in the U.N. Security Council.
Grand Imam Ahmed el-Tayeb, head of the Cairo-based institution, also urged Syrian protesters fighting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to refrain from turning their struggle into an armed confrontation, two days after Arab League diplomats suggested arming opposition forces could be an option.
"The situation now, brothers, no longer needs statements to condemn and criticize, but it is in desperate need of urgent, serious, and bold action from the Arabs," Tayeb added, without giving details of what kind of action he sought.
Assad, whose Alawite-minority family has ruled the mainly Sunni Muslim Syria for 42 years, is trying to stamp out pro-democracy demonstrations and stop insurgent raids across Syria with what the U.N. rights chief described as indiscriminate attacks and shoot-to-kill orders.
"The international conscience must be awoken in China and Russia," Tayeb said in a statement he read out by telephone to Egyptian state television.
Observers and its own officials say it is seeking to develop a more active political role to make up for the lost time during ousted Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's three-decades in power when the body kept close to the authorities.
"Oh you in Syria standing on solid ground, be patient, be firm and continue on your path with the blessings of God and do not be drawn into violence or armed confrontation in this miserable, despicable struggle," he said.
"But do defend yourself, your property, your women and your children and know that anyone killed unjustly is a martyr."
Tayeb called on army officers in the Syrian government's forces to refuse orders to kill protesters, saying "remember that the mission of armies is to protect people and nations, not oppress."
He also said the body would be willing to go to Syria to end the dispute, if "the path was opened for it."
While the uprising initially involved rallies by civilians, armed insurrection by the Free Syrian Army, made up largely of army defectors, is increasingly coming into play.
(Writing by Dina Zayed; Editing by Tom Perry and Alison Williams)
