China to keep investing in euro zone debt: China central bank
2012-02-15 11:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China will continue to invest in euro zone government debt and it remains confident in the euro, the country's central bank governor said on Wednesday, while calling on Europeans to produce more attractive investment products for China.
Zhou Xiaochuan admitted that China and other emerging nations like Brazil, Russia or India were waiting for the right time to help the bloc, after a European Union state visit was once again met with encouraging words but no concrete public commitments on fresh funding from China.
"We also hope that the euro zone and EU can innovate their mechanisms to offer new products that are more helpful for Sino-Europe cooperation," he said.
The central bank governor reiterated previous comments from Premier Wen Jiabao that China was ready to play a bigger role in solving Europe's debt problems, noting China had not cut its reserves exposure to the euro zone.
"At the G20, our state leaders promised European leaders that, amid the global financial crisis and the Europe sovereign debt crisis, China will not cut the proportion of euro exposure" in its reserves, Zhou said in a speech at the University of International Business and Economics in Beijing.
"Some people had cast doubt or suspicion over the currency, but for the People's Bank of China, we have always been confident in the euro and its future," he added.
Although Zhou's comments largely underlined China's established stance, the remarks helped push the euro higher and were cited in markets for supporting stocks buying in Asia.
Vice Finance Minister Zhu Guangyao, who is visiting the United States with leader-in-waiting Xi Jinping, also sought to reassure Europe of China's support.
"China's commercial investment in Europe has continued, under the principles of safety, liquidity and appropriate returns," he said.
"We have not adjusted out investment structure. That, it should be said, has been China offering its true trust and support at a crucial moment in European countries addressing their sovereign debt problems," he said.
Any bigger role in solving the debt crisis would be via the International Monetary Fund and the European Financial Stability Fund, or EFSF, Zhou said, echoing Wen's comments.
"We strongly believe European countries can work together to handle the challenges. They are able to solve the sovereign debt crisis," Zhou said.
"The PBOC firmly supports the ECB's recent measures to address the difficulties."
Chinese President Hu Jintao, meeting Van Rompuy and Barroso in the Great Hall of the People, repeated that China was confident Europe could overcome its difficulties, state radio reported.
"China is paying close attention, and supports the series of steps taken by the EU, the IMF and European Central Bank to deal with the debt crisis, and will continue to increase policy communication and coordination with the EU," it paraphrased Hu as saying.
China, with $3.2 trillion worth foreign exchange reserves at hand, is seen as having the potential financial firepower to bail out some European governments.
Analysts estimate that about a quarter of China's foreign reserves are held in euro-denominated assets.
Beijing has been consistently reluctant to make firm financial commitments, although it has repeatedly said it supports a stable euro.
The head of China's sovereign wealth fund said on Monday that hard assets are more attractive than European government bonds.
Chinese leaders have expressed alarm at protests and strikes sweeping Europe, while lauding a fiscal agreement to be signed in March that will build up a massive fund to backstop European debt.
"We believe the fiscal agreement will mark a big step toward closer economic and fiscal union, which will significantly boost EU member countries' fiscal sustainability and improve the sovereign debt conditions," Zhou said.
China and other countries beyond the 17-country euro bloc want to see its members stump up more money before they commit additional resources to the IMF, which had requested an additional 500 billion euros in funding.
The European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a 500-billion-euro permanent bailout fund that is due to be operational in July, is expected to replace the EFSF, a temporary fund, which has been used to bail out Ireland, Portugal and will help in the second Greek package.
Detailed policies and reforms to be launched by Europe can serve as "platforms" for China and other BRICS countries to help Europe, Zhou said.
(Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard, and Chris Buckley in Washington; Writing by Lucy Hornby and Zhou Xin)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Continues to invest? Bah Bah What a bunch of EU! Rhymes with¡­
Continues to invest? Bah Bah What a bunch of EU! Rhymes with¡­
Yep and boy does it smell. Communist China. A facade. Fake everything and this includes money. Invest without being made to adhere to EU rules? Then smack Greece for some obscure made up EU for the EU.
Add the IMF, and the International Accounting Standards Organization which is run by a Foundation though the two are not connected. Add to this the three companies that are over all of the advertising and media on the planet. The UN and it¡¯s milineum goals. And, the US learned it was ¡°behind¡± in compliance with global standards and must catch up. Cuts and Budget and a ruse. We have plenty of money. But, to take away any access to food, health care, employment, money, shelter for the majority of citizens here in the US and around the globe in the name of ¡°Financial Crisis¡± is deceit and what I consider a crime against humanity.
And the article, China¡¯s investment and all the concerns over their currency. It¡¯s downright toxic. Bottom line. The IMF and their required 500 billion Euro for ESM. And, another fund and another and ¡­
China hopes they can see this and that and makes me wanna go.. Hey China! They are just words and nothing more. Because China has Thought Reform and they are not capable of anything but repeating key phrases and words. The EU knows this yet.. This is another way that banks and the Market can remain insular without depending on ¡°unemployment¡± or ¡°consumers¡± at least here in the US that is.
Oh, I almost forgot. All the internet sites are completely run by autobots driven by algorhythms. Including this one. We pay to access everything that is not human. Every day. What we see is not what is.
Feb 15, 20124:41am EST--
With so many imbalances within their own economy, it¡¯s foolish (but not surprising coming from a central banker) that they would ¡®invest¡¯ in the EU as it currently stands.
Feb 15, 20121:11pm EST--
China maintains its EU bond holdings at current levels. Chinese banks invest in EU companies to bring growth, profits, jobs, and recovery in the practical sense. Bigger firewalls made of cash in bank vaults will disappear to bank operations and finance charges without plans for lending and growth.
Feb 15, 20121:40pm EST--
