China swats away trouble before Xi's U.S. trip
2012-02-09 03:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China swatted away friction over Syria on Thursday to lay out an optimistic view of ties with the United States in the next decade when Vice President Xi Jinping, who visits the White House next week, is likely to lead the rising Asian power.
The U.S. visit will be an international rite of passage for Xi, who is virtually sure to succeed Hu Jintao as Communist Party chief late this year and as state president in early 2013.
In a briefing to set the tone for Xi's visit, Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai argued that disputes over trade and international crises, most recently Syria, need not augur a constantly troubled relationship with the United States.
"I am optimistic about the overall development of relations between the two countries in the next decade," Cui told reporters, while stressing that both sides needed to work on cooperation.
"Of course, if we deviate from this direction, if we forget the experiences accumulated over the past 40 years, there will be high risks -- risks for China and the United States and for the whole world. This is something we need to avoid."
Ties between Beijing and Washington have been troubled by disputes over trade, China's policy on its yuan currency, its military intentions, and how to tackle North Korea's and Iran's nuclear ambitions.
This year, the strains could be complicated by China's Communist Party leadership succession and a U.S. presidential race.
Most recently, the Obama administration condemned China for joining Russia and vetoing a proposed U.N. Security Council resolution that Western powers said was intended to counter spiraling violence in Syria.
But Cui, whose portfolio covers steering relations with Washington, played down the potential for ructions in Washington over Syria while also defending the veto decision.
"Mutual accusations have little value and don't solve problems," Cui told the briefing.
"China believes that in international relations one should not rashly use force or the threat or force, and one shouldn't use external intervention to achieve regime change in another country," he said.
"When necessary, China will of course use its veto; when China has to show its hand, China will certainly show its hand. Nobody should have any illusions about that," he said.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman later said a Syrian opposition delegation had visited China this week and met Vice Foreign Minister Zhai Jun, signaling Chinese desire to show some involvement in ending the bloodshed.
Cui also brushed aside potentially embarrassing attention on an incident in which a prominent official from the southwest city of Chongqing visited a U.S. consulate in nearby Chengdu, fanning online rumors in China that the official may have sought refuge at the consulate.
The U.S. State Department confirmed that the official, Wang Lijun, visited the consulate this week, but said it was a "scheduled meeting" and Wang left on his own accord.
Cui called it an "isolated incident," and said the matter had been "smoothly resolved." He did not elaborate.
China's president-in-waiting, Xi, will visit Washington from next Tuesday, later going to the farming state of Iowa where he stayed briefly in 1985 and then to Los Angeles. In Iowa, Xi will be reunited with a family he stayed with there.
China has not formally anointed Xi (pronounced "shee") as its next top leader, but his growing prominence indicates he is virtually certain to replace Hu as party chief and later as president.
China wants to reach out beyond Washington to bring its message of mutual cooperate to the American public, said Cui. He denied China felt unwelcome in the U.S. capital.
"I studied in Washington and don't think there's anything bad about it," said Cui, who studied there at School of Advanced International Studies of Johns Hopkins University.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
He will be given a polite visit but he should not expect anything more given the strength of pro-Syrian peoples and anti-Syrian government sentiment in the U. S. President Obama will not want to be seen as too friendly given the timing of the visit. It would have been better if China had postponed the trip. China in general gives the impression of being a marginally esponsive dictatorship, except for censorship, that prefers incentives to punishments, much like the Arab monarchs not in trouble with their citizens, but there could be public protests against not only China¡¯s veto but over the Communist Party control of China and especially Tibet and claims of sovereignity over far more liked Taiwan that would be smaller if China had postponed the trip. These days with video connections over the Internet it is even hard to see what justifies a trip. My oldest son even did a 1-1/2 hour interview over Skype.
Feb 09, 20124:21am EST--
Isn¡¯t it time that the Veto power enjoyed by the permanent members of the UN Security Council is ended? Yes, the big five did save the world from Nazi and Japanese domination. But that was over 65 years ago and surely the rest of the world are no longer indebted as they were and are now more ¡®grown up¡¯! One way of still paying some homage to the big five is to have two votes in Security Council, both to be won by absolute majorities (namely,the abstainers will hold some leverage): one amongst the whole Security Council and the second amongst the permanent members. The advantage of this change is that if, say, Russia and China did not have vetoes, they would have had to go around persuading one of the US, Britain and France to side with them, rather than sit on their hands knowing they could veto any motion without necessarily giving any reason. So, in the case of Syria: both the full SC and the Perm members would have had absolute majorities and hence the motion would have carried.
Feb 09, 201211:14am EST--
