China growth could halve if Europe crisis worsens: IMF
2012-02-06 08:33:00.0
(Reuters) - China's annual economic growth could be cut nearly in half this year if Europe's debt crisis tips the world economy into a recession, putting pressure on Beijing to unveil "significant" fiscal stimulus, the International Monetary Fund said.
The Fund outlined its central scenario for China's 2012 growth outlook in its global outlook in January, cutting its forecast for 2012 growth from 9 percent to 8.2 percent.
The China Economic Outlook published on Monday showed that under the IMF's "downside" forecast for the global economy, China's growth rate may be cut by around 4 percentage points from the fund's current forecast of 8.2 percent in 2012.
"In the unfortunate event such a downside scenario becomes reality, China should respond with a significant fiscal package, executed through central and local government budgets," it said.
Stimulative measures could include cuts in consumption taxes, subsidies for consumers, corporate incentives to expand investment, fiscal support for smaller firms and more spending on low-cost housing social safety nets, the fund said.
Such fiscal stimulus, adding up to 3 percent of GDP, would help mitigate declines in economic output, it said.
A Reuters poll in January showed China's economic growth is likely to moderate to 8.4 percent from 2011's 9.2 percent as demand at home and abroad slackens.
Falling inflation will enable the People's Bank of China to fine-tune policy to support growth through its open market operations in the coming weeks, the IMF said. It said the central bank could opt to cut banks' reserve requirement ratio again if capital inflows remain subdued.
(Reporting by Kevin Yao; editing by Patrick Graham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I thinks what happens to China when the world economy slips back into recession isn¡¯t a matter that most of the rest of the world cares about. Except maybe North Korea.
Feb 06, 201210:59am EST--
The IMF lies to get more money from China for the IMF. Mistaken IMF attempts to build firewalls without growth doom the EU. The IMF makes false, empty threats to coerce what it cannot gain with intelligence. China invests in businesses in the EU for growth, but the EU and IMF stack cash in vaults. Euro notes can¡¯t have sex with other euro notes to create more euro notes, but IMF and EU leaders are stupid. Small business plans and loans are needed. China increases its trade with countries outside of the EU, implements its 12th Five Year Plan for growth in its central and western provinces, and will grow 8% to 9% despite reduced trade with the EU.
Feb 06, 201212:36pm EST--
Feb 06, 20122:11pm EST--
