Arab League to pursue Syria efforts after U.N. setback
2012-02-05 08:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Arab states will not stop their efforts to resolve the Syrian crisis even though their bid to secure U.N. backing was blocked by Russia and China, the Arab League's secretary-general said in a statement obtained by Reuters on Sunday.
Nabil Elaraby also said the Russian and Chinese veto "does not negate that there is clear international support for the resolutions of the Arab League," which had sought U.N. Security Council backing for a decision that called for President Bashar al-Assad to step aside so talks with the opposition could start.
Elaraby and Qatar's prime minister, whose country heads the League committee following the Syrian crisis, had briefed members of the council on the plan before the vote.
"The Arab League will continue efforts with the Syrian government and opposition, and coordinating with all sides related to the Syrian issue, in order to realize the higher objectives which the Arab League is working towards," Elaraby's statement said.
It cited those goals as ending all acts of violence and killing, protecting unarmed citizens and finding a political solution to enable reforms that protect Syria's unity "and avoids any ... foreign military intervention."
Foreign ministers would meet on February 11 to discuss the Syrian crisis and will "take the appropriate decisions to deal with these developments including presenting the issue another time to the Security Council," the statement said.
(Reporting by Ayman Samir; Writing by Edmund Blair; Editing by Tim Pearce)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The position of the Arab League, in particular the handful of countries making up the Syrian Committee, had lost, quite a while ago, the peaceful and neutral attitude they continue to claim. Qatar has been financing the Muslim Brothers ¡®National Council¡¯ and the ¡®Free Syrian Army¡¯ since September, 2011, while Saudi Arabia, which moved into the forefront from outside the Syrian Committee, was the first country to undermine the League¡¯s Observers mission, by withdrawing the Saudi team, following its revelation of facts on the ground that contradicted claims made by the Syrian Committee. Few doubted that the Arab League went to the UN Security Council with the sole aim of passing a resolution that would ultimately permit military intervention in Syria, irrespective of the incongruous statements to the country ¨C mostly made for the benefits of Russia and China. Today, we learn that the Security Council Resolution that failed does contain a reference to Section 42, which permits armed intervention in Syria! It is disingenuous, therefore, for Mr Al-Araby to express concern for the Syrian people¡¯s fate, when Qatar and Saudi Arabia were expecting him to arrange for bombers to level Syria, and kill thousands of Syrians to¡­ enable the Muslim Brothers of taking over in Syria, as well as in Libya, Tunis, Morocco and indeed, Egypt!
Feb 05, 201212:09pm EST--
The position of the Arab League, in particular the handful of countries making up the Syrian Committee, had lost, quite a while ago, the peaceful and neutral attitude they continue to claim. Qatar has been financing the Muslim Brothers ¡®National Council¡¯ and the ¡®Free Syrian Army¡¯ since September, 2011, while Saudi Arabia, which moved into the forefront from outside the Syrian Committee, was the first country to undermine the League¡¯s Observers mission, by withdrawing the Saudi team, following its revelation of facts on the ground that contradicted claims made by the Syrian Committee. Few doubted that the Arab League went to the UN Security Council with the sole aim of passing a resolution that would ultimately permit military intervention in Syria, irrespective of the incongruous statements to the country ¨C mostly made for the benefits of Russia and China. Today, we learn that the Security Council Resolution that failed does contain a reference to Section 42, which permits armed intervention in Syria! It is disingenuous, therefore, for Mr Al-Araby to express concern for the Syrian people¡¯s fate, when Qatar and Saudi Arabia were expecting him to arrange for bombers to level Syria, and kill thousands of Syrians to¡­ enable the Muslim Brothers of taking over in Syria, as well as in Libya, Tunis, Morocco and indeed, Egypt!
Feb 05, 201212:09pm EST--
