France, partners planning Syria crisis group: Sarkozy
2012-02-04 16:48:00.0
France, partners planning Syria crisis group: Sarkozy | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
France, partners planning Syria crisis group: Sarkozy
Sat, Feb 4 2012
Sat, Feb 4 2012
Fri, Feb 3 2012
Fri, Feb 3 2012
Thu, Feb 2 2012
Sat  EST
France and Britain had crafted the resolution, which condemned the Syrian government's violent crackdown on 11 months of protests and backed an Arab League peace plan that would see President Bashar al-Assad give up power.
Sarkozy, speaking after his Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said the twin veto had paralysed the international community, accused Moscow and Beijing of "encouraging the (Syrian) regime to continue with its cruel policies without an end.
"France is not giving up," Sarkozy said in a statement, saying France was in touch with Arab and European partners to create a "Friends of the Syrian People Group" that would marshal international support to implement the Arab League plan.
Last year he set up a Libya contact group to create a political roadmap backed by international players as part of efforts to oust Muammar Gaddafi, although Western powers have ruled out a Libya-style military intervention in Syria.
Russia and China joined forces in a double veto to quash the resolution despite the other 13 council members voting in favor of the measure, which would have said that the council "fully supports" the Arab League plan.
Juppe, who had earlier warned the veto-wielding countries, said everything had been done to accommodate them.
"This (veto) paralyses the international community," Juppe said on France 2 television. "We could not accept equating a regime which is capable of crimes against humanity with opponents who are often fighting unarmed."
The resolution had been watered down to try to win Moscow's backing by excluding any mention of an arms embargo, sanctions, the departure of Assad or possible military action.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov had given some hope saying the draft resolution was "not hopeless," but warned of a "scandal" if it was voted in its current version.
"Instead of stopping its policy of repression, the Syrian authorities have jumped a new hurdle in its savagery: the massacre in Homs is a crime against humanity and those responsible will have to answer for it," Juppe said.
Russia had said its main objection was that the draft resolution set down measures to be taken against Assad's government, but not against armed groups who it said were manipulating peaceful protesters.
France has consistently said it could not accept a resolution that blamed equally both sides for the violence, which French officials estimate has left 6,000 people dead.
France's U.N. ambassador said the Syrian people would not be left to a tragic fate and that Paris would work with the European Union to impose new sanctions on Damascus.
"The father killed en masse, the son is doing the same," Gerard Araud said, recalling a 1982 massacre in the Syrian city of Hama carried out by the forces of Assad's father Hafez al-Assad, then president, to crush an Islamist uprising.
About 20 supporters of the Syrian president were confronted by about 50 people against the government, according to a Reuters witness. Nobody was injured, but the police stepped in to make some arrests.
(Additional reporting by Claire Watson; Editing by Alison Williams)
