Philippines studying U.S. offer to deploy spy planes
2012-01-27 05:44:00.0
(Reuters) - The Philippines is considering a U.S. proposal to deploy surveillance aircraft on a temporary, rotating basis to enhance its ability to guard disputed areas in the South China Sea, the Philippine defense minister said on Friday.
Ongoing talks in Washington on security ties between the two allies include plans to deploy more littoral combat ships and spy aircraft, said Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin.
An expanded U.S. military presence in the region should raise the Philippines' capability to deter border intrusions, he said.
"I would rather look at it from the positive point of view that there would be stability in the region, that we would have enough deterrent," Gazmin told reporters.
"Without a deterrent force, we can be easily pushed around, our territories will be violated. Now that we have a good neighbor on the block, we can no longer be bullied," he said, referring to the United States.
The talks with the Philippines, a U.S. ally which voted to remove huge American naval and air bases 20 years ago, follow Washington's announcement of plans to set up a Marine base in northern Australia and possibly station warships in Singapore.
China claims the entire sea, while the Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia, Vietnam and Taiwan all have claims to parts of the area believed to have rich deposits of oil and gas.
Gazmin said there would be more exercises with U.S. forces and a rotating presence through port visits for exercises, repairs and resupply.
Since 2002, about 600 U.S. commandos have been stationed in the south of the Philippines to help train and advise Philippine
"They say that they will not bring back the U.S. bases but the proposal aims for virtual basing just the same," Renato Reyes, secretary-general of left-wing Bayan (Nation) group, said in a statement.
In 1998, the Philippines and the United States signed a Visiting Forces Agreement that allows U.S. troops to visit for exercises and rest and recreation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
At the moment Chinese are more assertive than 10 yrs back.. they are going after every country and trying to do land grab and parts of seas.. No body wants a big communist bully in the backyard.. I would live with non-violent Democractic India than a crazy minded communist party as a neighbour¡­ anyday.. I think vietnam, Phill and Malaysia too should do that. At the moment there are talks between Thai and India about cooperation on many fronts; lets get neighbours involved too and sout out Thai-Combodia issue ¨C lets take Indias help to resolve it ¨C both nation respects India.. Lets get SKorea, Japan, Aus, Indiea and the US all together tied up in military alliance¡­ atleast they dnt have any tug-of-war for any things esp terrotorial claims..
Chinese make issues of anything to prove a point and then make a piece of land as disputed; once its identified as disputed its waiting like a snake to strike in with force¡­ They invaded Tibet and now trying to block Taiwan too¡­
Jan 27, 20127:04am EST--
