Merkel to urge China to cut Iran oil imports: source
2012-01-31 06:21:00.0
(Reuters) - German Chancellor Angela Merkel will use a planned visit to China this week to encourage Beijing to reduce its imports of Iranian oil, a German government source said on Tuesday.
Last week, the European Union agreed to ban from July 1 all imports of oil from Iran, OPEC's second largest producer, in a drive to pressure Tehran into reining in its nuclear activities.
"It is in German interests that China does not raise its imports (from Iran). It would be good if China would reduce its imports," the government source told a news briefing ahead of Merkel's trip to China that begins on Wednesday.
China has criticized the EU ban, saying it is "not a constructive approach."
Beijing, the world's second largest crude consumer, has long opposed unilateral sanctions that target Iran's energy sector and has tried to reduce tensions that could threaten its oil supply.
The 27-nation EU delayed until July the entry into force of the oil import ban because it also wants to avoid penalizing the ailing economies of Italy, Greece and others for whom Iran is a major oil supplier.
(Reporting by Matthias Sobolewski and Gareth Jones; editing by James Jukwey)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Does anyone really think China will listen? They need the oil and they have their own rules¡­ I really think we are at the doorsteps of a world war and I am old, but it is not fair for our children and grandchildren. Please, I beg to those who are on the top¡­ your own future is the children who you would drive to end if you dont act like grown ups. ALL think they have the right to tell the other what and what not to do and there are no winners in this game¡­ cant you see it?
Jan 31, 20125:28am EST--
Hahah has she be drinking anything¡­.China won¡¯t really give a shite about this hahah
Jan 31, 20126:48am EST--
And as a result, Germany will be the first country Iran will cut off their oil.
Jan 31, 20127:44am EST--
