Senators renew push against China currency 'manipulation' despite yuan's rise
2013-06-05 18:20:00.0
(Reuters) - A bipartisan group of senators on Wednesday introduced legislation to give the United States new tools to fight currency manipulation, an effort aimed mainly at China, just days before President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping will meet for an informal retreat.
The bill is similar to legislation the House of Representatives and the Senate passed separately in 2010 and 2011, but which failed to win final congressional approval.
Obama and Xi are to meet at a luxury resort near Palm Springs this weekend for an informal meeting aimed at easing mistrust between the world's two biggest economies.
"The single biggest step we could take today to create jobs in American manufacturing is to tackle China's currency manipulation," Senator Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, said in statement.
"That's why we're making a renewed, bipartisan push to get this bill passed and on the President's desk, and send a strong message to the Chinese government that the rigged game must come to an end," Schumer said.
A bipartisan group of House lawmakers in March restarted an effort to pass the bill, which House Speaker John Boehner, the top U.S. Republican, has blocked on the grounds that it could start a trade war with China.
On Tuesday, the People's Bank of China fixed the yuan's mid-point versus the dollar at 6.1735, the highest since a landmark revaluation in 2005.
Still, the persistently high U.S. trade deficit with China set another record in 2012 at $315 billion, fueling a perception in Congress that China is an unfair trader.
The department has refused to take that step, even though many lawmakers believe it already has the authority to treat undervalued currencies as an illegal trade subsidy.
Another provision would require the Treasury Department to designate countries with "fundamentally misaligned currencies," including those that it is targeting for "priority action."
To the frustration of many lawmakers, the Treasury has not cited any country for currency manipulation for two decades.
"It is universally accepted that China and other major countries intentionally manipulate their currency to create an advantage for themselves in the marketplace" said Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican.
Other co-sponsors of the bill include Senators Jeff Sessions, a Alabama Republican, Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat, Debbie Stabenow, a Michigan Democrat, Richard Burr, a North Carolina Republican, Susan Collins, a Maine Republican, and Robert Casey, a Pennsylvania Democrat.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Dan Grebler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese yuan has increased 25.64% against the US dollar since 2005. In 2004, the US and China negotiated over their currencies and economies. Most economists predicted that China¡¯s GDP would pass that of the US in 2030, and China began raising the value of their currency in 2005 to reach parity with the dollar by 2030. The US Financial Scandal of 2008 to the present revealed massive criminal activities by large US financial institutions that raised doubts about the true worth of the US economy, and these doubts persist. The US Dot Bomb Bubble of 2000, the US Accounting Scandal of 2001-2003, and the US Financial Scandal of 2008 to the present revealed that US technology, corporate, and financial leaders were liars, thieves, and criminals. The failures of US regimes to prosecute the crimes did not make them disappear; they made the Bush and Obama regimes accessories after the fact to the crimes. The US economy remains in the hands of criminals; the Bush regime was a criminal organization; and the Obama regime is a criminal organization. China has continued to raise the value of its currency, but doubts remain about the true value of the US economy. This makes it difficult to know where China should place its currency with respect to the US dollar until thorough investigations, perhaps with criminal charges against US economic criminals, are pursued. Until the US cleans its own economy of criminals, China will pursue the best currency policy that it can determine for itself.
Jun 05, 20136:54pm EDT--
The U.S. Treasury Department stated in its report that China¡¯s currency has appreciated 40% (including inflation) against the U.S. dollar since 2005. In contrast, the Japanese Yen has depreciated by almost 20% in seven months against the U.S. dollar. If there¡¯s any currency manipulation, it is happening in Japan and not China.
Jun 05, 20138:33pm EDT--
Jun 06, 20139:46am EDT--
