Time running out for Iran diplomacy: Sarkozy
2012-01-20 09:00:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jan 20 2012
Wed, Jan 18 2012
Wed, Jan 18 2012
Tue, Jan 17 2012
Fri, Jan 13 2012
Fri  EST
France has led international efforts for tougher measures to increase pressure on Iran to halt its nuclear program since talks between Tehran and six world powers -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain, France and Germany -- stalled.
Western nations have voiced mounting concern that Israel could launch a preemptive attack against Tehran, deepening instability in an already volatile region.
"Time is running out. France will do everything to avoid a military intervention," Sarkozy told French ambassadors gathered in Paris. "A military intervention will not solve the problem, but it will unleash war and chaos in the Middle East."
Israel and the United States have refused to rule out military action while Iran continues enrichment operations which they say are aimed at seeking nuclear weapons. Israeli Defence Minister Ehud Barak said on Wednesday, however, that any decision about an Israeli assault on Iran was "very far off." [nL6E8CI0NH]
EU foreign ministers are expected to agree an oil embargo against Iran, the world's fifth largest exporter, and a freeze on the assets of its central bank at a meeting on Monday in Brussels.
Iran has threatened to close the Strait of Hormuz, used for a third of the world's seaborne oil trade, if Western moves to ban Iranian crude exports cripple its lifeblood energy sector.
Sarkozy urged Russia and China to back the tougher sanctions. The two emerging powers, which have also blocked efforts at the EU Security Council on Syria, have shown their unwillingness to back further oil sanctions on Iran, creating a rift in the international community.
"We need stronger, more decisive sanctions that stop the purchase of Iranian oil and freeze the assets of the central bank, and those who don't want that will be responsible for the risks of a military conflict," Sarkozy said.
"Help us guarantee peace in the world. We really need you," Sarkozy said, in a direct appeal to Moscow and Beijing.
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said during a visit to the region on Thursday that Beijing opposes any Iranian effort to acquire nuclear weapons but he defended his country's extensive oil trade with Tehran.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sarkozy is a madman whose mouth does not seem to be connected to his brain. Hopefully, he will be gone after the French presidential elections this spring so that we don¡¯t have to listen to his paranoid nonsense anymore.
Jan 20, 201212:26pm EST--
Thw world used to appreciate the independent diplomacy of France. But now, since Mr. Sarkozy run his office, France has since become a running dog of the US.
Jan 20, 201212:41pm EST--
And why should China listen to France ? France is lesser in size than the smallest province of China. Also, China is the world¡¯s second largest economy. Why should Russia listen to France ? Russia will be absolutely happy because of mouthwatering opportunity a middle east war will throw up. There will be a lifetime opportunity to hike Russian oil and gas prices to France by 10 (yes ten !) times. And be incredibly rich !! Then what ? You guessed it right extend Russia¡¯s rule over Europe !! This may seem fantasy now, but this is a real world where these are real possibilities !!
Jan 20, 20121:43pm EST--
