U.S. lawmaker may pursue limited China bill
2012-01-25 18:48:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jan 25 2012
Wed, Jan 25 2012
Fri, Jan 20 2012
Fri, Jan 20 2012
Sat, Jan 14 2012
Wed  EST
"I am willing to consider targeted legislation that ensures our countervailing duty laws can be used to protect U.S. employers and workers from unfairly subsidized imports from countries like China," House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp said in a statement.
A recent U.S. court ruling struck down the Commerce Department's ability to apply to countervailing duties to non-market economies, saying that Congress needed to change the law for the department to do that.
However, the prospect of the Republicans moving any China bill is likely to invite attempts by Democrats to attach a measure to address China's currency practices.
Last year, the Democratic-controlled Senate passed a bill to pressure China on its currency, which many lawmakers on both sides of the aisle say is undervalued and gives Chinese manufacturers an unfair price advantage.
But House Republican leaders have sat on the bill, which they said could start a damaging trade war.
Former President George W. Bush's administration, responding to pleas of domestic producers, changed longstanding policy to allow countervailing, or anti-subsidy, duties to be applied to goods from non-market economies.
Previously, the Commerce Department had taken the position it was too difficult to calculate subsidy levels in economies where the state plays a dominant role in setting prices.
However, U.S. industry groups persuaded the Bush administration that was no longer the case with China.
(Reporting By Doug Palmer; editing by Christopher Wilson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Interesting to watch economists, investors, politicians and public figures capable of walking on the world stage in Davos, today. Watched a discussion where the conclusion was that there was little chance of someone being stupid enough to try to start a trade war. They obviously haven¡¯t a clear picture of the reactionary idiots in Congress.
Jan 25, 20127:38pm EST--
