Sinopec to pay $1.1 billion for extra equity in APLNG
2012-01-22 21:13:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Sinopec will pay $1.1. billion to take an additional 10 percent interest in the $20 billion Australia Pacific LNG project, bringing the total equity it has in it to 25 percent, Australia's Origin Energy (
The $1.1 billion payment is based on a value of $110 million per one percent equity, as calculated in January 2011 and will be adjusted for any capital expenditures on the project since that time.
"The actual amount paid by Sinopec will be substantially more than $110 million as it will be adjusted for that accumulated capital expenditure," Origin managing director Grant King said in a conference call with reporters, adding that in total Sinopec's investment in APLNG will be over $3 billion.
Last week, Sinopec announced it was signing a 20-year binding agreement with APLNG to increase annual LNG purchases from 4.3 million tonnes to 7.6 million tonnes, starting in 2016.
The deal with Sinopec is the largest Australian LNG supply agreement to date, according to Origin Energy.
The Australia Pacific LNG project was on schedule and on budget, and it would make a final investment decision on its second train in the next few months, Origin said Monday.
"Both in respect to schedule and projected cost, the project remains on track," Origin's King said.
Origin will deliver LNG from its first train in mid-2015 and from its second train in 2016, King added.
(Reporting by Rebekah Kebede; Editing by Ed Davies)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The purchase will strengthen economic ties between Australia and China and benefit both countries. China¡¯s use of LNG reduces needs for coal, improving its air quality. Australia sells more products and helps its environment because air is global. Both countries gain economically, increase trade with each other, and have more wealth for trade with other countries, improving the global economic circle.
Jan 23, 20123:56pm EST--
