Obama officials back bill to hit China subsidies
2012-01-27 10:07:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama's administration is pressing Congress to restore an important weapon in the U.S. arsenal against subsidized imports from China by quickly passing legislation to undo a recent federal appellate court ruling.
"This matter is of the utmost urgency," U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk and Commerce Secretary John Bryson said in one of several letters they sent to members of Congress. It was dated January 18 and obtained by Reuters on Friday.
"Absent legislation, should the (court) decision become final, Commerce will be required to revoke all CVD orders and terminate all CVD proceedings involving non-market economies," the cabinet officials said.
That list includes "24 existing CVD orders on imports from China and Vietnam, as well as five pending investigations and two recently filed petitions," Bryson and Kirk said.
The ruling could require the Commerce Department to lift or deny duties on some $4.7 billion worth of subsidized imports, mostly from China, they said.
The December 19 court ruling originally was due to take effect shortly after Feb 2. However, the court this week gave the Commerce Department an extension until March 5.
On Wednesday, House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp said he was prepared to move quickly on a "narrowly targeted" bill to ensure the Commerce Department can impose countervailing duties on "non-market economies" like China and Vietnam.
(Reporting By Doug Palmer; Editing by Vicki Allen)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Why do we only tariff trade in goods? Almost all other nations tariff trade in services. Currently we are getting hit hard from India and China in services because of their manipulation. China and India are hitting us hard on all fronts and their advantage is largely because of cheating. My neighbor is Chinese and he spends half his time and China and half next door. He runs a team in a large software park in China ¨C where there are about 1000 ocmpanies each about 20-100 people in size. The government gives the facilities, and when they fly here to work onsite the Chinese government pays for their travel expenses! We can¡¯t ignore this. I can¡¯t compete with this type of subsidy ¨C if anything it is going to force those of us still in software out.
Jan 27, 201212:51pm EST--
Nothing could be more hypocritical than us accusing any other country of subsidies. Most recently just look at the single largest subsidy by ar in the history of the world ¨C our multi-TRILLION dollar subsidy to our entire financial sector which enables us to finance ALL other businesses throughout the nation at lower rates than anywhere else in the world. We¡¯re jealous they are successful and we need to find someone to blame and scapegoat. While their subsidies are much smaller than ours, they are very carefully targeted. We on the other hand have historically thrown ENORMOUS amounts of money at banks at low interest rates via the FED with no oversight, and expect the private sector to allocate all this money efficiently. We have preached this laissez-faire approach for decades. But it gets squandered and doesn¡¯t go where it needs to. Whose fault is that?
Jan 27, 20125:56pm EST--
Low interest by Fed is also kind of subsidery to thw WHOLE economy, isn¡¯t it. All these years I have come to the concludion that whenever the West, especially US, when they fall fall behind of anything, they will complain other countries are unfair. US never consider they are getting lazy and not competitive anymore. Everyone in US want to get a higher pay than their neighbor, want to have 2 chickens in every pot, 2 cars in every gargage. Where other countries content with 3 meals a day and a roof over their heads.
Jan 29, 20122:28pm EST--
