Obama plans new team to get tough on China trade
2012-01-25 08:41:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jan 25 2012
Tue, Jan 24 2012
Tue, Jan 24 2012
Mon, Jan 23 2012
Sun, Jan 22 2012
Wed, Jan 25 2012
Wed  EST
"I will go anywhere in the world to open new markets for American products. And I will not stand by when our competitors don't play by the rules," Obama said in his annual State of the Union speech.
Obama said his administration had already brought trade cases against China "at nearly twice the rate as the last administration ... But we need to do more. It's not right when another country lets our movies, music, and software be pirated. It's not fair when foreign manufacturers have a leg up on ours only because they're heavily subsidized."
Republicans vying to take on Obama in this year's presidential race have slammed his handling of China. Former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney has promised a tougher approach, begin with labeling China a currency manipulator.
The U.S. Trade Representative's office has filed five World Trade Organization cases against China since Obama took office in January 2009, compared to seven during the two terms of former President George W. Bush. China joined the WTO in December 2001.
In addition, the Commerce Department is currently investigating U.S. industry charges of unfair pricing practices by Chinese wind and solar energy equipment manufacturers.
Obama did not mention those cases, but urged Congress to pass tax credits to create more U.S. clean energy jobs.
"I will not cede the wind or solar or battery industry to China or Germany because we refuse to make the same commitment here," he said.
A business group representing U.S. companies that do business in China said it welcomed Obama's push to open China's markets to more U.S. exports.
"Direct negotiation with China is the best first approach to dealing with commercial problems American companies have with China. But we also can use other sound legal tools - such as anti-dumping investigations and WTO cases," said John Frisbie, president of the U.S.-China Business Council.
Another group that represents both labor and domestic manufacturers that compete with China also welcomed the initiative, but urged lawmakers to go further.
Congress should pass "a bipartisan bill to stop China's currency manipulation," said Scott Paul, president of the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
Last month, a top U.S. trade official said China continued to fall short on many of its WTO promises including barriers to its agricultural markets, weak intellectual property rights protection, discriminatory industrial policies and barriers in services.
Obama, in his speech to Congress, promised to increase border inspections to stop counterfeit name-brand goods and other pirated or unsafe products from getting into the United States.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce complains the worldwide trade in fake goods, many of which come from China, costs the United States hundreds of thousands of good-paying jobs.
He also appeared to make a subtle pitch for lawmakers to approve "permanent normal trade relations" with Russia in order to ensure that U.S. companies benefit from the market-opening benefits of Moscow's expected accession to the WTO.
"This Congress should make sure that no foreign company has an advantage over American manufacturing when it comes to accessing finance or new markets like Russia. Our workers are the most productive on Earth, and if the playing field is level, I promise you - America will always win," Obama said.
(Reporting By Doug Palmer; Editing by Eric Walsh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Thank you Mr. Obama for not mentioning our historically low interest rates for more than a decade, our 2000 billion dollar TARP et al subsidy basically to our entire economy, and that foreigners have been subsidizing us for decades by buying our low-yielding Treasuries due to our strong-dollar policy. And thank you for not mentioning that despite these subsidies we still have difficulties because we squander things. And thank you for making us feel good by saying we can compete and we are the most productive people on Earth. Never mind that we might not be the most productive per unit dollar spent on worker, or that if we are it might be due to technology and not necessarily because the worker herself is superior. Thank you for basically trashing the article below because after reading it I thought it had some good points but now after your speech I realize its FOS. www.nytimes.com/2012/01/22/business/apple-america-and-a-squeezed-middle-class.html?pagewanted=all
Jan 25, 20121:54am EST--
