Battle for China Gas heats up as SK Holdings boosts
2012-01-12 08:32:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Jan 10 2012
Tue, Jan 3 2012
Thu, Dec 22 2011
Tue, Dec 20 2011
Wed, Dec 14 2011
Thu  EST
) intensified on Thursday as South Korea's SK Holdings (
SK Holdings' move to boost its stake in China Gas to 12.24 percent and buy an additional $104 million worth of its shares is set to pressure ENN Energy Holdings Ltd (
) to sweeten their proposed offer, analysts said.
Buying China Gas will give the acquirer access to China's largest portfolio of natural gas projects. The company has piped gas operations in 151 cities and more than 100 compressed natural gas stations. Its gross profit in the six months ended September jumped 32 percent to HK$1.62 billion ($208 million).
ENN shares fell more than 8 percent on concerns the company's finances may come under strain if it had to increase the offer, while China Gas shares extended gains on the news.
"The existing shareholders are trying, basically, to make a quick buck on their existing shares of China Gas," said Kim-Chong Tan, an energy analyst with Yuanta Securities in Hong Kong.
"The question is whether ENN will up the price. Financially it's getting more and more stressful for ENN," Tan added.
As part of that plan, SK E&S has already acquired 8.1 million shares of China Gas at between HK$3.64-$3.69 each, the company said in a regulatory filing earlier this week, taking its stake to 7.75 percent. Another SK Group affiliate, SK Gas (
), separately holds 4.49 percent of China Gas.
The latest purchase takes SK Group member firms' collective holdings in China Gas to 12.24 percent, giving it significant influence in the fate of the first-ever unsolicited takeover battle for a Hong Kong-listed company.
"Sinopec is behind the deal. I don't think anyone wants to get in front of Sinopec," Tan said.
SK Holdings is a South Korean conglomerate, with business interests spanning across energy to telecom. SK Innovation runs the country's No.1 crude refiner and SK Telecom is the country's top mobile operator.
The latest purchases were made well above the indicative offer price of HK$3.50 each, clearly suggesting that SK Holdings does not intend to sell the shares in the Sinopec/ENN offer.
However, an SK Holdings spokeswoman flatly denied a South Korean media report that its city gas-providing unit SK E&S's stake purchase might be considered as a move toward a hostile takeover of the Chinese company.
"E&S has consistently increased its CGH stake since 2006. After the purchase, E&S will respect and follow the company's existing management and multiple strategic investors," the spokeswoman said, adding SK sees a lot of synergies via investment in China Gas.
China Gas shares rose to an intra-day high of HK$3.74, a premium of 6.9 percent to the offer price. It closed up 0.8 percent at HK$3.70.
ENN closed 8.1 percent down at HK$22.10, while Sinopec shares fell 1.3 percent. The benchmark Hong Kong share index
Last month, China Gas hired Macquarie Group Ltd (
The Sinopec/ENN consortium is in the process of securing regulatory and shareholder approvals before making a formal offer, a source familiar with the matter told Reuters.
), another significant shareholder in China Gas. Last month, Fortune said it would not accept the Sinopec/ENN offer.
(Writing by Denny Thomas; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Muralikumar Anantharaman)
