Analysis: China has multiple choices to avoid hard landing risk
2012-01-18 22:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Jan 17 2012
Tue, Jan 17 2012
Sun, Jan 15 2012
Thu, Jan 12 2012
Thu, Jan 12 2012
A worker installs a dragon decoration for the upcoming Chinese Lunar New Year in Wuhan, Hubei province, January 18, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Wed  EST
A record-breaking tax take expected to top 10 trillion yuan ($1.6 trillion) in 2011 gives Beijing fiscal scope to support growth and financial system liquidity, while monetary policy is perfectly poised for easing after a near two-year tightening cycle.
It adds up to China having every chance to steer its economy safely from its slowest quarter of growth in 2-1/2 years, and still avoid a hard landing that would reverberate globally.
"There are caveats, but compared to its counterparts, China has plenty of policy flexibility," Tim Condon, head of Asian economic research at ING in Singapore, told Reuters.
The release of some 1.2 trillion yuan of fiscal deposits in December signals how roomy China's policy pockets are.
That injection was the single biggest factor behind a jump in money supply and bank credit in December, according to analysts at China International Capital Corp, China's biggest investment bank.
Chinese banks extended 640.5 billion yuan in new loans in December, up from 562.2 billion yuan in November, while M2 accelerated to 13.6 percent from November's 12.7 percent.
The implications of China's fiscal strength are crucial for money markets. An outflow of government deposits from the balance sheet of the People's Bank of China (PBOC) can boost systemic liquidity far in excess of an RRR cut.
"It's getting increasingly important as the size is getting bigger," Xu Hong, an analyst with Daton Securities in northern Chinese city of Dalian told Reuters.
Government deposits fell 891 billion yuan in the last month of 2010, 954 billion yuan in December 2009, and 1,045 billion yuan in 2008, whereas a mere 350 billion yuan was estimated to have been injected into the system by the 50 basis point cut in RRR to 21 percent announced on Nov 30, 2011.
Economists polled recently by Reuters forecast a further 200 bps of RRR cuts to come in 2012, but the impact of that would far less than the 1.7 trillion yuan of injections implied if the government has turned an estimated 800 billion yuan surplus in 2011 into the 900 billion yuan deficit originally budgeted.
Released fiscal funds are a key factor underlying accommodative liquidity in the interbank market, according to Zhou Binglin, an analyst with Guosen Securities.
"That's possibly why fund supply is not too tight despite capital outflows for two consecutive months and the absence of central bank liquidity injection," he wrote in a client note.
China's foreign exchange reserves, the world's largest, fell $20.6 billion in the fourth quarter to $3.18 trillion as the trade surplus shrank and capital flows reversed.
That fall reinforced the views of many analysts and investors that a PBOC policy move was imminent, but a closer reading of fiscal deposit data would have been a better guide.
"It's a key fact to pay attention to, particularly at the end of a year, and it's role is becoming more visible," a bond trader in the interbank market, who declined to be identified, said.
China's surging tax flows are also changing credit dynamics at the local government level, with regional banks being cajoled into providing loans to pet projects in return for the promise of a share of soaring fiscal deposits.
A notice on the website of the Rugao government in China's eastern Jiangsu province said that the allocation of fiscal deposits would be linked to the credit offered by banks.
"Many small banks are in desperate need of deposits, and fiscal deposits are too big to miss, for which they have to make concessions," a regional banker in Zhejiang province said.
Twin bubbles in real estate and local government debt are still being battled by Beijing, and are arguably the only -- if significant -- policy constraint faced as the world's second-biggest economy faces another economic slowdown.
It's certainly a factor preventing the government using well-stocked fiscal coffers for outright economic pump-priming, or allowing explosive growth in still elevated leverage levels.
But relatively speaking, China has plenty of room to move.
"Every country has constraints. China was almost as unconstrained as it could have hoped for in 2008 when the crisis hit. The response to that has reduced the flexibility they have now, but they have far more than their counterparts in the West have," ING's Condon said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Since the world isn¡¯t sure of withstanding
Since the world isn¡¯t sure of withstanding
A slowdown in China¡¯s expanding,
With predicting a hard or soft landing. The ¡°Hard¡± guys are finding it troubling
That the property market is bubbling,
And China¡¯s growth race,
Of construction, would have to be doubling. Say the ¡°Softies¡±: there isn¡¯t just one way
Of averting a slump the yuan way;
While liquidity¡¯s free,
There¡¯s a gentle descent to the runway. http://www.limericksecon.com
Jan 19, 20121:06am EST--
Policy flexibility? Oh yes. ¡±Laws¡± that govern our finances don¡¯t govern China¡¯s, for many reasons. To list a few: 1. China¡¯s currency is entirely under its own control.
Policy flexibility? Oh yes. ¡±Laws¡± that govern our finances don¡¯t govern China¡¯s, for many reasons. To list a few: 1. China¡¯s currency is entirely under its own control.
3. Its sovereign debt, at 40% of GDP, is one of the lowest on earth.
4. Their slowdown, unlike ours, was intended and planned.
5. China¡¯s government doesn¡¯t just control the strategic heights of its economy, it OWNS them: banks, insurance companies, media, etc.
6. Chinese home ownership is 90%. Most homes were purchased for cash, the rest with a minimum 30% deposit. Second and third homes require 60% and 100% cash.
7. Hong Kong has been through many similar real-estate booms and busts. Hong Kong, along with its gifted administrators and their years of experience, is part of China. They are numerate. They talk to Beijing daily.
8. The Chinese economy is growing 7-9% annually. We have no idea of what that is like, or what that momentum can do in a nation of 1.3 billion people. That rising tide will lift most stranded boats. Ships, even. Developers and lenders know this. The Chinese are patient.
9. China is a unified, coherent nation and civilisation. Its government is trusted (Edelman) and admired (Pew) by 86% of the people. They¡¯ll cooperate, willingly, with government policies. They¡¯ll grumble because they¡¯re human but they¡¯ll cooperate because they¡¯re Chinese who, as Kissinger pointed out, ¡°are smarter than us.¡±
10. If the government says to the banks, ¡°We¡¯ve run some numbers and we think you should extend your CRE loans for another 18 months at interest only¡±, the banks will extend the CRE loans for another 18 months at interest only. Not just because the government owns controlling interests in the banks, but also because they know that the guys in the CCPCC are really, really smart and honest, and usually get things right. Aaah! A Capitalist Paradise on earth.
Jan 21, 20127:36am EST--
