China orders 7 pilot cities and provinces to set CO2 caps
2012-01-13 03:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China has ordered seven provinces and cities to set caps on greenhouse gas emissions in preparation for the launch of local pilot carbon markets, according to a notice issued by the country's state planning agency on Friday.
The National Development and Reform Commission requested the cities of Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, Chongqing and Shenzhen, along with the provinces of Hubei and Guangdong, to set "overall emissions control targets" and submit proposals as to how the targets will be allocated.
The provinces and cities have also been ordered to set up a dedicated fund to support the project and to draw up comprehensive implementation programs, the notice said.
An implementation plan drawn up by Guangdong, China's biggest CO2-emitting province, has already been approved by the State Council, the country's cabinet.
It commits the province to increasing the share of non-fossil fuels to 20 percent of total energy consumption by 2015, and to cutting the amount of carbon dioxide produced per unit of economic growth -- carbon intensity -- by 19.5 percent.
China as a whole has pledged to reduce carbon intensity by 17 percent over the 2011-2015 period, and said it is committed to using "market mechanisms" in order to reach the target.
Besides the seven official pilot projects, there are more than 100 entities across the country trying to establish their own regional CO2 emissions trading platforms, including the coal-rich province of Shaanxi and the northeast port city of Dalian.
(Reporting by David Stanway; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
At the Durban Climate Change Conference in 2011, China presented an eleven point proposal to spend $340 billion per year for five years to reduce pollution in China. These plans promote economic development because health care costs are the main cost of any business. Ask any manager with Starbucks. In addition, renewable energy cuts costs in a growing way with each passing year, so any company with long term goals needs some level of green energy. China is the biggest producer of solar panels and windmills. It makes hybrids and electric cars that reduce dependence on oil, an increasingly expensive commodity. China¡¯s BYD sedan gets 185 miles per plug in compared to 40 for Chevy¡¯s Volt, and it has a 40 minute fast charger so waits will not be excessive. The price tags are the same in the US, so China will clean America¡¯s clock given current gasoline prices, and BYD arrived in Los Angeles in October. Finally, BYD and others will help clean up China, but it will take years. However, if you don¡¯t start, you never finish.
Jan 13, 20124:54pm EST--
Why China doesn¡¯t accept the French proposal
Why China doesn¡¯t accept the French proposal
transactions? 1) it would be in accordance with the
Jan 14, 20125:02pm EST--
