China paper calls U.S. a troublemaker for defense strategy
2012-01-06 22:44:00.0
(Reuters) - China's state media stepped up its criticism on Saturday of the United States' planned strategic shift into Asia, accusing Washington of being a "troublemaker" responsible for mounting tensions in the region.
The commentary in the overseas edition of the People's Daily echoed the angry comments by the Global Times newspaper on Friday following U.S. President Barack Obama's announcement that Washington will expand its military presence in Asia.
The U.S. defense strategy was flagged late last year and is a clear sign of U.S. commitment to the region. U.S. allies and analysts said, however, that China had nothing to fear from the new policy.
In the commentary, Rear-Admiral Yang Yi wrote "it was clear that the new defense strategy was targeting China and Iran."
"Since the United States began emphasizing in 2009 its 'return to Asia', a variety of events that have threatened regional security have happened, turmoil in the region has occurred one after the other," Yang wrote in a front-page commentary.
"Anyone with an inkling of strategy in their minds can easily see who the region's security 'protector' is, who is the 'troublemaker' for the region's security."
Comments in the overseas edition of the People's Daily, a small circulation edition of the Communist Party's official paper, do not amount to government policy positions, but broadly reflect official thinking.
China is concerned Washington's new defense posture, as it turns away from wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, is aimed at encircling it.
The Global Times, a popular tabloid with a nationalist bent, said on Friday that China must not give up on its security presence in Asia.
Still, China's response to the United States' push to shore up its security presence in Asia was largely restrained last year. After disputes with neighbors in 2010 and with an impending succession preoccupying the Communist Party, Beijing policy-makers have avoided diplomatic fireworks.
The United States has said it will seek to work with China but will continue to raise security issues like disputed sovereignty in the South China Sea, through which $5 trillion dollars in trade sails annually.
The sea is claimed wholly or in part by China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam and Brunei. China is seen as increasingly assertive on the high seas, with several incidents in the region in the past year.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The US strategy change is a direct result of the chinese military buildup over the past 3 decades. If china thinks that it can develop military assets directly aimed at the US (like anti-carrier missiles and anti-satellite rockets), then they should also expect a response from the people they are pointing the gun at. If china doesn¡¯t like the new US military posture, then they should seriously reconsider their own actions which led to this US response. A few suggestions would be eliminating their cyber war on America, and discontinue their nationalist propaganda aimed at painting the leader of the Free World as an enemy. (frankly, if your supposed ¡°enemy¡± is the leader of the Free World, that is already saying something¡­.think about it).
Jan 06, 201211:58pm EST--
The US Asian Pivot is actually beneficial to China. The US Navy will burn its diesel fuel and aviation fuel to combat piracy in the waters around the Straits of Malacca and in other waters around Indonesia and Malaysia while Chinese commercial vessels can earn billions of dollars in trade for China. US Marines will be in a position to risk their lives fighting the islamic insurgents in the Philippines to protect the commercial interests of China, and the US Navy will burn US diesel fuel and aviation fuel to keep those waters safe for Chinese commercial vessels to make billions of dollars in trade for the People¡¯s Republic of China. China has signed bilateral treaties with all claimants in the South China Sea disputes to resolve their claims peacefully, so China can avoid a costly war knowing that the US Navy will exert itself at US expense to enforce international law, that includes the treaty rights of China in the South China Sea disputes that must, by international treaty, be resolved peacefully. Finally, the US will destroy US computers, digital cameras, cell phones, and fertilizer, the basic components of smart munitions, and burn millions of gallons of diesel fuel and aviation fuel to create grand fireworks demonstrations for the entertainment of the crews of Chinese merchant vessels as they earn billions of dollars in trade for the Communist Party of the People¡¯s Republic of China. The Chinese sailors should applaud with appropriate loudness.
Jan 07, 20126:53pm EST--
Defense strategy is not an appropriate term. Military strategy is more appropriate. With over 1000 foreign military bases and in places across both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and the absence of any credible Chinese naval forces capable of traversing the oceans, the objective is obviously offensive. China will hardly seek to close the sea trade links when it is so obviously dependent upon those links for its trade with America and Europe. A strong China military will increase security in the ASEAN region and deter regional wars. Just for the record Tibet was part of China before America was founded and the red indians genocides. Tibet and Xinjang were also represented in the drawing up of the chinese constitution. When will America stop wasting valuable resources and pandering to the military industrial vested interests in America? These interests use hate mongering to enrich their coffers and is leading the world into repeated wars. It is time to divert the resources in tackling looming environmental problemns. America needs to be a real leader rather than a rather pathetic clown and trouble maker that it amply demonstrates currently.
Jan 08, 20126:55pm EST--
