U.S. renews Iran sanctions waivers for China, India, others
2013-06-05 16:49:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. State Department on Wednesday renewed six-month waivers on Iran sanctions for China, India and seven other economies in exchange for their agreeing to reduce purchases of oil from Iran.
"The United States and the international community stand shoulder to shoulder in maintaining pressure on the Iranian regime until it fully addresses concerns about its nuclear program," Secretary of State John Kerry said in a statement.
The waivers, which the State Department calls exceptions mean that financial institutions in the consumer countries do not risk being cut off from the U.S. financial system for the next six months.
Sanctions are one of Washington's main strategies to choke funding to Iran's nuclear program, which Western countries suspect seeks to develop the ability to make weapons. Iran insists the program is for peaceful purposes.
U.S. and EU sanctions more than halved Iran's oil shipments last year, helping to devalue the rial, the country's currency, and pushing up inflation. This May the sanctions drove the Islamic Republic's crude exports to the lowest level in decades according to industry sources and tanker tracking data.
Despite the damage the sanctions have done to its economy, Iran's government has foreign currency reserves worth tens of billions of dollars with which it can fund the nuclear program. There is little evidence the sanctions have slowed the program ahead of a presidential election in Iran next week.
President Barack Obama on Monday issued an executive order imposing sanctions on foreign financial institutions that facilitate deals in the rial, which has lost two-thirds of its dollar value since late 2011.
Lawmakers in Congress also hope to pass legislation this year that could further limit Iran's oil sales and reduce Tehran's access to its foreign currency accounts, mostly held in euros.
The other economies the State Department renewed waivers for were South Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Turkey and Taiwan. Japan and 10 EU countries got waivers earlier this spring.
(Reporting by Roberta Rampton and Timothy Gardner; Editing by Sandra Maler and Cynthia Osterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It seems like no one in Washington has thought this through. The US won¡¯t allow Iran to use US dollars, but allows other countries to trade with Iran. So the trade must use other currencies, further undermining the very fragile US dollar. The Navy used to call this sort of thing a self inflicted wound.
Jun 05, 20138:26pm EDT--
