Hong Kong air pollution at worst levels ever: report
2012-01-08 21:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Air pollution levels in Hong Kong were the worst ever last year, the South China Morning Post reported on Monday, a finding that may further undermine the city's role as an Asian financial centre as business executives relocate because of health concerns.
Readings at three roadside monitoring stations in Hong Kong's Central, Causeway Bay and Mong Kok commercial districts showed that pollution levels were above the 100 mark more than 20 percent of the time, the newspaper said, citing the city's Environmental Protection Department.
This was 10 times worse than in 2005, when very high readings were recorded only 2 percent of the time, it said.
The station in Central business district, home to the Asia headquarters of global banks such as HSBC Holdings Plc and Goldman Sachs Group Inc, showed the worst figures, with excessive readings a quarter of the time, the report said.
Environmentalists renewed their calls for the immediate introduction of new air quality objectives, claiming that the government had deliberately delayed their introduction to ease the way for major infrastructure projects, the newspaper said.
The department blamed the figures on unfavourable weather conditions, worsening background pollution and the number of ageing vehicles on streets.
The newspaper quoted the government as saying a number of measures were being considered to help improve air quality, and new air quality objectives would be discussed by Hong Kong's legislature soon.
(Reporting by Charlie Zhu; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani and Chris Lewis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I think we need to ship them more of our coal!
Jan 08, 201210:14pm EST--
Except we import all the pollution from over the border!! The activists protest about HK because they can. We still have freedom of speech here. To try to do it over the border at the source бн. is a little tricky бн. and the SCMP has to fill its expensive pages somehow. Activists are cowards and masters of spin.
Jan 09, 20126:29am EST--
we ship out jobs there, they dont care about anything but the bottom dollars,we get our cheap products and high unemployment and the world get crappy air. win win win!!
Jan 09, 20127:48am EST--
