China factories struggle, policy action seen ahead
2011-12-31 22:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China's big manufacturers narrowly avoided a contraction in December a survey showed on Sunday, but downward risks persist and suggest the world's second's second-largest economy will need fresh policy support to counter a slowdown in growth.
The official purchasing managers' index (PMI), complied by the China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing (CFLP) on behalf of the National Bureau of Statistics, rose to 50.3 in December from 49 in November.
That indicated a slight expansion in business activity in China's vast factory sector, but the reading was barely above the flatline of 50 that demarcates expansion from contraction which the index fell below in November for the first time since early 2009.
"The rebound in the December PMI shows that there will be no big slowdown in the Chinese economy," Zhang Liqun, a researcher with the Development Research Centre of the State Council, wrote in the CFLP statement.
The economy faces downward pressure but there are positive elements that could underpin growth, Zhang sid.
The new orders sub-index rose to 49.8 in December from 47.8 in November while the sub-index for new export orders rose to 48.6 from November's 45.6.
A similar survey on Friday by HSBC and UK-based data provider, Markit, which captures data from smaller factories, inched up to 48.7 in December from a 32-month low of 47.7 in November but still signaled a modest contraction in activity on the month, reinforcing the case for pro-growth policies.
"Accumulating evidence of economic weakness would herald more policy easing in the months ahead, starting with another RRR cut by the Chinese New Year," they wrote in a client note, citing risks to growth from the euro zone, property prices, industrial production (IP) and fixed asset investment (FAI).
"Although domestic consumption held up steadily, its contribution may have been more than offset by weakened investment activity and deteriorating foreign trade conditions. We estimate that GDP has grown by 8.5 percent year on year during Q4 and 9.1 percent for the entire year," they wrote.
China's central bank is in the spotlight with widespread speculation in financial markets that it will soon unveil a cut in the required ratio of reserves (RRR) it demands commercial lenders hold, after cutting it by 50 basis points on November 30 from a record high of 21.5 percent.
Such a move would free up funds that could be used for lending to support growth, but China's leaders remain wary of relaxing their grip too soon on inflation, the annual rate of which remained stubbornly above the 4 percent target through 2011 and hit a three year of 6.5 percent in July.
Still, Chinese officials have warned that demand-destroying effects of Europe's debt crisis and weakness in U.S. consumption could put more pressure on Chinese exporters in coming months and have pledged to fine-tune economic policy settings in response.
"Overall, the economy is weakening and it's still too early to tell any clear signs of recovery at this stage," said Hua Zhongwei, senior economist at Huachuang Securities in Beijing.
Despite the uptick for the official PMI, both it and the HSBC index are stuck near their weakest levels since early 2009, when China took a blow from the global financial crisis.
China's economy is on track to slow for a fourth successive quarter, easing further from the first quarter's 9.7 percent annual growth rate with economists expecting the final three months of the year to have slipped below 9 percent.
Economists polled by Reuters earlier this month forecast the PBOC will deliver 200 bps of RRR cuts by the end of 2012, but refrain from an outright cut in interest rates unless quarterly GDP growth dips below 8 percent.
(Reporting by Kevin Yao; Editing by Nick Edwards)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I¡¯ve got a great idea (for the U.S.). Since China¡¯s manufacturing is slowing down, why don¡¯t we ask them if we can have our factories back? Seriously. All the wise-guy pundits and pseudo-experts who keep diagnosing our problems and emitting solemn pronouncements, refuse to face one fact: We simply have to have our manufacturing sector back again. We can¡¯t allow other, low-wage countries to produce the preponderance of our goods, while we only consume. We produce little, we consume much, and the difference we finance by going into debt up to our eyeballs. That¡¯s madness. All the half-wits who keep prattling about Smoot-Hawley and ¡°protectionism¡± and such-like crap, are living in the prehistoric past. They don¡¯t have any solution for the debacle we¡¯re headed straight into. They just keep patting themselves on the back because they¡¯re so righteous and would never interfere with free trade or the flood of goods from low-wage countries. But they have no clue on how to keep us from going over a cliff. They¡¯re just basking in their economic holiness ¡ª which is not a sound economic policy. This is a massive betrayal by our economic ¡°intellectuals¡± ¡ª a trahison des twerps. Apr¨¨s all the half-witted pundits, le d¨¦luge!
Dec 31, 201110:03pm EST--
