Japan's SMFG to buy into China fund house: sources
2012-01-06 07:51:00.0
Japan's SMFG to buy into China fund house: sources | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Japan's SMFG to buy into China fund house: sources
Fri, Jan 6 2012
Thu, Jan 5 2012
Wed, Dec 28 2011
Sun, Dec 25 2011
Fri, Dec 23 2011
A man walks past a branch of Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation of Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group in Tokyo July 29, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Yuriko Nakao
Fri  EST
) (SMFG), Japan's third-largest lender by assets, plans to acquire a minority stake in a mid-sized Chinese fund house to access China's struggling but still attractive mutual fund industry, two sources with knowledge of the deal said.
An SMFG unit has agreed to buy a 20 percent stake in Beijing-based China Post & Capital Fund Management Co, the sources said. The deal, which still awaits regulatory approval, is estimated by some analysts to be worth about 400 million yuan ($63.6 million).
China's mutual fund industry shrank 12 percent last year to 2.19 trillion yuan as asset managers struggled to lure investors in a stock market that slumped 22 percent amid growing economic uncertainty.
The sector, however, remains attractive to foreign asset managers who bet that China's strong economic growth and growing ranks of middle class would in the long run boost demand for wealth management services.
Of China's 66 fund management firms, more than half are Sino-foreign ventures, and the market is luring more entrants, at least nine overseas companies including Taiwan's SinoPac Financial Holdings (
), Korea's Mirae Asset Financial Group and UK insurer Aviva Plc (
If the China Post Fund deal is successful, SMFG would become the third Japanese company to invest in a Chinese fund house. Rival Mitsubishi UFJ Trust and Banking Corp and Nikko Asset Management already own Chinese fund ventures.
Japanese financial institutions have been increasingly active in China in recent years. In December, Nomura Holdings (
) became the first Japanese financial group to be allowed to make private equity investments in China, and the investment bank is also waiting for regulatory approval to set up a joint venture securities firm in China.
Last year, Mitsubishi UFJ bought a 33 percent stake in a Chinese fund house from BNP Paribas (
China Post Fund was established in 2006 and its main shareholders include Capital Securities and China Post Group, the country's biggest postal service provider.
SMFG is buying the 20 percent stake from China Post Fund's third and smallest shareholder, Beijing Changan Group, a source said. Foreign stakes in a Chinese fund venture are capped at 49 percent.
Based on typical valuation of a Chinese fund house recently -- about 8 percent of a firm's asset under management (AUM) -- as well as China Post Fund's current size of 25 billion yuan in AUM, the deal is worth about 400 million yuan, analysts said.
The deal was submitted to the China Securities Regulatory Commission for approval last month and the transaction still needs to receive the green light from China's Ministry of Commerce, one of the sources said.
