Analysis: China's trade surplus fades but imbalances persist
2012-01-10 14:22:00.0
(Reuters) - One of the biggest imbalances in the global economy could soon be a thing of the past: China's super-sized trade surplus is melting away.
But don't get too excited.
In light of the "savings glut" theory that China's export of its excess savings helped to drive down interest rates in the West and fuel over-consumption, especially in the United States, the fast-falling surplus should help to put the world economy on a steadier footing.
"This supports our view that global rebalancing is occurring amid weakening developed market growth and robust Chinese demand," economists at Barclays Capital in Hong Kong said in a report.
As a share of gross domestic product, the surplus shriveled to 2.1 percent in 2011 from 3.1 percent in 2010 and a high of 7.3 percent in 2007.
For 2012, Jacqueline Rong at BNP Paribas in Beijing expects the surplus to drop further to 1.2 percent of GDP. In dollar terms, Daiwa Securities has penciled in a surplus this year of $118 billion and Mizuho is forecasting $113 billion.
Indeed, some economists believe China's trade will be in the red before too long. If that sounds implausible, Japan last year is likely to have chalked up its first trade deficit since 1963, according to JP Morgan.
Mark Williams with London consultancy Capital Economics said it was positive for global rebalancing that China, with its declining surplus, was a source of net demand for the rest of the world.
But he fretted that the 24.9 percent increase in Chinese imports last year had been geared to ramping up already-strong investment, raising the question of who would buy the extra goods to be churned out by newly built factories.
Short of an unlikely boom in domestic consumption, Williams said he feared one of two unpleasant outcomes.
"One option is that China does everything it can to gain market share. So it slows the appreciation of the renminbi and continues to offer very cheap credit to Chinese firms to enable them to undercut foreign producers, and so on. That route leads to protectionism," he said.
"The alternative is that China accepts that it needs to go through a pretty wrenching process of structural adjustments which will involve a lot of companies going bankrupt," he added.
Uri Dadush, an economist with the Carnegie Endowment in Washington, said he was less concerned about ballooning factory capacity.
"A lot of the investment in China is going into infrastructure and building a domestic service economy. It isn't all going into exportables and manufactures by any stretch of the imagination," Dadush, a former World Bank official, said.
Moreover, the dwindling of China's surplus should serve to put the spotlight on countries with truly "outlandish" surpluses -- including Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Sweden.
"The fact that Chinese exports may not have performed as well as expected in recent months is in part a reflection of the very large slowdown we have seen in the United States and Europe," Dadush said.
And there's the rub: economists see no end to the headwinds that slowed global growth in 2011 as Western governments struggle with excessive deficits and debt burdens.
"Despite the widespread fiscal tightening that will be taking place through the developed markets, debt as a percent of GDP will still be on an upward path in the U.S., the euro area, Japan, and the UK," they said in a report.
For mature economies as a whole, governments' net lending positions - the budget balance - by the end of this year will still fall 5 percentage points of GDP short of stabilizing debt as a share of GDP, the bank estimates.
Hence the fierce embrace of austerity and the resulting hit to growth: the central bank of Portugal said on Tuesday that belt-tightening mandated as the price of an international bailout would cause the euro zone member's economy to shrink 3.1 percent this year.
In short, China's trade surplus may be fading, but only to be displaced by other imbalances that are the legacy of past excesses and policy mistakes.
"Fiscal consolidation will no doubt weigh heavily on economic activity in the developed markets in the coming years, and thus on the global economy as well," JP Morgan said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese are beating their planned trade surplus for 2011 that was in the 12th Five Year Plan (2011-2015) that planned a 20% reduction in the trade surplus. 2011¡äs trade surplus only fell 15.3%, so China is 4.7% above its projection. This may have been caused by the natural disasters that struck its near trading partners: floods and typhoon in Australia, earthquake, tsunami, and typhoons in Japan; typhoons in the Philippines, Vietnam, and South Korea. China would need to increase exports to make up for shortages in production by these partners. The goal of China has been to develop the central and western provinces to increase domestic demand, and these infrastructure projects have been on schedule, creating millions of workers with paychecks who become customers and taxpayers. In addition, China raised the minimum tax deduction by 75%, added a pension plan for the elderly, lowered fuel prices 25%, built 10 million low-cost housing units, and restricted purchases of homes in certain cities to prevent excessive speculation. The last two actions helped reduce home prices by 5.1% in four months or a 16% reduction per year to lower home prices without a collapse. Also, 36 million more low-cost units will be added by 2015 or about 9 million per year, and millions of construction workers will earn pay to become customers and taxpayers. Chinese banks have been instructed to lend to small businesses and reductions in reserve requirements let China create the small businesses that will cater to the construction workers/customers and to workers in networks of small firms created by the large construction projects. The infrastructure projects do not make products for trade, permitting China¡¯s customers to recover for a few years, but they create new manufacturing centers that will be in place for competition when the US and EU recover.
Jan 10, 20126:25pm EST--
