China loan growth quickens
2012-01-08 11:42:00.0
(Reuters) - China's banks ratcheted up lending in the last month of 2011 on the back of stronger money supply, reinforcing perceptions that the central bank is gently easing policy to cushion the impact of the global economic slowdown.
Chinese banks extended 640.5 billion yuan ($101.51 billion) in new loans in December, up from 562.2 billion yuan in November, data from the People's Bank of China showed on Sunday.
Annual growth in China's broad M2 money supply accelerated to 13.6 percent in December from November's 12.7 percent.
"The policy easing signal is becoming clearer," said Wang Hu, an economist at Guotai Junan Securities in Shanghai.
Chinese policymakers have watched Europe's debt crisis with increasing alarm, but have resisted declaring an outright easing in monetary policy. Instead, they have stressed the need to "fine tune" policy, which many analysts say will mean easing of credit restrictions, particularly for small businesses.
MORE EASING AHEAD?
The stronger-than-expected lending and money supply figures suggested that Beijing is firmly on track to unveil more pro-growth steps as inflation eases, which reduce the risk of a hard landing in the world's second-largest economy.
Contrary to its usual practice, the central bank did not release foreign exchange reserve figures along with money supply and lending data. The bank did not say when those numbers would be released.
Beijing cut banks' reserve requirements by half a percentage point on the last day of November, its first in three years.
The move indicated China's central bank is shifting its policy to a pro-growth model, although the central bank continues to label its policy as "prudent," which suggests it is only easing policy gradually as it wants to tame the property sector and also fears that inflation may rebound.
Chinese banks extended a total of 7.47 trillion yuan in new loans in 2011, slightly under the government's undisclosed annual target of 7.5 trillion yuan.
China's once turbo-charged economy is on track to slow for a fourth successive quarter as global demand slackened.
China's annual GDP growth in the fourth quarter may have slowed to 8.7 percent from the 9.1 percent, according to the latest Reuters poll.
Annual inflation is expected to ease to 4.0 percent in December from 4.2 percent in November, according to a poll.
(Additional reporting by Don Durfee; Editing by Jane Merriman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The 12th Five Year Plan (2011-2015) was published in March of 2011 and announced the development of the central and western provinces. The infrastructure projects create tens of millions of new jobs for workers with paychecks who become customers and taxpayers. The new customers shop at stores, and construction firms order supplies, so stores and suppliers need more workers with paychecks who become customers and taxpayers, and the circle expands. China¡¯s government insures that capital is available for new small businesses that are needed to support the construction firms and the workers/customers that development creates. The 13th Five Year Plan (2016-2020) is likely to continue this development. In addition, at the Durban Climate Change Conference, China¡¯s government announced a five year plan that spends $340 billion per year to reduce emissions mainly by improvements to industrial processes, and by building more nuclear power plants, windmill farms, and solar power arrays. There are irrigation, forestation, and anti-desertification projects. These efforts create thousands of small companies and millions of new jobs, customers, and taxpayers. The banks have many reasons for small business loans in China with many sets of projects that create growth of 8% to 9% per year for a decade and lay the foundation for much more rapid growth when the West recovers from its wars in the Middle East and the recessions that follow conflicts.
Jan 09, 20125:55pm EST--
