China moving to more convertible yuan: Zhou
2011-12-31 09:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China's central bank governor argued in comments published on Saturday that Beijing does not control the yuan's flow across borders as tightly as some think and that it is natural for the currency's trading band to be widened over time.
Zhou Xiaochuan said in an interview with Chinese magazine Caixin that China did not fare badly on an International Monetary Fund measure of currencies' convertibility under the capital account.
"If the highest standard of measurement is to have wholly unrestricted convertibility, then so many developed countries have not achieved 100 percent full convertibility," Zhou told the magazine.
While the currency is already convertible under China's current account, the broadest measure of trade in goods and services, the capital account, which measures inflows and outflows of different types of capital, is still closely managed by Beijing as it worries about capital flight and hot money inflows.
Zhou noted China must regulate levels of foreign debt incurred by private and public sectors to reduce currency risks, monitor cross-border deals to guard against illegal activities such as money laundering, and combat speculative capital flows.
"Excluding the above three factors and judging from the 40 sub-items set by the IMF, you may find that actually China is not that far from capital account convertibility," Zhou said.
Still, he said Beijing would keep improving the exchange rate regime to make it more flexible, adding it is natural for the currency to fluctuate in a bigger trading band in future.
"The yuan's trading band will be widened," he said.
China currently lets the yuan trade in a 0.5 percent range, and moves to increase that band would show Beijing is gradually relaxing its control over the currency.
"Compared with international markets, you may know that the 0.5 percent (daily trading band) is quite a small floating band," Zhou said.
Investors had speculated earlier this year when China was fighting three-year high inflation that Beijing would widen the yuan's trading band to accelerate its rise and combat price pressures.
Instead, Beijing raised interest rates three times, moves that have produced some tentative success: Inflation eased to 4.2 percent in November, down from a 6.5 percent high in July.
"Inflationary pressure is easing, and curbing inflation is not as urgent as in 2011," he said. "But we should not lower our guard against inflation and must appropriately manage inflation expectations."
He said that it is difficult for China to achieve the government's annual inflation ceiling of 4 percent this year and he expects inflation to be around 5 percent this year.
"China has been always having relatively big scope to adjust its monetary policy," Zhou said when asked whether a drop in China's foreign exchange purchases in recent months has given the central bank more room to adjust monetary policy.
President Hu Jintao in his televised New Year's address on Saturday, said the government would continue to maintain relatively fast economic growth and manage inflationary expectations in the year ahead.
The yuan closed at a record high against the dollar on Friday, passing through resistance at 6.30 and ending 2011 with an appreciation of 4.7 percent, with traders citing signs of central bank intervention to push the yuan up at the end of the year.
The yuan's gains for the year are in line with the 4 to 5 percent traders in the onshore market had expected at the start of the year.
Traders still see the yuan appreciating in 2012 as China faces U.S. pressure to do more to rebalance bilateral and world trade, while it continues to record trade surpluses.
(Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard and Fang Yan; Editing by Edward Lane and Hugh Lawson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Dec 31, 201111:39am EST--
The Chinese are making bilateral agreements with trading partners to allow transactions in China¡¯s yuan. Recent countries are Japan and the Philippines. The Chinese continue to raise the value of the yuan, but it will be at a measured pace because turning the currency into gambling games in market casinos is wrong. The West is slowly learning this lesson, but there are still too many criminals controlling western financial markets. Currency is an economic tool that should have a relatively stable price based on the value of a country¡¯s economy. A depression in the West may be needed to give time for western business and financial leaders to learn economics.
Dec 31, 20111:10pm EST--
alanchristopher writes: ¡°Currency is an economic tool that should have a relatively stable price based on the value of a country¡¯s economy.¡± Stable in terms of what? Another currency that is itself moving around in value? oil? gold? Implicit here is a criticism of countries that let their currencies be traded freely. ¡°there are still too many criminals controlling western financial markets¡±. But obviously every country cannot do what China does. Suppose that the U.S. were to peg its currency at 4RMB to the dollar, because it wants ¡°price stability¡± for the dollar and thinks that 4RMB per dollar reflects the value of the U.S. economy. What would happen? The Chinese cannot peg at 1:6 while the U.S. pegs at 4:1, something has to give. China has been allowed to get away with many things in terms of trade and currency that only one country (or a limited number of countries) can get away with. It comes down to trade imbalance: China wants to be permanently guaranteed the right to engineer a substantial trade surplus for itself. The U.S. has so far agreed to absorb this enormous trade surplus in the form of debt, and has refrained from pushing too hard back against China for the various mechanisms that China uses to ensure that trade will not and cannot become balanced. There are too many such mechanisms to name them all here: currency pegging and capital controls are only one; there is also industrial and trade policy, intellectual property policy, etc. etc. Something has to give, and something will indeed eventually give, because the U.S. can¡¯t give to China a perpetual gift of a trade deficit to fund China¡¯s growth indefinitely. The question is how long U.S. leaders are paralyzed into inaction on the matter.
Dec 31, 20118:53pm EST--
