China to start work on world's highest airport
2011-12-27 07:35:00.0
(Reuters) - China will start work on the world's highest airport next year, in Tibet's Nagqu county, state media said on Tuesday, which will be about 100 meters (328 ft) higher than the existing record holder in another part of the remote and restive region.
Nagqu airport will be at an altitude of 4,436 meters (14,553 ft) above sea level, slightly higher than the airport in Qamdo town at 4,334 meters (14,219 ft), Xinhua news agency reported.
The airport will cost 1.8 billion yuan ($280 million) and is expected to open in three years, Xinhua added.
Tibet already has five civilian airports, at least two of which are only open for a few months of the year because of extreme weather which makes flying impossible the rest of the time.
China has embarked upon a multi-billion-dollar program in recent years to revamp old airports and build new ones, especially in the country's remote west, as a way of boosting the economy.
The government has also poured billions of dollars into Tibet, hoping to win hearts and minds in a region the Communist Party has run with an iron grip for six decades.
The government says that the new airports, roads and a railway to Tibet will promote development and help raise living standards.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Ed Lane)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I can not understand why airports, highways and economic activities are harmful to these Tibetans. They just can not keep their homeland closed and isolated from the world.
Dec 27, 20113:25pm EST--
@ Howardxue, It¡¯s seen as a bad deal because the airport will be used as a military base to conduct raids on the local region. Randomly arresting ethnic minority men and prosecuting them on prostitution charges. Willing to bet that it will mostly employ Han Chinese. So people in an area that had for the most part been void of CCP politics will become the front line in a race war.
Dec 27, 20116:34pm EST--
