Analysis: Asia's double-edged currency sword
2012-01-02 09:15:00.0
(Reuters) - The roller-coaster ride for Asian currencies, which saw only the yen and yuan post significant gains for the year against the U.S. dollar, is set to continue in 2012.
While Japan actively sought to stem the yen's rise -- drawing U.S. criticism last week -- China intervened to ensure the yuan ended the year at a new high. Both currencies appreciated roughly 5 percent in 2011 against the dollar.
The opposite approaches illustrate a dilemma facing Asian policymakers as they try to smooth out foreign exchange rate volatility, which shows no sign of abating in the new year. If the currency is too strong, exports get more expensive. Too weak, and imported inflation spikes and domestic buying power fades.
Singapore and South Korea provide two examples of how inflation can stay surprisingly high, even as declining global demand curbs exports and saps growth. Both the Singapore dollar and the won slipped against the greenback in 2011.
For Japan, which has been battling deflationary forces for two decades, rising prices would be a welcome change. Three times in 2011, Tokyo intervened in the currency market to try to weaken the yen, once with the help of Group of 7 nations after the March earthquake and tsunami, and twice unilaterally.
It was the solo moves that drew Washington's ire. The Treasury pointed out in its December 27 report to Congress on world currencies that the United States "did not support these interventions," and said Japan would be better served by taking steps to increase the dynamism of its domestic economy.
"The United States is saying, our recovery is dependent on the (U.S.) dollar not becoming too strong," said Yukon Huang, an economist with the Washington-based Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
"It's worried that there will be a global move for people to depreciate" their currencies, he said.
The twice-yearly currency report was mandated by Congress in 1988, when the trade imbalance with Japan was the main concern. More recently, it has become a source of friction with China.
"The criticism (of Japan) is accurate but it's 20 years old and resuscitated as cover," said Derek Scissors, a research fellow at the conservative Heritage Foundation in Washington.
"It's so they don't appear to be picking on China."
If Treasury determines a country is manipulating its currency to gain a trade advantage, it can call in the International Monetary Fund to press for a realignment.
Some U.S. lawmakers, businesses and unions want Washington to label China a manipulator, but Treasury declined to do so yet again in its latest report. It did, however, mention China twice as many times as it referred to Japan.
While there may be politics at play in the currency report, a closer look at trading in China's yuan suggests Beijing may have earned its reprieve this time.
The United States has long argued that a stronger yuan is in China's best interest because it can help ease inflationary pressures and lift domestic spending power.
China's central bank keeps the currency on a tight leash by setting a daily midpoint and then allowing only a one-half percent move on either side.
In the first half of December, the yuan traded limit-down nearly every day, partly due to demand for dollars but also reflecting increasing concern that China's economy will falter as export demand slows and its housing market declines.
The People's Bank of China intervened on December 16 and again on December 30 to prop up the yuan, traders told Reuters. That left the yuan up 4.7 percent against the U.S. dollar in 2011, even though China's exports have cooled over the past six months and will probably slow even more in 2012.
The yuan's performance makes it more difficult for the United States to claim China is intentionally weakening its currency to gain a trade advantage.
"The argument gets weaker when China is moving toward a smaller trade surplus," said Carnegie's Huang, who is also a former World Bank country director for China.
Why would China favor a stronger currency now? It helps to defuse political tension with the United States and discourage traders from assuming the yuan is a safe one-way bet, and it can also neutralize imported inflation.
China's annual inflation rate has dropped dramatically since it hit a three-year peak of 6.5 percent in July, but it is still above the government's target of 4 percent.
With oil trading around $100 per barrel even though the world economy looks shaky, it would not take much of a shock to push prices back up to the $115 level seen in May, which threatened to choke off the global recovery.
Aside from the yuan and yen, most Asian currencies weakened in 2011. South Korea, Indonesia and India stepped in to try to cap currency volatility, but countries across the region seemed content to allow a gradual decline.
In Singapore, considered a regional bellwether because the city state is so closely tied to the global economy, annual inflation spiked unexpectedly to 5.7 percent in November.
Trade-dependent Singapore uses the exchange rate as its primary policy tool, and has slowed the pace of appreciation to try to support growth. But that leaves it vulnerable to imported inflation.
In South Korea, a measure of factory activity fell to its lowest in nearly three years in December, figures on Monday showed, yet its inflation rate came in above the central bank's target. The Bank of Korea said last week that fighting inflation would remain the top policy priority in 2012.
"We believe the government's tolerance for a weak won is waning," Barclays economist Wai Ho Leong wrote in a note to clients on December 30.
(Reporting by Emily Kaiser; Editing by Mathew Veedon)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
After reading, sounds as if Japan is trying to fight the natural ebb and flow of a capitalistic monetary system. If the currency does weaken this allows for exports to increase and then the currency will naturally strengthen as more and more exports are shipped out. The counter points for a stronger currency are the same. So I do not really see why Japan needs to battle the currency. Perhaps the focus should be on a strong, stable economy, with sound fundamentals all of which Japan has relative to most other currencies (evident in flee to the yen). Enjoy the ups and downs; that is what makes capitalism.
Jan 02, 201212:02pm EST--
When it comes to slice and dice a smaller pie, every country will want to be a player, and that means weaker currencies are attractive.
When it comes to slice and dice a smaller pie, every country will want to be a player, and that means weaker currencies are attractive.
Poor Japan that has been in a multi-decade economic malaise, followed with the tsunami problems definitely won¡¯t benefit from contracting exports.
Given our inept leadership, reluctance to engage, and apparent interest in doing NOTHING til FORCED, after the Euro flounders from lack of credible support, speculators will focus on the USD!!
Jan 02, 20125:36pm EST--
ALL countries manipulate their currency when it¡¯s possible. Germany led the charge in creating the Euro. In 10 years,
ALL countries manipulate their currency when it¡¯s possible. Germany led the charge in creating the Euro. In 10 years,
Germany¡¯s export to the rest of the Euro zone increased by 130%.
That¡¯s the ultimate manipulation of currency. There is zero
economies, so German businesses experience no uncertainty
the goods and money exchange hands. Was Germany a currency manipulator? Yes. By fixing the exchange
rate 1:1 to the rest of Europe, its currency does not have to
appreciate if it were an independant currency, thus keeping German
even mumbled about Germany being a currency manipulator? Why not?
Because European economists dominate the highest echelon at these world organizations, and they depended on Germany to supply the largest portion of the bailout funds for countries and banks in financial trouble? Is that the only reason? We in the United States print more money to dilute its currency, effectively deflating it, and create a fancy name of QE to hide its real nature. Other European countries who are in the Euro zone, cry foul because they cannot deflate their currency, and faces worse austerity measures to avoid bankruptcy. The UK opted out of the Euro, thus maintaining autonomy in setting the value of its currency, and opted out of contributing bailout funds to the Eurozone without the safeguards for the UK. The other Euro countries cry foul, but the citizens of UK are by and large satisfied with Cameron¡¯s decision to protect the UK. Japan has unapologetically spent billions and billions to keep its currency from appreciate too much, but it has still appreciated quite a bit because Japan¡¯s economy kept doing well. There is no meaning in the term currency manipulator because if a country does not manipulate its currency(or cannot, as in Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain), whenever it can to its own country¡¯s advantage, its own citizen would take to the streets to protest.
Jan 02, 20127:20pm EST--
