China's factories falter, pro-growth policies eyed
2011-12-30 04:29:00.0
(Reuters) - China's factory activity shrank again December as demand at home and abroad slackened, a purchasing managers' survey showed on Friday, reinforcing the case for pro-growth policies to underpin the world's second-largest economy.
The People's Bank of China is widely expected to lower its requirement for the amount of cash banks must hold as reserves to let lenders inject more credit into the economy to fight headwinds from Europe's debt crisis and sluggish U.S. demand.
The HSBC Purchasing Manager's Index, designed to preview the state of Chinese industry before official output data are published, inched up to 48.7 in December from a 32-month low of 47.7 in November, but fell short of the flash reading of 49.
The HSBC PMI has been mostly under 50, which demarcates expansion from contraction, since July.
"While the pace of slowdown is stabilizing somewhat, weakening external demand is starting to bite," said Qu Hongbin, China economist at HSBC.
"This, plus ongoing property market corrections, adds to calls for more aggressive action on fiscal and monetary fronts to stabilize growth and jobs, especially with prices easing rapidly."
China's once turbo-charged economy is on track to slow for a fourth successive quarter, easing further from the first quarter's 9.7 percent annual growth rate with economists expecting the final three months of the year to have slipped below 9 percent.
The official PMI, due to be published on Sunday, is expected to paint a similar picture, suggesting the world's second-largest economy is finishing 2011 on a weak note, in tandem with the global economic outlook.
Both the official and HSBC PMIs are stuck near their weakest levels since early 2009, when China took a blow from the global financial crisis.
"I think the government will ratchet up pro-growth policies if (quarterly) growth falls below 8 percent, otherwise the economy could face big risks," said Guotai Junan Securities economist Wang Hu in Shanghai.
China's central bank cut reserve requirements for commercial lenders late in November for the first time in three years.
The RRR remains at 21 percent for big banks, giving the central bank plenty of room to cut and free up funds that could be used for lending.
Underlying indexes of the HSBC PMI showed softening demand at home and abroad, which helped cool inflation -- a boon for Chinese policymakers, according to the data collated by UK-based information firm, Markit.
The sub-index for overall new orders edged up to 46.9 in December from November's 45, but still signaled falling demand. New export orders shrank in a reflection of listless demand from the United States and Europe -- China's top overseas markets.
Average input costs faced by manufacturers continued to moderate as raw material prices slipped, the HSBC survey showed.
Inflation appears to be cooling, having fallen from a three-year high of 6.5 percent in July to 4.2 percent in November, creating additional room for policy easing to support growth.
HSBC's Qu expects the government to move on the fiscal front to boost job creation, cutting taxes for exporters -- a sector employing more than 30 million workers -- while increasing spending on public housing and other projects.
"On top of monetary easing, mainly in the form of further reserve ratio cuts, we have long argued that fiscal policy can and should play a more important role in stabilize growth and jobs," Qu said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Funny, I have been led to believe by all media that China is the Disney Land of low wages for big western industrial companies. And that they are the pearl of the world for profits.
Dec 30, 20114:40am EST--
In perspective: We¡¯ll probably never see 9% growth rate again here in the US in our lifetimes. So 9% is still pretty good.
Dec 30, 201110:08am EST--
@ CleoThePirate: Ok, but when the chinese government itself has said that growth rates anywhere below 8% will cause massive unemployment and social unrest, I think there is justifiable cause for concern. If china¡¯s unemployment rate reaches 10%, which is quite likely at 8% growth, then you have nearly 140 million people unemployed throughout china. What do you think 140 million unemployed people do? Sit quietly and continue to praise the achievements of the communist party? I don¡¯t think so.
Dec 30, 201111:39am EST--
