Afghanistan cabinet OKs oil deal with China's CNPC
2011-12-26 10:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Afghanistan's cabinet cleared the way for the war-torn state to sign a deal with China National Petroleum Corp (CNPC) for the development of oil blocks in the Amu Darya basin, the Afghan president's office said on Monday.
It marks the second major deal for China in Afghanistan after Metallurgical Corp of China signed a contract in 2008 to develop the huge Aynak copper mine south of Kabul, which is due to start producing by the end of 2014.
"The Afghan cabinet has ordered Mines Minister Wahidullah Shahrani to sign an oil exploration contract for Amu Darya with China National Petroleum Corporation," the statement said.
Jawad Omar, a spokesman for the mines ministry, said the contract would be signed on Wednesday.
State-owned CNPC and joint venture partner Watan Group -- a diversified Afghan company -- will explore for oil in three fields in the basin - Kashkari, Bazarkhami and Zamarudsay, which are estimated to hold around 87 million barrels of oil.
Under the contract, CNPC will agree to pay a 15 percent royalty on oil, a 20 percent corporate tax and give up to 70 percent of its profit from the project to the Afghan government.
Indian and Chinese bidders have been front-runners for deals to develop Afghanistan's vast mineral deposits, which are valued at $3 trillion, worrying Western firms that have hesitated to invest in the country due to security concerns.
Experts have warned that mining projects in Afghanistan are likely targets for insurgents, that production and transport costs will be high and that sovereign risk is a serious concern.
But China and India, where demand for energy and industrial inputs is booming, are willing to take risks to secure supplies.
(Writing by Agnieszka Flak; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani and Jane Baird)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sure risk is one of the factors deterring western countries from investing in risky mineral assets. But there is no doubt that the Chinese are overcompensating in these contracts. They are basically promising most of the profit will go to Afghanistan in exchange for rights to their resources. No real corporation would be willing to do that. States should not be allowed to make these kinds of investments, it undermines capitalism.
Dec 26, 20113:04pm EST--
Wonderful move, at least this shall ensure that Afghanistan shall develop, I¡¯m impressed with the way they¡¯ve been working in Africa, bring in your best game. China you are always welcome.
Dec 26, 201110:30pm EST--
Wonderful move, at least this shall ensure that Afghanistan shall develop, I¡¯m impressed with the way they¡¯ve been working in Africa, bring in your best game. China you are always welcome.
Dec 26, 201110:30pm EST--
