China hackers breached U.S. Chamber of Commerce: report
2011-12-21 08:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Hackers in China broke through the computer defenses of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce last year and were able to access information about its operations and its 3 million members, the Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday.
In Beijing, China dismissed the report.
The Journal, citing unidentified people familiar with the matter, reported the operation against the top American business lobbying group involved at least 300 internet addresses and was discovered and shut down in May 2010.
The newspaper reported it was not known how much information was seen by the hackers, or who may have had access to the network for more than a year before being discovered.
The group behind the breach is suspected by the United States of having ties to the Chinese government, one of the sources told the newspaper. The FBI informed the Chamber of Commerce that servers in China were pilfering its information, the source said.
"There's nothing to be said about the baseless whipping up of so-called hacking and it won't come to anything," he told a daily news briefing in Beijing. "Chinese law bans hacking."
The Chamber of Commerce employs 450 people and represents business interests in Congress, including most of the largest U.S. corporations.
The newspaper reported that the emails revealed the names of companies and key people in contact with the Chamber, as well as trade-policy documents, meeting notes, trip reports and schedules.
"What was unusual about it was that this was clearly somebody very sophisticated, who knew exactly who we are and who targeted specific people and used sophisticated tools to try to gather intelligence," the group's chief operating officer, David Chavern, told the Journal.
China is often cited as a suspect in various hacking attacks on U.S. targets. In August, the Pentagon warned in a report to Congress that hacking from China could one day be used for overt military means.
(Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in BEIJING; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
That won¡¯t help @what_the_fudge. I practice offensive security every day, and scan every system that I have attacks from (45 yesterday). They are not all in China. The attack vectors are from all over the world. Taiwan, Japan, India, Malaysia, Germany, Russia, Estonia, Brasil, Columbia, Mexico, Canada, and even the US. There are compromised systems throughout the world, that are being operated as bots. I track and backs-can these every day looking for commonalities. The more interesting ones are posted on my business website. Where I can I contact the system administrators. Where I can¡¯t, I use dark-art tools to disable the sites where possible. It is not always possible. But hence, blocking Chinese IP addresses would be futile. Bot systems don¡¯t select for nationality, they select for weak configurations that can happen anywhere¡­
Dec 21, 20118:37am EST--
China has always felt that the role of a strong central government is more important than any individual or corporate concern, so to snoop on individuals, corporations or even other governments is not above Communism¡¯s ideals.
Dec 21, 20118:45am EST--
Things are not always as they seem. The ¡°US Chamber of Commerce¡± is not a national extension of your friendly local Chamber of Commerce, but is instead a shadowy lobby group that pursues an agenda which is dangerous to the US public, as well as people and business around the world. As such it has enemies around the world. There is the distinct possibility that the Chinese cadre of hackers are being specifically singled out as a retaliation for China¡¯s unwillingness to open their markets to American based businesses.
Dec 21, 20119:31am EST--
