Japan picks Lockheed F-35 fighter as allies stress tight ties
2011-12-20 06:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan picked Lockheed Martin's F-35 jet as its next mainstay fighter Tuesday, choosing the aircraft over combat-proven but less stealthy rivals, as concern simmers over North Korea and as China introduces its own stealth fighters.
The decision came as Japan and the United States stressed that their security alliance was tight in the face of worry about an unstable North Korea after the death of its leader, Kim Jong-il.
Defense Minister Yasuo Ichikawa said the decision to buy 42 of the stealth aircraft, valued by analysts at more than $7 billion, would help Japan adjust to a changing security environment after Monday's announcement of the death of the 69-year-old North Korean leader.
"The security environment surrounding future fighter jets is transforming. The F-35 has capabilities that can firmly respond to the changes," Ichikawa told reporters.
Lockheed Martin and the Pentagon hailed Japan's selection of the F-35, saying it would help establish a strategic, conventional deterrent in the Asia-Pacific region, where concern simmers about instability under Kim's successor, his untested youngest son, Kim Jong-un.
"The F-35 Program Office looks forward to strengthening partnerships with Japan, and contributing to enhanced security throughout the Asia Pacific region," the Pentagon said in a statement after Japan announced its decision.
The F-35, which is in an early production stage, competed against Boeing's F/A-18 and the Eurofighter Typhoon, made by a consortium of European companies including BAE Systems.
Experts said the decision to opt for the U.S. plane, made informally well before news of Kim's death, reflected Japan's desire to tighten U.S. ties in the face of concern over China's rising military might and other regional uncertainties.
"It reflects Japan's recognition on a variety of levels that at a time of greater insecurity, it needs to be more deeply engaged with the United States on security issues," said Brad Glosserman, executive director at Honolulu's Pacific Forum CSIS.
In a sign the allies meant to stand together, U.S. President Barack Obama spoke by telephone to Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda and underscored the U.S. commitment to its allies, the White House said.
Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary Osamu Fujimura told a news conference that Washington and its two close Asia allies, Japan and South Korea, were likely to hold high-level talks on North Korea soon. "The date has not been decided but it will be at the soonest possible opportunity," he said.
U.S.-Japan relations had frayed after the novice Democratic Party of Japan took power in 2009 for the first time, vowing to recalibrate the alliance on a more equal basis and attempting, unsuccessfully, to keep a pledge to move a U.S. military base off Japan's Okinawa island.
Noda, who took office last September, has firmly shifted gears back to a more traditional security stance.
"Once again, Japan's security policy is right back to the post-war Japanese mainstream -- the decision that the U.S. is Japan's best security partner," Glosserman said.
Japan had been widely expected to choose the F-35 due to its advanced stealth capability and U.S. origin. Stealth technology has drawn much attention in Japan since China, which has a long-running territorial dispute with Japan, in January confirmed it had held its first test flight of the J-20 stealth fighter jet.
Despite Sino-Japanese tension over territorial feuds, maritime resources and a bitter wartime past, Noda will nonetheless be seeking China's cooperation in coping with North Korea when he visits Beijing on December 25-26.
"Instructions from the prime minister were that we need to establish close cooperation and exchange of information with the United States, South Korea and China, so we will seek to work with China on this understanding," Fujimura said.
Japan's choice of the F-35 comes as a shot in the arm for Lockheed Martin's F-35 program, which has been restructured twice in the past two years and is expected to boost the odds that South Korea will follow suit with its own order for 60 fighters. Japan will pay 9.9 billion yen per fighter including backup parts in the initial stage of procurement.
"This program badly needed an endorsement like this, particularly one from a technically respected customer. But there are still many complications, especially price tag and work share demands," said Richard Aboulafia, an analyst with the U.S.-based Teal Group.
Boeing's loss of the order would be a real setback for the company's prospects in the fighter business, especially since there were few other large competitions open anymore, said Loren Thompson of Lexington Institute.
"The market place is signaling to Boeing that its days in the fighter business may be numbered," Thompson said.
Japanese firms Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd , IHI Corp and Mitsubishi Electric Corp will participate in the production and maintenance of the F-35, the Defense Ministry said.
A Lockheed Martin official said Japanese defense contractors could become global suppliers to the F-35 stealth fighter program if Japan's government decided to ease a decades-old ban on exports of military equipment.
"The Japanese aerospace industry is world class, so if there was a relaxation (of the export ban) it would be very logical for them to have the opportunity and indeed it would be a very good opportunity to participate in the F35 global supply chain," Dave Scott, director of international business development for the stealth fighter, told Reuters.
Japan is considering easing the export ban, a step that might allow its contractors to bid for contracts in the United States, which spends 10 times as much on its military.
Ending the ban would also allow Japan to buy aircraft, ships, missiles and other equipment more cheaply by allowing domestic manufacturers to tap overseas markets and lower production costs through economies of scale.
(Additional reporting by Andrea Shalal-Esa and Carol Bohan in Washington, Tim Kelly and Shinichi Saoshiro in Towriting by Leika Kihara and Linda Sieg; Editing by Edwina Gibbs and Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Great just what the world needs more weapons. You know I went food shopping yesterday for a family of three I bought basic stuff: vegetables, meats (chicken mostly), various aisle stuff (rice, beans, soy sauce, etc), personal products (shampoo, soap, etc) NOTHING gourmet. i dis get a duck for Christmas. Cost? $273.00. What is that? Did we loose a war or something? Oh, that¡¯s right we did. Two of them. Carry on¡­
Dec 20, 20119:46am EST--
FoxxDrake, a family in a far away country stood in line for their ration of beans and rice. THEY lost a war. Be happy my friend.
Dec 20, 20111:11pm EST--
Has anyone bothered to tell these US ¡°experts¡± that China has been helping Japan with recovery efforts since the earthquake and tsunami in March of 2011? In addition, China, Japan, and South Korea have established the Trilateral Cooperation Office in Seoul to develop and implement joint projects for economic, commercial, environmental, and other improvements. The Japanese military stated concerns over China¡¯s growing power, but militaries are supposed to be paranoid. It¡¯s part of the job. The only disputes that the Americans can point to involve private Chinese citizens who have grown justifiably proud of their nation¡¯s progress and have overreacted to vessels in waters that the civilians regard as Chinese. The government has signed treaties with countries that have maritime disputes with China to resolve them in a peaceful manner. That may explain why US ¡°experts¡± say that China is a threat to Japan, but Japanese statements do not regard the Chinese as potential adversaries. The article points out that the Japanese prime minister will visit Beijing on December 25th and 26th, so the Chinese might eat America¡¯s christmas dessert. In addition, China has helped the Philippines and Australia to recover from flooding, and the Chinese navy participated in naval maneuvers with the Australian navy while US Marines observed. Of course, China has over $3.5 trillion in cash while the US political stalemate makes the US bankrupt. Money talks loudly to those in need.
Dec 20, 20111:26pm EST--
