USTR's Kirk says no trade war but troubled by China
2011-12-17 15:02:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said on Saturday the United States is not in a trade war with China, but he is troubled by China's tendency to retaliate when other members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) launch trade cases against it.
"I am troubled by what I see as a trend of China to retaliate when members - not just the U.S., other members of the WTO - bring China to dispute settlement over legitimate matters," Kirk said in an interview.
"That's not only disruptive to global trade, it's not only not in the interest of the members of the WTO.
"But I think long term it's not in China's interest. It begins to cut away at their credibility and their belief in the two-way value of trade in which not only they marvellously and spectacularly benefit as they have, but they're also committed and have a commensurate responsibility to open up their markets fairly to us."
Asked if the United States was in a trade war with China, he said: "I really do push back on that. It is not a trade war for me to use the tools, the resources that every member of the WTO has open to them, to go to China and say: 'We believe the way you're executing this policy - that is WTO-inconsistent'."
Kirk was speaking on the last day of the WTO's biennial ministerial conference in Geneva, where the 153 member states agreed to admit Russia, Samoa and Montenegro and clinched a landmark reform of government procurement rules.
But the conference was held amid very low expectations because of deadlock over the 10-year-old Doha round of trade talks, which has effectively paralyzed the WTO's ability to legislate.
Many diplomats had hoped for a constructive meeting, but on the eve of the gathering China slapped punitive duties of up to 22 percent on large cars and SUVs made in the United States, a U.S. export flow worth nearly $4 billion a year.
China's decision to impose duties was widely seen as a tit-for-tat move after U.S. challenges to China, most recently in the solar industry and poultry sector.
"Part of a foundation of a rules-based system is dispute settlement," Kirk said. "That's what we think is so important about the WTO. How China reacts to that is up to China. But I just cannot buy into the argument that our standing and protecting the rights of our exporters and workers is somehow igniting a trade war or being protectionist."
(Reporting by Tom Miles; Editing by Mark Trevelyan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The so called ¡°trade war¡± over merchandise trade is actually rather irrelevant, in the scheme of things. One objective observation is that America has decided to pursue a national policy of encouraging all of the nation¡¯s major banks and other financial institutions to actively engage in GAMBLING (derivatives trading is purely redistributive, and produce nothing), at a scale already 50 times the GDP of the entire nation. The instability is clearly evident, and there is no abatement, or even abatement attempts. 2008 saw 100 year old ¡°Names¡± fold like card-built houses. 2011 there is MF Global. Those are only first tastes. Gambling is inherently unpredictable, and nobody knows what major bank or insurance company will be killed next by this greed subsidized by bipartisan government policy. Some would argue that the failure is just what happens in competition in a free market. But I submit that no free market in any country in human history had ever had a gambling industry 50 or 100 times the size of the GDP of any nation. According to Bloomberg, by June 2011, the derivatives casino was already at $700 Trillion (that is 2,000 TIMES the trade deficit with China). American banks play croupier, and make money coming and going in this casino. Of course it is not beneath them to bet against a customer or two (or all or them), using contracts that even the salesmen cannot explain, so the contracts have to sold based on the good ol¡¯ ¡°trust me¡± confidence game techniques. With the American mutual funds industry now pushing for massive adoption of derivatives, and the CFTC promulgating regulations to allow the small guys to join the fun, the derivatives casino is going to be US$1.5 QUADRILLION in no time. That would be 100 times the size of the American GDP. Hugely attractive if you are making money off of it ¨C that is the pitch American wants to make to the rest of the world. Even if you argue that the net exposure on any derivative contract is only 1%, that is $7 trillion on $700 T, or $15 Trillion on $1.5 Quadrillion. Here a trillion, there a trillion, they soon add up to more than the ENTIRE equity base of all American banks and financial companies. For the bipartisan (economic) industrial policy to work, foreigners MUST be convinced to open up their markets to American ¡°banking¡±, in order to feed the meat grinder. Otherwise the very capable predators will simply consume each other ¨C as they have. 2008 complicated things. Both Germany and China ordered their banks to stop massive gambling in derivatives. Both of their economies recovered. America bet the farm, and counted on EXPANDING the scope of the casino, betting heavily that (a) other countries will be forced to open their markets to this contagion, and (b) the American banks would win. Essentially it is double or nothing time, a bet it all at already 50 times the GDP, and gaining. The $7.77 TRILLION in subsidies to the American banking industry (in very low cost loans) also complicated things (Bloomberg exposed the practice after FOIA requests). Now the foreigners are going to point to that as an violation of WTO rules, and refuse to allow the American banks to come in and do their derivatives ¡°banking¡±. Against that backdrop, disputes over merchandise trade (a billion here, a few hundred millions there) is rather irrelevant. The real economic ¡°arena¡± in this 21st century is going to be over industrial policies in a post industrial world ¨C mostly over the financial industry. We do live in interesting times.
Dec 18, 20111:19am EST--
