China tells U.S. to axe anti-subsidy probe on tires
2011-12-21 08:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Dec 15 2011
Thu, Dec 15 2011
Thu, Dec 15 2011
Wed, Dec 14 2011
Tue, Dec 13 2011
Tue, Dec 20 2011
Wed  EST
The call by China's Commerce Ministry was issued after the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit dismissed an anti-subsidy lawsuit submitted by the U.S. Department of Commerce that targeted tires imported from China.
"For many years, the United States has been launching anti-subsidy investigations against China which go against World Trade Organisation rules and are not supported by U.S. laws," the Commerce Ministry said.
"We hope the United States can correct its mistakes as soon as possible and not launch an anti-subsidy probe against China if it does not recognize China's market economy status."
That status has troubled Beijing, which says Chinese exporters are unfairly penalized when trading partners pursue anti-subsidy or anti-dumping cases against them.
To build an anti-subsidy or anti-dumping case against China, a country can substitute Chinese prices with those of another nation, and one where manufacturing costs are higher, in order to provide supporting evidence for the case.
China says this is unfair because it hinders its export sector, a point reiterated by the Commerce Ministry on Wednesday.
"The abuse of trade measures is a typical behavior of protectionism," the ministry said.
Ties between the United States and China, the world's two biggest economies, have been fraught with a growing list of trade and investment disputes as rising global economic uncertainty raises tension.
(Reporting by Aileen Wang and Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Ken Wills and Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Looks like it has come down to cheat or be cheated. That¡¯s how both sides are playing.
Dec 21, 20111:54pm EST--
Tires are a rip-off now, it was so much better before the tariffs where I could get them much cheaper. Even if I didn¡¯t buy the chinese ones the price lowering effect on all the other brands kept them from gouging.
Dec 22, 20112:33am EST--
