Analysis: China's severe export outlook
2011-12-19 09:19:00.0
(Reuters) - China could record a rare trade deficit next year, which would test both Beijing's resolve to go slowly on policy easing and its trading partners' ability to adapt.
The first quarter is shaping up to be especially tough because of slow European and U.S. demand, coupled with the normal spike in imports that comes with the celebration of Chinese New Year, which this year starts in late January.
Zhiwei Zhang, a Nomura economist based in Hong Kong, expects China to import $28.8 billion more than it exports during the first three months of 2012, dwarfing the $1 billion deficit posted over the same period this year. That quarterly deficit was the first since 2004, and China has not recorded a full-year shortfall in two decades.
Slowing exports are part of the reason why many economists think China's economic growth will dip below 8 percent, at least in the first half of 2012, if not the full year. The 8 percent mark is considered the minimum growth rate needed to create enough jobs to keep up with a growing urban population.
"Looking from a global perspective, China's shrinking trade surplus should be seen as a welcome development, as evidence that China has made progress in boosting its domestic demand relative to exports," said Tao Wang, China economist at UBS, based in Hong Kong.
SOFTLY, SOFTLY
UBS's Wang expects export growth to drop to zero in 2012, which would trim 1.4 percentage points off China's gross domestic product, although she does not think the trade surplus will completely vanish in 2012. Flat exports will prod Beijing to ease fiscal and monetary policy, Wang predicted.
China has shown no willingness to repeat its 2009 spending spree, which helped insulate it from the Lehman fallout, but also left behind a trail of questionable investments and a growing pile of bad debts.
That means instead of a deluge of government cash, the spending next year will probably be targeted at areas such as affordable housing and green energy that China has already designated as development priorities.
Reducing banks' reserve requirements is widely expected to be the main policy lever. Interest rate cuts, if any, will be used sparingly.
But if a slowdown turns into something worse, China may abandon the "prudent" monetary and "pro-active" fiscal policy approach it spelled out at an annual work conference on December 14.
"If the Chinese economy needs stimulation, they have the resources and the political will to do it," Nobel prize-winning economist Josepth Stiglitz told Reuters in an interview in Santiago on Friday.
"Unlike the United States, they don't have half the country committed to an ideology which says the way to solve the problem is to cut spending," he said. "If their economy slows, they'll spend to keep going."
If China's domestic growth stays resilient, the United States would stand to benefit from rising demand. U.S. exports to China reached $84.2 billion in the first 10 months of this year, up by about 16 percent from the same period in 2010, according to U.S. Commerce Department data.
However, for the rest of Asia, slower exports out of China could mean less demand for imports into China. A large fraction of what China imports from its Asian neighbors is raw materials or partially finished goods destined for export channels.
Wiping out the trade surplus, which totalled about $180 billion in 2010, but probably narrowed this year, would also mean fewer U.S. dollars flowing into China. Those reserves are typically recycled into U.S. and other government bonds.
But it could conceivably propel China ahead of the United States in correcting current account imbalances that have been a source of friction between the two countries for years. Washington has long pressured Beijing to reduce its surplus, and promised to tackle its own deficit.
Over the first three quarters of 2011, China's current account imbalance was equal to 3 percent of GDP, below the 4 percent threshold that U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has linked with global economic stability.
If China's export juggernaut really does run out of steam, perhaps the biggest adjustment the United States will have to make is in its political campaigns.
As is often the case, anti-China rhetoric has intensified as Republicans battle over who will win the right to challenge President Barack Obama in November 2012. Mitt Romney, considered the Republican front-runner, has accused China of manipulating the yuan currency to gain an export advantage and vowed to impose trade sanctions if he were elected.
"Despite the rising rhetoric from the U.S. in recent months complaining about China's exchange rate policy, the fundamental pressures for the (yuan) to appreciate have weakened," UBS's Wang said.
(Reporting by Emily Kaiser in Singapore; Additional reporting by Hugh Bronstein in Santiago; Editing by Mathew Veedon)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China¡¯s plan is to develop the central and western provinces from 2011 to 2015. China intended to reduce its export surplus by 20% over 2010, so the surplus should have come in at $144 billion. Natural disasters in trading partners caused its export surplus to fall only 15% by October, so the total 2011 surplus may be $153 billion. Evidently the author missed China¡¯s plan to build 46 million low-cost housing units between 2011 and 2015, enough for 138 million Chinese or 10% of the population. 10 million units, enough for 30 million, will be built in 2011. Also, there are limits of 1, 2, or 3 homes per person to reduce excessive speculation that raises prices without raising value. Homes are for people to inhabit, not for gamblers to turn into casinos. The plan and policy have reduced home prices 5.1% in China, giving lower inflation. China has a growing ¡°green energy¡± sector, and the Chinese announced a five-year plan for the Durban Conference on climate change that China would invest $1.7 trillion over 5 years ($340 billion per year) to make environmental improvements that would include increased use of ¡°green energy.¡± The author apparently missed that part, too. I suggest that anyone who writes about China should read Xinhua to learn about China¡¯s plans to understand more about the country. China has been beating all of its target numbers, based on its Five Year Plan published in March, 2011, but the ignorant western writers have made false claims that China is declining. Western markets have fallen often on these ignorant reports, so the West is receiving what it has earned.
Dec 19, 201112:55pm EST--
¡°I suggest that anyone who writes about China should read Xinhua to learn about China¡¯s plans to understand more about the country.¡± Rather than Xinhua, which is more than likely closely governed by the CCP in terms of content, you may want to read reports at this site (http://www.theepochtimes.com/n2/c/china-news/china-economy). Hard to say what is really happening in China regarding the economy because what is published may not actually be factual. Just ask anyone from China and they¡¯ll quote the old saying, ¡°only the date on a newspaper is accurate¡±. I hope the economy there is strong and stable, for the sake of the country and the people, but only time will tell.
Dec 19, 20111:38pm EST--
I have one correction to make. Prices for new housing in Beijing fell 5.1% for the first ten months of 2011. (Xinhua, 11-11-2011). The basic argument remains valid because ignorance of China¡¯s plans makes it impossible to determine if China is succeeding or failing. For example, if China¡¯s export ¡°surplus¡± falls by 20% or less, then China succeeds; if the export ¡°surplus¡± falls by more than 20%, then China fails to achieve its goal. Add Xinhua to the required reading list of those reporters who cover China.
Dec 19, 20111:48pm EST--
