Tension simmers in blockaded China village after land protest
2011-12-14 13:32:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Dec 12 2011
Sat, Dec 10 2011
Wed, Dec 7 2011
Wed, Dec 7 2011
Wed, Nov 30 2011
Villagers raise their hands as they gather for a meeting in Wukan village of Lufeng, Guangdong province December 12, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Wed  EST
The death of Xue Jinbo, 42, fanned tension in the small pocket of export-dependent Guangdong province and came after riot police fired water cannons and tear gas on Sunday to disperse thousands of stone-throwing villagers on the coast of the booming province.
"The case is under further investigation," Zheng Yanxiong, the Communist Party boss of Shanwei city, which oversees Wukan village, was quoted as saying by the official Xinhua news agency.
Human rights group Amnesty International called for an immediate and independent investigation into Xue's death, adding that China was failing to protect citizens from forced eviction.
"Contrary to international human rights law and standards, Chinese citizens rarely have an opportunity for genuine consultation before eviction, rarely receive adequate information on the nature or purpose of the eviction and often receive little or no compensation," the group said in a statement.
The term "Wukan" was blocked on China's Twitter-like microblogging service Weibo on Wednesday.
China's Communist Party leaders face thousands of small protests and riots every year that chip away at its authority at the grassroots. Land disputes are a widespread source of discord.
One expert on unrest, Sun Liping of Beijing's Tsinghua University, estimates there may have been more than 180,000 such "mass incidents" in 2010, nearly double the number often cited by academics and government experts.
According to a witness, villagers at the Wukan rally gathered in front of a poster of Xue and chanted slogans denouncing corrupt officials.
They also pressed for Xue's body to be returned for proper funeral rites, a request that authorities have refused.
"They clearly have something to hide," one resident told Reuters by telephone. "We will continue to fight for justice for Xue's death and we won't back down."
Riot police maintained a tight cordon around the village on Wednesday and barred almost all access to and from the area, while blocking some supplies of food.
"We beg the central government to save us," said another villager by phone. "Everything is black now."
(Reporting by James Pomfret; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I am currently in Beijing and we can¡¯t see any of this coverage in the Chinese news, both english or Chinese language. There are some photos going around on weibo (Chinese twitter), but most get taken down soon. The Chinese government is trying to again cover up what is going on in China, but they are finding it more and more difficult to do so. Lets just hope this doesn¡¯t end the same way it did in 1989.
Dec 14, 20119:53am EST--
If a government official grabbed my land it would be their last grab. Good thing I don¡¯t live in China or they¡¯d probably execute me in some remote prison citing the old ¡®state subversion¡¯ crap. I can¡¯t believe they actually allow this to happen to begin with absolutely nothing is done about it. The reality is this turn a blind eye behavior will inevitably be their downfall. I think there are simply too many greedy fingers in the pie and it¡¯s like a runaway train that can¡¯t be stopped until it crashes.
Dec 14, 201111:10am EST--
I have to wonder why the local villager would say that they are ¡°waiting for the central government to come and save them.¡± I guess this goes to show how little the chinese people know about their own government. china is morally bankrupt from the top, all the way down to the local authorities. The only thing that can save these local villagers is themselves.
Dec 14, 201112:42pm EST--
