China villagers defy government in standoff over death
2011-12-15 10:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Villagers in southern China on Thursday defied authorities and continued protests over a death in custody and land dispute in the latest outburst of simmering rural discontent that is eroding the ruling Communist Party's grip at the grassroots.
"The whole village is distraught and enraged. We want the central government to come in and restore justice," said one resident who described the scene.
He and another resident, both speaking on condition of anonymity, said villagers remain enraged over last weekend's death in custody of Xue Jinbo, 42, who was detained on suspicion of helping organize protests against land seizures.
"We won't be satisfied until there is a full investigation and redress for Xue Jinbo's death," said the second resident.
"If you say he wasn't beaten to death, then you can show us the body," another villager who had his face hidden from the camera by the hood of his jacket told Hong Kong's Cable TV.
"If there really isn't any injury on the body, then why would you not return the body to us?"
Rural land in China is mostly owned in name by village collectives, but in fact officials can mandate its seizure for development in return for compensation, which residents often say is inadequate and does not reflect the profits reaped.
The government of Shanwei, a district including Wukan, said on Wednesday a "handful" of Communist Party members and officials accused of misdeeds over the disputed land development were detained and that the main land development project had been suspended, the official Xinhua news agency reported.
In a bid to allay suspicions that other villagers detained over protests in September had been abused, the local government put online footage of four suspects being visited by relatives and reassuring them of their wellbeing. (
But for the two residents interviewed it was not enough to defuse fury over the death of Xue, whom villagers believe was the victim of police brutality -- a charge the government denies, citing an autopsy that found he died of heart failure.
China's leaders, determined to maintain one-party control, worry that such outbursts might turn into broader and more persistent challenges to their power.
But they usually stay local and Beijing's grip remains strong, said Kenneth Lieberthal, an expert on Chinese politics.
"Is there a risk of disruption? Yes, absolutely. Is this a place just waiting to explode? No," said Lieberthal, director of the John L. Thornton China Center at the Brookings Institution, a Washington D.C. think tank.
"The chances of long-term, systemic instability are very, very small. The chances of some major disruption -- like 1989, but on a much larger scale -- are considerably greater, but still the odds are they can avoid it," he said.
Wukan, with its clannish unity and big stake in rising land values, is an example of the kind of slow-burning discontent that is corroding party power at the grassroots.
Although China's Communist Party has ruled over decades of economic growth that have protected it from challenges to its power, the country is confronted by thousands of smaller scale protests and riots every year.
One expert on unrest, Sun Liping of Tsinghua University in Beijing, has estimated that there could have been over 180,000 such "mass incidents" in 2010. But most estimates from Chinese scholars and government experts put numbers at about half that in recent years.
The real worry for Beijing is not the sheer number of such protests, but their tendency to become more persistent and organized - both features on display in the unrest in Wukan, where there were torrid riots in September.
(Addition reporting by Paul Eckert in Washington D.C. and Stefanie McIntyre in Hong Kong, Editing by Jonathan Thatcher and Yoko Nishikawa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
So few people in this world actually KNOW (or care) about this story, and the heart-break that HUNDREDS of MILLIONS of oppressed Chinese people must fight against every day. If the past is any indication, it will only be a matter of days before the Chinese Army swoops in and all of these villagers disappear¡­ from their homes, and more importantly, from the headlines. Every day I read stories like this and wonder at the sheer audacity of the Chinese Totalitarian Regime and how long before the Chinese people finally say ENOUGH! Forget another Arab Spring¡­ I want to see an Asian Spring!
Dec 15, 201111:04am EST--
They¡¯ve been lied to, cheated, extorted and now they want justice. I certainly can¡¯t blame them, who wouldn¡¯t?
Dec 15, 201111:16am EST--
Who do the protesters think they are? The land is the People¡¯s land. The local people work the land, and may live on the land, but final ownership will mnot change. What happened in the jail was wrong, must be investigated, and punishements metted. But, China has been, is, and will remain the People¡¯s Republic.
Dec 15, 201112:39pm EST--
