China eyes private sector as growth slows
2011-12-16 09:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China aims to free up its infrastructure and financial businesses to private investment in 2012 to bolster growth in the world's No. 2 economy in the face of a global slowdown, the country's top economic planner said.
China's National Development and Reform Commission said it would support private investment in railway, utilities and financial projects which are so far dominated by the government.
An embracement of private investors in 2012 would be a sharp contrast to 2008, when China countered a world recession with massive government stimulus that created impressive headline growth rates but also heavily-indebted state sectors.
A debt hangover from the 2008 spending spree has left its mark. China's Railway Ministry, a big investor with 2 trillion yuan ($313.80 billion) worth of debt, is set to miss its annual investment target of 600 billion yuan for 2011.
All said, China has pledged repeatedly over the years to free up these industries for private investment but has never delivered on its promises.
Zhang Dejiang, one of China's four vice premiers, said in an article in the Communist Party's journal Qiushi that Beijing will do more to support them.
Zhang said China would give SMEs more financial and tax incentives, and plans to launch a National SME Fund designed to increase financial aid to these smaller firms that account for 60 percent of China's economy and 80 percent of its jobs.
China's Finance Ministry has already cut taxes for the country's smallest firms and China's central bank is encouraging banks to lend more to them.
Shut out of the bank lending market, local governments are also rolling out their red carpets for private investors.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China¡¯s government maintains dominance in some sectors because initial investments in areas like railways and utilities are high and returns do not come as fast as in other businesses. The financial sector stays strictly regulated because US and EU deregulation caused the current economic crises, and China, wisely, intends to avoid western mistakes. Competition is accepted, but the West should understand that officials have high levels of education and expertise, so the government may win competitions fairly against free enterprise. It will be interesting to watch. However, state-owned firms give profits, state-private joint ventures give partial profits and partial taxes, and private companies give taxes, so the government wins in the end. The Chinese have three options for companies but all three give profits and/or taxes so the government has more choices for revenue streams. The West may want to experiment with some of these competitive systems to see if they can be adapted to western economies and succeed. The West is competing with China and must become better. There is a four step system to any competition: 1st, learn what the opponent is doing; second, learn how he is doing it; third, determine how to do it better; and fourth, beat him at his own game. This how the West should compete with China. One side will win more than the other, but both sides will gain. May the best side win the most.
Dec 17, 20116:10pm EST--
