China says already part of effort to help Europe
2011-12-10 00:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China will remain part of international efforts to help Europe through its crisis, vice foreign minister Fu Ying said on Saturday, dismissing the idea that Beijing was sitting back as the region suffered.
"China will be part of the international effort to help Europe. We've done a lot, we have been so much in it, Europeans know it," she told reporters on the sidelines of a conference in Vienna. Asked how China would help, she said:
"We want to invest, we are importing more, we are sending delegations to buy, to purchase, that will help create jobs, that will help stimulate the economy.
"China will continue to be part of the effort because we are interrelated, interdependent. We are in it together. We are in one boat," she said.
As the owner of the world's largest foreign exchange reserves, China is one of the few governments with pockets deep enough to buy a sizeable portion of European government debt and help pull the region from its economic malaise.
Supporters of this idea say China would help itself if it assisted the euro zone, because it would allow Beijing to diversify its reserves from the dollar and foster economic growth in China's biggest export market.
China has been cool to such suggestions and has not committed publicly to contributing to Europe's bailout fund, despite being courted by the fund's chief last month.
"When it is translated into Chinese it sounds like development aid and that is not what we are talking about," she told a panel discussion.
"The kind of thing we want to do is to be part of the effort to stimulate the economy," she said, adding that China hoped to increase its imports from Europe next year.
"China has 120 million people living on one dollar a day so it is not the kind of country rich enough to talk about saving others. It doesn't mean that China is trying to stay away from this global effort...we are all interdependent," she said.
(Reporting by Sylvia Westall; Editing by David Cowell)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China has offered words of support, but must also prepare for its own tsunami from a collapsing market of 65,000,000 vacant homes, the resulting impact on its banking industry.
Dec 10, 201112:34pm EST--
You are absolutely right SanPa, China is faced by many internal threats to economic stability, the housing market being a major problem. Lets just hope that this new round of stimulus and bank regulation relaxation does not put full on the fire. China needs to figure out how to put businesses into empty offices and families into empty homes. As this article states, there are still 120 million living on less than a dollar a day, yet China¡¯s upper class rivals Europe. The government is dependent on these impoverished people to power the nations factories. There is no doubt that they have the strongest ability to mobilize liquid funds. The foreign minister is right, its time to invest in Europe.
Dec 10, 20111:24pm EST--
The Chinese are taking the correct actions in the EU crisis. They are investing in businesses that will make the profits needed to repay loans to banks, to expand their businesses, and to hire new workers with paychecks to become customers and taxpayers. They will pay the taxes needed for governments to pay interest, redeem bonds (pay debts), and pay for existing programs. The US and EU leaders have no plan other than to gather cash and stack it in vaults. Most of this cash will be electronic money in cyberspace, but the US and EU leaders have made no plan to use the money to make more money. Stacking the money will not end the interest payments that are due, and the massive hoard will be spent with no economic growth. The money must be invested to create growth; China is taking the correct actions; but the US and EU leaders are doing nothing to help themselves.
Dec 10, 20112:43pm EST--
