South Korea's China embassy window shot amid tension
2011-12-14 09:10:00.0
South Korea's China embassy window shot amid tension | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
South Korea's China embassy window shot amid tension
Mon, Dec 12 2011
Mon, Dec 5 2011
Fri, Dec 2 2011
Thu, Dec 1 2011
Wed, Nov 30 2011
Cracks and a hole are seen in the window of a building hit by an air gun shot at the South Korean embassy in Beijing December 14, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Cha Dae-woon/Yonhap
Wed  EST
South Korea's Foreign Ministry said it was unclear what kind of weapon was used to fire the ballbearing-like shot that cracked one of the embassy's windows on Tuesday afternoon, but that no one was injured.
A ministry official, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters in Seoul the incident occurred between 12:30 p.m. and 1:30 p.m. on Tuesday and that an investigation was under way.
"The Korean embassy has sent a letter to authorities requesting them to protect the mission and identify the reason for the incident," the official said.
In a report from Beijing, South Korea's Yonhap news quoted sources as saying the metal ball was likely fired from an air gun, as no one testified to hearing a gunshot.
An embassy official said it was difficult to comment on what kind of weapon, if any, had been used, but as there is another building between the glass and the street outside, "a shot would have to have been fired from an upper floor" of a building.
"As far as we know, from the initial evaluation and from the onsite inspection, the South Korea Embassy had its window glass broken and has not been attacked," Liu told a news briefing.
"At present, the Chinese side has taken relevant measures and will send more police and enhance the security patrols to increase the protection of the embassy."
Chinese boats are frequently caught illegally fishing in the Yellow Sea, an area rich with mackerel and crabs, and there have been a number of clashes with South Korean maritime police.
Beijing has expressed regret over the incident, but initially was unapologetic, calling on Seoul to protect the rights of the detained fishermen.
On Tuesday, a few hundred protesters staged a demonstration outside the Chinese embassy in Seoul. About 30 people attempted to enter the mission but were stopped by police, and a man crashed a car into a police bus at the embassy.
Yonhap has reported that some 2,600 Chinese fishing boats have been caught illegally fishing in the South Korean exclusive economic zone since 2006 and nearly 800 Chinese fishermen have been arrested.
(Additional reporting by Jack Kim in Seoul and Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Since this is an ongoing problem, which China has obviously not addressed, one has to wonder how seriously they are taking this incident. Such a shame, since it actually could have been an opportunity to engage in helpful action and change the view that many have of China as being out for itself and not a caring part of a world community. But China, you are not alone.
Dec 14, 20113:47am EST--
So, a chinese fisherman illegally enters S. Korean waters, attacks and then kills a S. Korean coast guard official. Then, a chinese citizen shoots at the S. Korean embassy in Beijing. And if that wasn¡¯t enough, the chinese government has the audacity to claim that, ¡°As far as we know, from the initial evaluation and from the onsite inspection, the South Korea Embassy had its window glass broken and has not been attacked,¡± Liu told a news briefing. Take a look at the picture china¡­..it was clearly a gunshot. How is a gunshot at an embassy not an attack? Nice try! It seems to me that china¡¯s arrogance is becoming a very big problem in international relations.
Dec 14, 201111:16am EST--
