China Gas rejects $2.2 billion Sinopec/ENN bid
2011-12-14 16:22:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Dec 13 2011
Tue, Dec 13 2011
Wed, Nov 23 2011
Tue, Nov 22 2011
Mon, Nov 21 2011
The Sinopec logo is seen outside one of its gas stations in Hong Kong April 26, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Wed  EST
), saying it failed to reflect the fundamental value of the company.
Analysts said earlier that Sinopec, seeking to expand its resources footprint, might need to sweeten its offer or go hostile but China Gas shares stayed just below the bid price on Wednesday, suggesting that a rival offer was unlikely.
Piper Jaffray said in a research note earlier on Wednesday: "We don't rule out the possibility (of Sinopec) lifting the offer price."
China Gas, a Chinese city piped-gas distributor, said in a stock exchange filing the Sinopec-ENN bid was "wholly unsolicited" and "opportunistic."
) to advise on the deal, confirming a Reuters report earlier on Wednesday.
If a deal was completed, ENN and China Gas would become the largest listed downstream gas utility in China with combined sales of more than 10 billion cubic meters per year, Piper Jaffray estimated.
), known officially as China Petroleum & Chemical Corp, and ENN Energy, another Chinese city piped-gas distributor, on Tuesday offered HK$3.50 per share for China Gas at a 25 percent premium to the previous closing price.
China Gas shares ended up slightly at HK$3.38 on Wednesday, after soaring more than 20 percent the previous day.
Sinopec, China's second-largest oil and gas company and Asia's largest refiner, now holds 4.8 percent of China Gas, while ENN has no shares in the company.
), Gail India Ltd (
China Gas issued 719 million new shares, 16 percent of its enlarged share capital, to the public in October 2010 at HK$4.31 per share, representing about a 54 percent premium over the current market price.
Even if China Gas accepts the offer there is a chance that Beijing may block the trade on anti-trust grounds, some analysts say.
China International Capital Corp said the China Gas deal "indicates another round of consolidation may be under way in the gas distribution industry, which should help support the valuations of gas distributors."
In October, China Resources Gas Group Ltd (
) said it would offer HK$795.13 million ($102.2 million) to take its 56.9 percent-owned unit, Zhengzhou China Resources Gas Co Ltd 3928.HK, private to reduce potential conflicts in allocating resources or investments and acquisitions.
), Towngas China Co Ltd (
China, the world's top energy user, is keen to curb use of dirtier coal and will likely triple use of natural gas to about 300 billion cubic meters (bcm) by 2020. Nearly a third of that will be imported.
(Additional reporting by James Pomfret in Hong Kong, Wan Xu in BEIJING, Cho Meeyoung in SEOUL and Saleh Al-Shaibany in MUSCAT; Writing by Charlie Zhu; Editing by Ken Wills and David Cowell)
