China lends Costa Rica $400 million on Xi visit
2013-06-03 18:41:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, May 30 2013
Wed, May 29 2013
Wed, May 29 2013
Mon, May 27 2013
Mon, May 27 2013
China's President Xi Jinping and his wife Liyuan receive the Keys to the City from San Jose Mayor Johnny Araya in San Jose June 3, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Carlos Flores
Mon  EDT
Costa Rica recently backed China in its dispute with Taiwan, which Beijing regards as a renegade province, in votes at the United Nations. Members of the Costa Rican opposition said the deals announced on Monday raised questions about what China expected in return.
The bulk of the financial aid was made through the Export-Import Bank of China, which said it was giving a $296 million loan to fund the extension of a road to connect the central part of Costa Rica to its main shipping port in the Caribbean.
A second loan for $101 million was made to allow Costa Rica to replace some 16,000 public transportation vehicles. Both loans must be approved by Costa Rica's Congress.
China still claims the island as its own territory and reserves the right to use military force to reclaim Taiwan, although economic ties have broadened rapidly and a free-trade agreement links the two sides.
But after the loans were announced by the Costa Rican government, Castillo said no strings had been attached.
"In the political arena, China has asked us for nothing, there have been no conditions imposed on us," he said.
"It's been our initiative, since we are friends, to offer our position in the region and help them start new friendships with other countries here," he added.
FREE LUNCH?
Xi's visit came on the sixth anniversary of the beginning of diplomatic relations between the two countries. He is set to fly to Mexico on Tuesday for a state visit, and then to the United States to meet President Barack Obama later in the week.
Nine deals were signed on the visit, including a Chinese donation of $16.3 million for Costa Rica's police academy. Costa Rica will be applying for a loan from China to buy 5,000 solar panels in coming months, the government said.
But a $1.5 billion upgrade of an oil refinery by China National Petroleum Corporation, due to be funded partly through a $900 million loan from the China Development Bank, is still pending as Costa Rica is not yet satisfied with the terms.
The main opposition Citizens' Action Party, or PAC, submitted a letter in Mandarin to Xi calling for transparency on the agreements made on Monday, PAC congresswoman Carmen Munoz said.
"We know there's no such thing as a free lunch and from this point of view we are questioning why Costa Rica is opening its doors for China and in exchange for what," she said. "We'll see how these gifts and donations express themselves in the future."
China is Costa Rica's second-biggest trading partner after the United States. Costa Rica imported $1.44 billion in Chinese goods last year, while its exports to China were $331 million, government data showed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I am not sure why we are spending money on our military? Eventually, communist China will buy us w/out firing a shot.
Jun 03, 20138:03pm EDT--
¡°The main opposition Citizens¡¯ Action Party, or PAC, submitted a letter in Mandarin to Xi calling for transparency on the agreements made on Monday, PAC congresswoman Carmen Munoz said.¡± Letter in Mandarin? Might need to have your editors double check on that. Mandarin is a SPOKEN dialect, not a written script.
Jun 03, 20139:13pm EDT--
all one has to do is look at what¡¯s happening in Africa with the millions spent there by the Chinese for access to raw material/mines to supply the makings for parts to hi-tech devises it produces back in the mainland. the massive influx of Chinese and Chinese currency paid to local African governments has spawned a massive and savage increase in elephant and rhino poaching to meet the Chinese demand for ivory and folk cure (rhino horn) for erectile dysfunction and ¡°cancer¡±. The savagery of the slaughter happening right now is beyond comprehension, with entire families of elephants being gunned down with machine guns, including babies and pregnant females. all for their tusks, which are laundered via Hong Kong to China and Thailand. A horrific price being paid with the near extinction of two species at an alarming rate. I wonder what Costa Rica¡¯s price will be? How many animals will be traded for their parts from the rain forests there? Chinese investment leaves a brutal, bloody handprint wherever it touches¡­
Jun 03, 201310:32pm EDT--
