Vietnam police swoop on anti-China protest, 20 detained
2013-06-02 02:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Police in Vietnam moved swiftly to break up an anti-China protest on Sunday, making at least 20 arrests in the latest sign of the communist regime's tough stance on dissent, and even after it chided Beijing for aggression in the South China Sea.
As crowds gathered in response to the recent ramming of a Vietnamese trawler by Chinese navy vessels, uniform and plain clothes police blocked off rallying points and quickly put protesters on to waiting buses, Reuters witnesses said.
Two Vietnamese journalists working for foreign media were also detained at the protest near Hanoi's Hoan Kien lake.
Vietnam's has been criticized by Western countries including the United States for crushing freedom of speech and arresting its detractors as discontent grows over land grabs, graft and the state's management of an economy hamstrung by bad debt.
Diplomats and experts say the ruling party is eager to curtail all protests, even those against rival China which it once tolerated, fearing they could mushroom into wider anti-government movements.
In a rare break from a usually diplomatic tone, Vietnam Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung on Friday warned of damage to regional economies and global trade if "unilateral might, groundless claims" and "power politics" were to ignite a conflict in the South China Sea.
(Reporting by Martin Petty; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Even though Vietnam is struggling to overcome the financial crisis, the government still spend a large amount of tax money in propaganda. Vietnamese youth are brainwashed to believe that the government is always right. They don¡¯t even know that basic human rights in Vietnam are being brutally violated by the government, especially freedom of speech and religion. Vietnamese who publicly criticize government or demand for human rights are usually arrested by the government secret service.
Jun 02, 20136:18am EDT--
That how Vietnamese revolutionists communists started and they were very good against any regime. WHo can understand this better than Vietnam communist party. This is why they crush any gathering group either it¡¯s a bad or good group. Fear, few and fear but you can¡¯t hide.
Jun 02, 201312:30pm EDT--
