Stocks, euro advance on EU deal, China report
2011-12-09 16:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Global stocks rebounded and the euro rose on Friday after nearly all European Union leaders agreed to build a closer fiscal union to address the region's debilitating debt crisis.
Yields on Italian debt also were trading below the 7 percent threshold, which was seen as unsustainably high. However, traders said frequent European Central Bank purchases offset disappointment over the prospect for a quick end to the crisis.
Led by Germany and France, 26 of the 27 nations in the European Union agreed after a two-day summit to pursue tighter integration with stricter budget discipline in the euro zone. Britain said it could not accept the proposed EU treaty amendments.
European and U.S. shares surged more than 1 percent, recouping most of Thursday's losses as investors saw merit in the EU deal.
"Some were hoping for a bigger deal, but we're seeing a lot more meat behind the effort with these measures," said Dennis Wassung, portfolio manager at Cabot Money Management in Salem, Massachusetts.
Italian bonds rebounded, and yields on the 10-year bond fell. Yields were off 15 points to 6.38 percent, with traders citing frequent European Central Bank purchases that offset market disappointment at the lack of prospects for a quick end to the debt crisis.
The euro also reversed course, gaining 0.2 percent to $1.3372. The single currency hit a global session high of $1.3433 on news of the Reuters report about China's planned investment vehicle.
Still, concerns remained that implementation of tougher budgetary discipline is going to be difficult.
"While many promises were made to stick to the rules of keeping debt at manageable levels, there were no tools offered that would supply an immediate and tangible benefit to the area," said Brendan McGrath, senior analyst at Western Union Business Solutions in Victoria, British Columbia.
closed up 186.56 points, or 1.55 percent, at 12,184.26. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
was up 20.84 points, or 1.69 percent, at 1,255.19. The Nasdaq Composite Index
was up 50.47 points, or 1.94 percent, at 2,646.85.
Banks, which have been pressured by the uncertainty of the debt crisis, rallied. The Financial Select Sector SPDR in New York rose 2.2 percent to $13.10, while the STOXX Europe 600 Banking Index .SX7P rose 2.6 percent to 135.18.
A rise in U.S. consumer sentiment also drove gains on Wall Street. Consumer sentiment in early December hit its highest level in six months on signs of better labor conditions and an improving economic outlook, according to a survey by Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan.
The U.S. trade deficit narrowed in October to its lowest in 10 months, but imports from China hit a record high, a government report showed.
U.S. Treasury debt prices stumbled on the Wall Street rally and as traders reduced bond holdings in advance of next week's $78 billion in coupon debt supply.
U.S. gold futures for February delivery settled up $3.40 at $1,716.80 an ounce.
(Reporting by Frank Tang, Julie Haviv, Ellen Freilich and Ryan Vlastelica and Robert Gibbons in New York; Writing by Herbert Lash; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/sink to displace part of the volume of a supporting substance or object and become totally or partially submerged or enveloped; This currency and the overvalued portion/infant euro economies attached to Germany needs to come down to earth. I could careless about big business cheaper or expensive goods coming out of our USA based on our weak dollar. Time to stay concerned with our well being. If the rest of the world has to pay more for our products because the dollar strengthens then so be it. If one can not afford a product then one should not purchase that product. What ever happened to I can not afford this item right now so I will save and buy it later.
Dec 09, 20111:37am EST--
Intriped:, good, again no objection to a lower Euro currency. Just make sure you know what to ask for. As EU and Chinese companies already broadly outcompete US counterparts, a dollar rise would maybe help your personal finances but certainly not your country¡¯s economy. US trade balance is not really credited for it¡¯s great performance you know.
Dec 09, 20114:38am EST--
FBreughel1: It is time for our economy/population here in the USA to come to grips with spending today for tonight¡¯s pleasure, most Americans spend way more than they actually take in annually. Disciplined folks like myself that take in a six figure income learned a long time ago that you should only pay cash for what you need and activate credit on a minor level/book purchase etc to keep ones credit fluid. This is what will bring our country under control in the beginning, it all starts at home. Consumption is great for business but terrible for an economy full of broke people with tapped out credit.
Dec 09, 20118:25am EST--
