China army to conduct first digital exercise
2013-05-28 23:53:00.0
(Reuters) - China will next month conduct its first "digital" technology military exercise, state media said on Wednesday, against growing concern in Washington and elsewhere about Chinese hacking attacks.
A brief report by the official Xinhua news agency said the exercise, in north China's remote Inner Mongolia region, will "test new types of combat forces including units using digital technology amid efforts to adjust to informationalized war".
"It will be the first time a People's Liberation Army exercise has focused on combat forces including digitalized units, special operations forces, army aviation and electronic counter forces," the brief English-language report added.
President Barack Obama will discuss cyber security with Chinese President Xi Jinping during a meeting in California next week, as Washington becomes increasingly worried about Chinese hacking of U.S. military networks.
The Pentagon underscored its concerns in a report to Congress earlier this month, accusing China of using cyber espionage to modernize its military. It said the U.S. government has been the target of hacking that appeared to be "attributable directly to the Chinese government and military".
In Australia this week, a report by Australia's ABC Television said hackers linked to China stole the floor plans of a new A$630 million headquarters for the Australia Security Intelligence Organization, the country's domestic spy agency.
The Chinese government has repeatedly denied any involvement in hacking attacks, even as it steps up defense spending and develops new technologies such as aircraft carriers and stealth fighters.
(This story corrects the timing of the exercise to next month, not next week)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The photo with the article is quite interesting. The large Chinese characters on the green background say ¡°Police Camp Internet Bar¡± and the badge on the guys says ¡°Internal Security¡±.
May 29, 20133:59am EDT--
And the big tech corporations are spending millions to lobby to increase work and student visa¡¯s for foreign Chinese to get the best seats at our universities and our best high tech jobs all so they can turn around and steal our tech and at the same time we have trained them to compete against us and attack us better. Those running this country are truly corrupt and insane. Is it any wonder this country is falling apart at the seams like never before? It¡¯s time for Americans to stick together and help Americans only, get a sense of nationalism and stand up, get educated, work hard and drive away the enemy!
May 29, 201311:06am EDT--
