October trade gap narrows to lowest in 10 months
2011-12-09 09:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. trade deficit narrowed in October to its lowest in 10 months, but imports from China hit a record high, a government report showed on Friday.
The trade gap totaled $43.5 billion, in line with a consensus estimate from analysts before the report. However, the Commerce Department revised its estimate of the September trade deficit to $44.2 billion from $43.1 billion.
As a result, the October trade gap narrowed 1.6 percent from September, instead of widening, as most analysts expected.
Both U.S. imports and exports declined in October, in a possible sign of weakening demand in the United States and abroad.
However, a smaller trade deficit is positive for fourth-quarter economic growth, since it suggests more domestic demand is being met by U.S. production.
Also, both imports and exports of capital goods set records in October, suggesting businesses are gearing up operations.
U.S. stock index futures rose on Friday after European Union leaders agreed on measures that partially addresses the region's crippling sovereign debt crisis. The euro rose against the dollar, while U.S. government debt yields rose.
U.S. exports to the 27-nation EU rose 1.0 percent in October to $23.4 billion, while imports from the community increased 6.3 percent to $31.4 billion.
"Exports to Europe are bound to weaken substantially, while imports will pick up steam as U.S. companies rebuild inventory after the unexpected decline in the third quarter," said Ian Shepherdson, chief U.S. economist at High Frequency Economics, Valhalla, New York.
Overall U.S. imports fell 1.0 percent to $222.6 billion, led by a $3.6 billion drop in industrial supplies and materials. The average price for imported oil fell for a fifth consecutive month to $98.84 per barrel, from its May peak of $108.70.
The drop in the overall trade deficit "will prove temporary, because oil prices have risen significantly since October," Shepherdson said.
Despite the overall import decline, imports of capital goods and food, feeds and beverages increased to records in October.
Imports from China rose to a record $37.8 billion and imports from Japan increased to $12.3 billion, the highest since April 2008.
U.S. exports fell 0.8 percent to $179.2 billion, led by a $1.3 billion drop in industrial supplies and materials. The biggest monthly decline in that category was for non-monetary gold, which tumbled 25 percent to $3.5 billion.
However, for the first 10 months of 2011, non-monetary gold exports totaled $27.8 billion, compared to $14.8 billion in the same period last year.
U.S. exports to China increased to $9.7 billion, the highest since December.
The U.S. trade gap with China was unchanged in October at $28.1 billion, but remained on track to surpass the annual record of about $272 billion set in 2010.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
When I was a child, the U.S. had a trade surplus and the politicians used to argue about how to spend it. Now the U.S. trade deficit is $500 billion a year with $300 billion of it with China and we read articles like this that lead people to believe something is changing for the better when it certainly is not. U.S. trade is BROKEN. Bush Sr. crafted and ceremoniously signed NAFTA which Clinton ratified beginning the era of ¡°free¡± trade. Since then American jobs, capital investment, and innovation have been offshored and outsourced enmasse to foreign countries and workers while white collar workers have been imported on visa in large numbers each year to displace Americans further. All this was done in an environment that ignored illegal immigration which has strained safety nets to the brink, established Spanish-speaking latino immigrant networks that block American citizens from entire industries today, and resulted in large amounts of U.S. dollars being sent out of the country rather than spent here. The U.S. labor market is in shambles and despite the temporary surge around the holidays, has been in decline now for years with an enormous and growing long-term unemployed American citizen population not even counted in the usually reported unemployment rate any longer. Help Fix America First ¨C http://helpfixamericafirst.blogspot.com
Dec 09, 201110:01am EST--
China is pretty much the industrial complex of the world right now. This is a problem. They are what we were. It need not be this way, however they are willing to live with dirtier water and dirtier air then we are, so that is where industry has flocked. It is not simply the cheap labor, to be honest the labor is incidental as in time it all becomes automated. Mr. Obama is both right and wrong about our need to break our dependence on foreign oil, We must do so. But the truth is that is $200 Billion of our trade deficit and could be fixed in the short term by opening up oil and gas rights like crazy, but it is only a stop gap solution. The $300 Billion China issue is a little more difficult. They produce our goods now and the incentives to produce them here are a regulatory nightmare, I tried, could not even get it off the ground there was so much regulation that I would have to comply with half my start up money would have gone just to that. But it does not matter in the end, we have regulated ourselves out of the market and will continue to see this kind of response for the next several decades until things get so bad that our children¡¯s children will finally get a clue and stop this idiocy. Until then¡­
Dec 10, 201111:54am EST--
