Now China to probe U.S. renewable energy support
2011-11-25 06:13:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Friday announced an investigation into government policy and subsidy support for renewable energy, weeks after the United States decided to probe sales of Chinese-made solar panels.
The announcement by the Commerce Ministry also comes after China's solar industry association said on Tuesday that Chinese solar companies may ask Beijing to launch an anti-dumping and subsidy probe into imports of U.S. polysilicon, the raw material used to make solar cells.
The tit-for-tat investigations underscore simmering trade tensions between China and the United States, as leaders warn of a rising tide of protectionism amid gloomy global economic tidings.
U.S. vitriol over what it says is China's undervalued currency tops frictions, and U.S. President Barack Obama has taken China to task in recent discussions of trade barriers, having said China is now "grown up" and should act that way in international affairs.
"The Ministry of Commerce has decided to initiate a trade barrier investigation into policy support and subsidies for the U.S. renewable energy sector," a statement on the ministry's website (www.mofcom.gov.cn) said.
The companies complained that U.S. measures "violated the United States' commitments under World Trade Organization rules, and are an unreasonable barrier and restriction on China's renewable energy industry, reducing the competitiveness of Chinese products in the U.S. market".
The investigation would cover programs from the states of Washington, Massachusetts, Ohio, New Jersey and California, the statement said, and include wind energy, solar and hydro technology products.
"During the investigation, the investigating agency may engage in consultations with the U.S. government concerning the measures in question," the ministry said.
Earlier this month, the ministry said it was "greatly concerned" about Washington's probe into whether China was selling solar panels in the U.S. at unfair discounts and that its investigation could hurt U.S.-China energy cooperation.
While the U.S. probe threatens to deprive Chinese rivals of a large chunk of the solar market, analysts say U.S. solar firms also risk losing some of the business too if the dispute escalates into a major rift.
"I think this is a political game more than an actual dispute between producers in China and the U.S.," said Keith Li, an analyst at CIMB Research in Hong Kong.
The United States was a significant net exporter of solar products in 2010, including to China, according to U.S. industry group Solar Energy Industries Association. Total U.S. exports of solar energy products were $5.6 billion, with net exports totaling $2 billion.
(Reporting by Michael Martina; Additional reporting by Chris Buckley and Leonora Walet in Hong Kong; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is almost laughable. The Chinese heavily subsidize every Chinese owned industry and penalize non Chinese companies in many ways, but one of the more prominent ways is by making the non Chinese companies abide by Chinese laws that are flagrantly disregarded by Chinese companies. If the world wants to get serious about China, they need to look no further than the thousands upon thousands of bootleg/ illegal software licenses being used by every Chinese company. I worked and lived in China for over 4 years and the only thing I saw was Chinese companies and the Chinese government doing everything it could to increase their advantage. Everything includes, subsidies either hidden or direct, to lying, cheating and stealing. Copyright law, or intellectual property law mean nothing to the Chinese. If you are not Chinese, you are their economic enemy. They don¡¯t trust each other let alone any outsiders.
Nov 25, 20117:22am EST--
Nov 25, 20119:26am EST--
@Dj301, ¡°Chinese companies and the Chinese government doing everything it could to increase their advantage.¡± Shouldn¡¯t American companies and the American government do the same thing? Actually, that¡¯s exactly what the American companies and government are doing. Isn¡¯t this called capitalism? Since when the US is afraid of competition?
Nov 25, 201111:24am EST--
