U.S., UK investors slash euro zone debt
2011-11-30 09:26:00.0
(Reuters)- U.S. and British institutional investors walked away from euro zone bonds during November as fears for the future of the currency bloc grew, Reuters asset allocation polls showed on Wednesday.
The surveys of 59 leading investment houses in the United States, Europe ex UK, Britain and Japan also showed an increase in exposure to stocks, mainly as a result of demand for emerging market equities.
Suggesting caution still reigns, however, cash holdings rose to 6.4 percent from 5.9 percent and were at their highest for the year.
Overall, the polls showed a model mixed-asset portfolio held an average of 50.6 percent of assets in equities, up from 49.5 percent in October. Bonds fell to 35.3 percent from 35.9 percent.
"The political and policy paralysis at the heart of Europe has raised the specter of a global recession, and greater uncertainty and volatility for asset markets," said Neil Michael, executive director of investment strategies at London & Capital.
Globally, the bonds allocation to the euro zone fell to 26.9 percent from 27.4 percent. But this masked a much greater U.S. and UK retreat.
European and Japanese investors raised their exposure to euro zone debt slightly, but not in a way that could be considered a sign the crisis was ending.
"The greatest risk we perceive today remains the tail risk on the (euro) area. The contagion to core countries like France has not stopped yet," said Nadege Dufosse, senior asset allocation manager at Dexia Asset Management.
In contrast, the asset management firms cut their bond allocation to 29.3 percent in November from 32.0 percent in October. Cash holdings were at 2.7 percent, down just a touch from 2.8 percent in October.
European funds increased equity holdings for a third month in a row in November and cut bonds, but they also boosted cash.
The survey of 17 Europe-based asset management firms outside Britain showed a typical balanced portfolio held 44.0 percent of its assets in equities, its highest since July and up from 43.3 percent in October.
Allocation to bonds fell to 39.4 percent, its lowest since June, from 40.8 percent. Cash rose to 9.9 percent from 9.3.
The poll of 12 Japan-based institutional investors showed their average equities weighting falling to a three-month low of 44.7 percent, compared with 46.8 percent in October.
Otherwise, UK fund managers raised equities and cut overall bonds.
-- Reuters also issued two similar polls from China and Italy, neither of which were included in the global calculations.
In the China poll, fund managers raised their suggested equity weightings for the third month in a row, betting on a rebound that could be triggered by looser monetary policy and hopes for a euro zone crisis solution.
(Additional reporting by Akiko Takeda in Tokyo, Jennifer Ablan in New York, Natsuko Waki and Chris Vellacott in London, Samuel Shen and Jacqueline Wonf in Shanghai, Maria Pia Quaglia in Milan, and Bangalore Polling Unit)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good article, because one can finally see in numbers what is happening:
Good article, because one can finally see in numbers what is happening:
¡°U.S. investors moved to 17.6 percent from 19.1 percent and British counterparts sliced their exposure to just 8.9 percent from a previous 11.9 percent.¡± ¡°The survey of 13 Italy-based asset management firms both showed stock and bond holdings rising in November at the expense of cash¡± So, UK, US investors out, Italian in. With cash that has been waiting. Well, well, when rates stay above 6 %, Italy has just created herself a little money machine. National spendings (private and public) won¡¯t drop to much as Italy¡¯s deficits are not incredibly high. Almost a modern version of Agnelli¡¯s days. Don¡¯t tell Italians about business, especially if it includes government policy :-) You¡¯ve got to admire these guys. A cool head can make one rich these days.
Nov 30, 201112:55pm EST--
