PLA researcher says U.S. aims to encircle China
2011-11-28 15:51:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States clearly wants to encircle China, a prominent Chinese military commentator said on Monday in some of the bluntest criticism of President Barack Obama's recent diplomatic push into the Asia-Pacific region.
People's Liberation Army Major General Luo Yuan, well-known for his hawkish views, made the warning in a commentary about Obama's visit to Asia that was published on the website of the People's Daily (www.people.com.cn), the top paper of China's ruling Communist Party.
Earlier this month, Obama told Asia-Pacific leaders that the United States was "here to stay," announced plans to set up a de facto military base in northern Australia and chided China for refusing to discuss its South China Sea disputes at regional forums.
"The United States is making much of its 'return to Asia', has been positioning pieces and forces on China's periphery, and the intent is very clear -- this is aimed at China, to contain China," Luo wrote in the commentary, which quickly spread across the Chinese Internet.
"The United States has committed a fatal strategic error. It has misjudged its foes, it has placed its strategic focus in the wrong location, and its strategic means are wrong," wrote Luo.
The comments do not represent official policy -- Beijing has reacted to Obama's diplomatic push with calls for cooperation.
But they do illustrate the undercurrents of nationalist ire with Washington that Beijing's policy-makers face.
Luo was among several PLA officer-pundits who lambasted U.S. policy earlier last year, before both governments moved to ease tensions over Taiwan, Tibet and other disputes.
Analysts have said that although the PLA is firmly under the thumb of China's Communist Party, officer-analysts have been given some leeway to strike a tougher tone in their comments.
Later in 2010, however, Chinese President Hu Jintao made clear that he could ill-afford a new round of tensions that might sour ties with Washington ahead of 2012, when he retires from power and the U.S. is focused on its presidential race.
Hu admonished the military for letting officers speak on sensitive disputes, a scholar familiar with official discussions who spoke on condition of anonymity told Reuters earlier.
But Luo, at least, appears emboldened to speak out again.
"China has not provoked U.S. interests, so what are you doing running to Asia to encircle China?," wrote Luo.
"If you shift your strategic focus to the Asia-Pacific, who will protect your own backyard. Don't you worry about a second September 11 incident?," he asked, referring to the devastating 2001 attacks on New York and Washington D.C.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley, Editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Major General Luo Yuan needs not to worry about the US military expansion in Asian Pacific and thus encircling China. At present the US government is sitting on huge deficits and large debts, foreign military intervention and military expansion will certainly expedite her bankruptcy. We should encourage them to do so if General Luo considers the US as a threat from military perspective. However, we should indeed worry about trillions dollars of our US reserves, that are cash of ¡®blood and sweat¡¯ earned from 30 years of hard working, becoming vaporized someday from meltdown of the US economy and its government.
Nov 28, 201110:38pm EST--
Major General Luo Yuan made an astute and helpful comment for the US. US forces in Australia will destroy US computers, digital cameras, cell phones, and fertilizer, the basic components of smart munitions, and the US will burn millions of gallons of US gasoline, diesel fuel, and aviation fuel at great cost to give impressive fireworks displays to the Chinese crews of commercial vessels who will make billions of dollars in trade for China. Perhaps, the Chinese will applaud loudly. The US has threats in the Indian Ocean region that could cause oil to rise rapidly in price, but fleet units in the Pacific serve no useful purpose. China rotates flotillas of warships that join international forces to fight Somali pirates, and China built and sold three naval ships to Pakistan that have joined the same effort. China has built and sold several squadrons of warplanes to Pakistan that have bombed Taliban and al-Qaeda targets in Pakistan. The US has threats to its oil from the south Atlantic coast of Africa that it doesn¡¯t address, and it must use naval units in the Mediterranean to watch developments in the new islamic ¡°democracies.¡± China also continues to hold US debt despite doubts about the US economy that pays for the military. The US remains China¡¯s second biggest trading partner after the EU, and China wants the US to prosper, but US stupidity creates doubts about the prosperity of the US in the future. The US should use trade for its commercial competitions and armed forces for its conflicts.
Nov 29, 20116:43pm EST--
