China not disputing Japan sovereignty over Okinawa
2013-06-01 23:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China does not dispute Japanese sovereignty over Okinawa and recent comments in Chinese newspapers merely reflects the views of some academics, a senior Chinese military leader said on Sunday.
"China's position has not changed... Scholars can put forth any idea they want and they do not represent the views of the Chinese government," the deputy chief of general staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, Lieutenant General Qi Jianguo, told delegates at a security conference in Singapore.
China's state-owned People's Daily last month published an article by two academics that said Okinawa was part of an island chain that used to be a vassal of imperial Chinese dynasties before it was annexed by Japan in the 19th century, implicitly asserting Chinese claims over the island.
Okinawa, host to the bulk of up to 50,000 U.S. military personnel in Japan, is the largest island in the Ryukyu chain, which extends south towards Taiwan.
China is already involved in a tense dispute with Japan over the latter's move last year to nationalise the nearby Senkaku islets, which the Chinese call Diaoyu, which sits astride key shipping lanes and undersea energy resources.
That row has escalated in recent months to the point where both sides have scrambled fighter jets while patrol ships shadow each other in nearby seas, raising worry that an unintended collision or other incident could lead to a broader clash.
(Reporting by Kevin Lim; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 01, 201311:49pm EDT--
Notice they could not say ¡®China does not dispute Japans sovereignty of the Ryukyu Island Chain¡¯, if they did, their claim to the Senkaku¡¯s would be more laughable that it already is. Both sides of the mouth as always. They encourage these nationalistic reports to prepare their people for further aggressions, based on false maps, false history and lies.
Jun 02, 20131:18am EDT--
It was one of buffer states around imperial China about 150 years ago that Japan overran it in 1879 by abducting its emperor to Kyoto. If there¡¯s any dispute on sovereignty, it should be one instigated by the indigenious population in now Okinawa, not China who stirred this up to incite independence or controversy.
Jun 02, 20131:55am EDT--
