Defense chief calls China, India threats
2011-11-17 16:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense Secretary Leon Panetta appeared to call China and India "threats" on Thursday, in comments that the Pentagon quickly sought to correct.
Panetta, addressing workers at a submarine plant in Connecticut, was talking about emerging challenges facing the United States as it looks beyond the Iraq and Afghan wars.
After detailing the threat of cyber warfare, Panetta turned to concerns over "rising powers."
"We face the threats from rising powers, China, India, others that we have to always be aware of," Panetta said.
"And (we have to) try to make sure that we always have sufficient force protection out there in the Pacific to make sure they know we're never going anywhere."
Pentagon spokesman Captain John Kirby moved to correct the record, saying Panetta believed that relationships with both China and India were absolutely vital.
"Any suggestion that he was implying either country was a military threat is just false," Kirby said.
"And (he was referring to) the challenges that we share with them as we try to forge better relationships going forward in a very turbulent, dynamic security environment," Kirby said.
Panetta made the comments after touring a nuclear-powered, Virginia-class attack submarine in the very final phase of construction. The U.S. submarine fleet is considered one of the most important counters to China's growing military might, which includes advances in missile technology that make surface targets easier to reach.
Obama also announced this week that the United States will extend the military's reach into Southeast Asia with Marines, naval ships and aircraft deployed to northern Australia from 2012.
China has questioned the deployment to Australia, raising doubts whether strengthening such alliances will help the region pull together at a time of economic gloom.
(Reporting by Phil Stewart; Editing by Eric Walsh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I watched many of Panetta¡¯s forum presentations,
I watched many of Panetta¡¯s forum presentations,
and had thought they were thought provoking. I can¡¯t imagine Panetta being one of those grounded in racist presumptions. Right, every human being has the right to aspire for a strong country. But by Panetta¡¯s books, if that human being happens to be Asian, then it¡¯s a threat. A clear double standard. India has never in its entire history been aggressive to the rest of the world. In fact, its identity as a nation had never even been consolidated before the very multifarious groups, often speaking completely different dialects, celebrating different days in the year as New Year¡¯s day, all rose together under Gandhi to throw out the oppressive British. China, also has never in its long, thousands years of history, been aggressive to other nations. Mongolians were the only minority group within China, which had previously shown conquering tendencies under Gengis Khan. And Mongolians were among the many groups that ancient Chinese built the Great Wall to fend off. Their culture has never shown itself to be a threat. Now, Marxist ideas represent a different kettle of fish, because Marx believed that communism would naturally spread around the world. And Mao followed that belief religiously. However, Marxism is far from vibrant in the current capitalistic chinese system. SO taken together, there is no other way to interpret Panetta¡¯s comments other than being racist.
Nov 17, 20117:16pm EST--
@Temujin,
@Temujin,
Wow 3 times, how many times for the USA, how many assassinations, how many terrorist acts in south america, how many lies a deceits, very few trust the USA, we know they operate for their own interests and greed, we know the history of the USA too, and in it¡¯s short history it has done far worse things than China, And NO I am NOT Chinese, I am Australian, and our government may let you in here but its not what we voted for, so much for democracy.
Nov 18, 20112:25am EST--
How can India be a threat to US? India is not a threat to any country. We are not a threat to our own enemy country Pakistan then its impossible to call us as a threat for US who is our close friend¡­.
Nov 18, 201112:04pm EST--
