China keen to invest in Western infrastructure: CIC head
2011-11-27 18:22:00.0
(Reuters) - China is keen to invest in the ailing infrastructure of Western countries, especially Britain, the chairman and chief executive of the Asian country's sovereign wealth fund wrote in the Financial Times.
"Now, infrastructure in Europe and the U.S. badly needs more investment," China Investment Corporation's (CIC) Lou Jiwei wrote in an op ed piece.
He said while China had traditionally confined itself to the role of contractor in overseas infrastructure projects, the country's investors now saw a need to invest in, develop and operate such projects.
"In a sign of this determination, the China Investment Corporation ... is now keen to team up with fund managers or participate in public-private-partnerships (PPP) in the UK infrastructure sector as an equity investor," Lou wrote.
"CIC believes that such an investment, guided by commercial principles, offers the chance of a 'win-win' solution for all."
Local co-investors need to provide local knowledge for infrastructure projects while the government must encourage domestic players to head them, Lou wrote.
Lou said long-term investment in infrastructure was inadequate and emphasised the need for governments to implement pro-investment policies such as making fiscal adjustments, lowering taxes and offering bank loans at discounted rates.
"These measures will generate demand for equipment manufacturing, put more people on the payroll and cut back on unemployment benefit spending," he wrote.
(Writing by Michelle Martin; Editing by Dale Hudson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Awesome idea. Instead of China eventually taking most of our territory in a truly epic scale bankruptcy settlement when we¡¯ve been too weakened to fight back by lead, mercury and chlorine contamination; they can no arrange to just buy it from the ground up! I love efficiency. May I be the first to welcome our new Chinese masters. On behalf of all my brothers and sisters here I welcome you to the land of the round-eye; which you will now know as your summer place. Okay seriously though; this is a terrible idea. I would like to believe that our elected leaders are not so stupid or greedy as to allow this nonsense. I know, I know ¨C if wishes were fishes.
Nov 27, 20117:42pm EST--
Nov 27, 20118:13pm EST--
Actually LordP, rebuilding and upgrading our infrastructure is an absolutely grand idea. FDR realized that in the 1930¡äs and it worked wonders. It put people to work, while increasing our ability to properly educate our children (with the building of schools), and helped heal our people (with the building of hospitals).
Actually LordP, rebuilding and upgrading our infrastructure is an absolutely grand idea. FDR realized that in the 1930¡äs and it worked wonders. It put people to work, while increasing our ability to properly educate our children (with the building of schools), and helped heal our people (with the building of hospitals).
The part that is bad is that our own leaders can¡¯t see the necessity of helping the ailing infrastructure¡­ This stupidity is what leads people to become slaves of others¡­
Nov 27, 20118:23pm EST--
