Pearson to buy English teaching firm in China
2011-11-21 05:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon  EST
) agreed to buy China's Global Education and Technology Group GEDU.O, which prepares students for English-language tests, for $155 million in cash, extending its reach in China from eight cities to 60.
"Through organic investment and complementary acquisitions, we're learning a lot about the very significant growth opportunities we see in China and about the value of combining our content and technology with high-quality school networks," John Fallon, Chief Executive of Pearson's International Education Business, said in a statement on Monday.
Global Education and Technology Group, which teaches children and adults, has a network of 450 test preparation and training centers in China, of which it owns about 115 with the remainder run as franchises.
Shares in Pearson were unchanged at 1103 pence at 0935 GMT, the only members of the European media index .SXMP not in negative territory.
"As well as continuing the process of EPS upgrades from deploying cash, we see this deal as strategically positive too," UBS analyst Alastair Reid wrote in a note.
"Pearson trades at 8x 2012e EBITDA -- we view this as far too cheap for the only global player in a global structural growth industry," added Reid, who has a "buy" recommendation and 1,450 pence target price on the stock.
Pearson said its offer of $11.006 per American depositary share valued Global Education at $294 million with almost half the cost mitigated by the Nasdaq-listed group's estimated $139 million cash balance.
Shares in Global Education closed almost 28 percent higher at $5.37 on Friday, taking their gains over the last three trading sessions to 60 percent.
Pearson, which also owns the Financial Times and Penguin books, runs the world's biggest educational business, which brings in the bulk of its revenues.
(Reporting by Paul Hoskins and Georgina Prodhan; Editing by Sarah Young and Jane Merriman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Any person that goes to China to teach English is a fool. All you are doing is helping them to compete against your country better in the global market. Don¡¯t let the Chinese use you. You should learn Chinese but don¡¯t teach them English. Make yourself more competitive, don¡¯t help them become more competitive unless you like to cut your own throat.
Nov 21, 20118:13am EST--
