China FDI remains strong, export outlook darkens
2011-11-15 23:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Foreign direct investment (FDI) into China climbed nearly 16 percent in the first 10 months of 2011 from a year earlier as foreign investors continued to flock to the world's fastest-growing major economy despite the global economic malaise.
China drew $95 billion in FDI in the first 10 months of this year, up 15.9 percent from the same period in 2010, the Commerce Ministry said on Wednesday, putting it on track for another record year of FDI inflows.
Growth slowed slightly from a 17 percent rise in the fist nine months, dragged by sluggish inflows from the United States and Europe, the ministry said.
In October alone, China attracted $8.3 billion in FDI, up 8.75 percent from a year ago, the ministry said.
Investment inflows, which surged in the years after China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001, have recovered strongly after being hit hard by the global economic slowdown.
FDI from 10 major Asian countries and regions soared 20.7 percent in January-October from the same period a year earlier, with inflows from Japan jumping 65.5 percent, it said.
FDI from the United States dipped 18.1 percent in the first 10 months year-on-year while inflows from the European Union inched up 1.1 percent, underscoring their economic woes.
Firms invested $44.5 billion in the services sector, up 20.7 percent from a year earlier. The manufacturing sector drew $43.6 billion in funds, but the annual growth rate was a more moderate 11.7 percent.
Meanwhile, China's outbound investment rose 14.1 percent in the first 10 months from a year earlier to $46.3 billion, including $15.6 billion via mergers and acquisitions in overseas markets, the ministry said.
The ministry also cautioned that China's export outlook could be grim for the rest of this year and the early part of next year as Europe struggles to contain its sovereign debt crisis and the United States seeks to spur its fragile recovery.
"China's export outlook in the near future is not very optimistic," Shen Danyang, the ministry's spokesman told a news conference.
Shen shrugged off foreign criticism, particularly from the United States, that China keeps the yuan undervalued, giving the country a persistent trade advantage, saying such accusations was "groundless and unreasonable."
"Currently, China's yuan exchange rate is basically at a reasonable level and range," he said.
U.S. President Barack Obama served notice on Sunday in Honolulu that the United States was fed up with China's trade and currency practices as he turned up the heat on America's biggest economic rival.
But Chinese President Hu Jintao insisted U.S. trade and employment problems would not be solved by even a major appreciation of China's yuan versus the dollar.
China's exports grew 15.9 percent in October from a year earlier, their most sluggish expansion in eight months. After stripping out the traditionally volatile month of February, October's growth was the slowest since November 2009.
Imports jumped 28.7 percent in October, suggesting efforts to tilt the economy toward domestic demand may be offsetting the external weakness that has dragged on economic growth this year. That helped limit October's trade surplus to $17 billion.
(Reporting by Langi Chiang, Kevin Yao; Editing by Nick Edwards and Jonathan Hopfner)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Yes, the undervalued yuan absolutely gives Chinese products a 20-25% price advantage in global markets. China pegged the value of the Yuan to the US dollar some 15 years ago, which kept it unrealistically low. The cheap Yuan was compelling for US corporations to go ¡°off shore¡± and thereby manufacture products in China. US unemployment rose as our jobs vanished. Since China doesn¡¯t import goods from the US it instead purchased our Treasury bills and bonds, lots of them, bringing their ownership to a staggering $1.160 Trillion in US debt. China¡¯s purchase of all those Treasuries helped drive down US interest rates. So, we quickly discovered that we could still keep our ¡°fat cat¡± lifestyles through borrowing. We could outspend our incomes easily and continually refinancing our home, while its value kept rising. This refinancing credit scheme kept US families spending rates high. This worked well, as long as China continued to buy Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and our Treasury issues. Now that the US has a lowered debt rating, it¡¯s too risky to own US debt. Though they gradually shifted from short term bills to longer term bonds, China recognizes the need to divest its US ¡°holdings¡± longer term. If it were to do so aggressively, the US will feel an even deeper recessionary economic cycle, possibly causing a financial collapse. China and the US have created a huge liquidity bubble, and increasing our debt ceiling just made it worse. So, is there a viable, immediate solution? Not really. The prudent approach would have China opening their markets, allowing the Yuan to float on the open market, and the US would need to significantly lower its deficit spending. A serious commitment of paying off the piles of debt should start the process of economic recovery, higher overall employment, investor confidence and a return to a more robust economy. This is one of the key major issues facing the 2012 US Presidential candidates, and I have yet to hear any of them address it with a real world, viable solution, that includes Obama. The other looming concern is that the current administration has zero economic advisory expertise left, given that Romer, Wolfe, Summers, Volcker, Orszag, Bernstein, Goolsbee have all long departed. I must also admit that Financial Wizard George Soros, not considered an economic advisory source to Obama, reinforces this impeding economic vulnerability-the need to control asset bubbles are as critical as controlling the money supply: ¡°you must control the availability of credit. The best-known tools are margin requirements and minimum capital requirements. Currently, they are fixed irrespective of the market¡¯s mood, because markets are not supposed to have moods. Yet they do, and the financial authorities need to vary margin and minimum capital requirements in order to control asset bubbles.¡±
Yes, the undervalued yuan absolutely gives Chinese products a 20-25% price advantage in global markets. China pegged the value of the Yuan to the US dollar some 15 years ago, which kept it unrealistically low. The cheap Yuan was compelling for US corporations to go ¡°off shore¡± and thereby manufacture products in China. US unemployment rose as our jobs vanished. Since China doesn¡¯t import goods from the US it instead purchased our Treasury bills and bonds, lots of them, bringing their ownership to a staggering $1.160 Trillion in US debt. China¡¯s purchase of all those Treasuries helped drive down US interest rates. So, we quickly discovered that we could still keep our ¡°fat cat¡± lifestyles through borrowing. We could outspend our incomes easily and continually refinancing our home, while its value kept rising. This refinancing credit scheme kept US families spending rates high. This worked well, as long as China continued to buy Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and our Treasury issues. Now that the US has a lowered debt rating, it¡¯s too risky to own US debt. Though they gradually shifted from short term bills to longer term bonds, China recognizes the need to divest its US ¡°holdings¡± longer term. If it were to do so aggressively, the US will feel an even deeper recessionary economic cycle, possibly causing a financial collapse. China and the US have created a huge liquidity bubble, and increasing our debt ceiling just made it worse. So, is there a viable, immediate solution? Not really. The prudent approach would have China opening their markets, allowing the Yuan to float on the open market, and the US would need to significantly lower its deficit spending. A serious commitment of paying off the piles of debt should start the process of economic recovery, higher overall employment, investor confidence and a return to a more robust economy. This is one of the key major issues facing the 2012 US Presidential candidates, and I have yet to hear any of them address it with a real world, viable solution, that includes Obama. The other looming concern is that the current administration has zero economic advisory expertise left, given that Romer, Wolfe, Summers, Volcker, Orszag, Bernstein, Goolsbee have all long departed. I must also admit that Financial Wizard George Soros, not considered an economic advisory source to Obama, reinforces this impeding economic vulnerability-the need to control asset bubbles are as critical as controlling the money supply: ¡°you must control the availability of credit. The best-known tools are margin requirements and minimum capital requirements. Currently, they are fixed irrespective of the market¡¯s mood, because markets are not supposed to have moods. Yet they do, and the financial authorities need to vary margin and minimum capital requirements in order to control asset bubbles.¡±
Nov 16, 201110:44am EST--
While China¡¯s growth may be slowing down, India¡¯s is increasing in the long run, and by 2014, India¡¯s growth rate will outstrip China¡¯s, at 8.6 per cent compared with 8.2 per cent. China will have trouble in tackling its public debt and its debt to GDP ration will rise from 16.2 per cent in 2011, to 16.3 per cent in 2012, 2013 and 2014, before going back down to 16.2 per cent in 2015. ¡ª
While China¡¯s growth may be slowing down, India¡¯s is increasing in the long run, and by 2014, India¡¯s growth rate will outstrip China¡¯s, at 8.6 per cent compared with 8.2 per cent. China will have trouble in tackling its public debt and its debt to GDP ration will rise from 16.2 per cent in 2011, to 16.3 per cent in 2012, 2013 and 2014, before going back down to 16.2 per cent in 2015. ¡ª
Nov 16, 20114:51pm EST--
