White House says U.S.-China relationship complicated
2011-11-19 05:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States has been direct with China about its plans to be more active in the Asia-Pacific region as well as its interests in the South China Sea, a top White House official said on Saturday.
National Security Adviser Tom Donilon said President Barack Obama and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao talked mainly about economic issues when they met on the sidelines of an Asian leaders' summit on the Indonesian island of Bali on Saturday.
"They had an informal meeting this morning and the principal focus of the meeting was on economics," he told reporters on Saturday, the last day of Obama's nine-day Asia-Pacific tour.
Obama and Wen discussed "specific issues around business practices" as well as U.S. concerns about controls on China's yuan currency and its desire to see Beijing adhere more closely to international norms and rules, the U.S. official said.
"We don't have a claim, we don't take sides in the claims, but we do as a global maritime power have an interest in seeing these principles applied broadly," he said.
Over the course of his trip to Hawaii, Australia and Indonesia, Obama has ruffled Chinese feathers with tough language on trade and plans to increase the U.S. military presence in Australia so it can respond faster to maritime disputes and other emergencies in the region.
On Saturday, Donilon sought to play down tensions in the U.S.-China relationship, which he said was on the whole was "productive and constructive."
"Our partners and allies look to us for that reassurance. They want to know that the United States is going to play the role it has played with respect to security and reassurance and balancing and stability here," Donilon said.
"We have a very complicated and quite substantial relationship with China across the board," he said.
(Reporting by Laura MacInnis; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
So what I can read from this story is that China is telling the US to back off or we will put your economy further into the dumpster. I think that the Chinese are smart enough to recognize that when the US says that is it wants to ensure stability and peace, that it really means that it wants to maintain domination and control. While the US is rapidly declining as a world power, China is just as quickly growing as a world power, owns most of the US dept and has a military capable of easily challenging the US in the South China Sea, which makes ¡°complicated¡± the understatement of the year,
Nov 19, 20114:04am EST--
China can¡¯t touch the US navy. We could block the Malacca straight and China would collapse like dominoes without their oil. We already know their weaknesses and that is why they are so nervous about the South China Sea. The American people need to push to pry away the elements of China and it¡¯s economy that are preventing us from doing what we should do. Boycott Chinese products and their businesses and don¡¯t hire Chinese.
Nov 19, 20118:02am EST--
Just take a look how mainstream western media play propaganda and brain wash. All have been reporting how tough Obama is to China: he warns, he stand up to, he announce stationing of (handful) US marines in Australia¡­. China has said that outer force (US) should stay out of the disputes between China and her neighbors over South China Sea. Any one with a few functional brain cells will truly believe that Wen will discuss issues of the SCS dispute with Obama in their meeting sideline the Asean summit. Who will be such dumb and to slash one¡¯s own face as the Americans?
Nov 20, 20112:18pm EST--
