China accuses U.S. of 'prejudice' over 1989 protest comments
2013-06-01 13:13:00.0
China accuses U.S. of 'prejudice' over 1989 protest comments | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China accuses U.S. of 'prejudice' over 1989 protest comments
Fri, May 31 2013
Fri, May 31 2013
Thu, May 30 2013
Wed, May 29 2013
Tue, May 28 2013
China's Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei asks journalists for questions during a news conference in Beijing July 7, 2011. Credit: Reuters/David Gray
Sat  EDT
The United States should "immediately rectify its wrongdoings and stop interfering in China's internal affairs so as not to sabotage China-U.S. relations", Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said in an English-language statement released via the official Xinhua news agency.
China has already reached a "clear conclusion" about the events of 1989, Hong said.
The U.S. State Department, in a statement released on its website, said China should "end harassment of those who participated in the protests and fully account for those killed, detained, or missing."
After initially tolerating the student-led demonstrations in the spring of 1989 centered on Beijing's Tiananmen Square, the Communist Party sent troops to crush the protests on the night of June 3-4, killing hundreds, according to rights groups.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; editing by Mike Collett-White)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 01, 201312:28pm EDT--
I must admit that the Chinese have a point. We still have plenty struggles with our own Human Rights issues. You know, ¡°glass houses and throwing stones¡±.
Jun 01, 20131:04pm EDT--
it is the actions of the chinese that perpetuates prejudice. right now, china and thailand are behind a massive surge in elephant and rhino slaughters throughout africa, pushing both species nearer to extinction. why? both asian nations value ivory as a status symbol, and rhino horn as a folk cure for¡­cancer and erectile dysfunction. china is also behind the horrifying culling of sharks in international and asian waters for their fins, throwing the mutilated animals back into the water to die a slow death, and tipping oceanic ecosystems into rapid decline. in hong kong, recent undercover photos have shown as many as 10,000 fins drying on a single rooftop in the urban center (with many other drying plains sprinkled around this sprawling urban metropolis). for what? shark fin soup ¡ª a status symbol of wealth in the asian cultures. china is also beholden to perpetuating and reinforcing human rights abuses throughout their society, treating people who voice opposition to their government in the same way the environment is treated within their jurisdiction and influence ¡ª a painful and horrifying pattern of abuse and death. 10,000 pigs were recently found in the country¡¯s rivers and streams, while upwards of 70% of china¡¯s farmlands and meat production facilities are now contaminated with heavy metals and toxic chemicals from the commercial mixing of mining runoff water with fish, livestock and farming irrigation, as well as a pattern of 0% environmental regulations and their country¡¯s airways choked with smog and pollution. while its people suffer, the chinese government turns to buying up american pork companies to tap safe sources of food for its population, as it can no longer provide safe food and grain itself as a result of a decades-long industrialized-based economy with no regulation and a resulting environmental catastrophe. melamine contamination from chinese gluten additives infected materials for pet food shipped worldwide, causing the death of thousands of beloved pets after consuming these products ¡ª and this system of additives is still in production and risks further food chain contamination ¡ª it is a buyer-beware situation for any consumable good with a made in/imported from china label. and, melamine-contaminated milk formula continues to kill off babies within chinese borders¡­ cheap toys and jewelry riddle with cadmium are shipped daily by the tons to nations across the world, many of which are designed for children and are purchased unwittingly by western parents. accidental ingestion of these products by the young has yielded fatal results from cadmium poisoning. so, china ¡ª unless you can combat the acts of economic/manufacturing/societal & governmental barbarism and environmental destruction wrought and perpetuated by your nation, know that prejudice will be the price. i, personally, have been boycotting chinese products for over two years now. i won¡¯t buy or consume food products or goods manufactured or sourced in your country. as a consumer, i will not fund what i see to be a destructive government and society.
Jun 01, 20131:15pm EDT--
