China says Xinjiang minorities too busy dancing to make trouble
2013-05-28 15:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Ethnic minority people in China's Xinjiang are far more fond of dancing, singing and being good hosts than making trouble, a top official said on Tuesday, dismissing the idea that the far western region is a hotbed of unrest.
Many Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim people who live in energy-rich Xinjiang, chafe at Chinese restrictions on their culture, language and religion, and the region is frequently the scene of deadly ethnic violence.
Last month, 21 people were killed in clashes in the heavily ethnic Uighur part of Xinjiang near the old Silk Road city of Kashgar, the deadliest unrest since July 2009, when nearly 200 people were killed in riots in the Xinjiang capital of Urumqi.
China says it offers broad freedoms in Xinjiang, though few Chinese officials make the effort to learn the Uighur language or understand much about Islam in what is officially an atheist country.
Speaking to reporters in Beijing, deputy Xinjiang governor Shi Dagang said he had worked in southern Xinjiang for more than a decade and never had to carry a gun or have a police escort.
This was the common experience of government officials who are members of the majority Han Chinese ethnicity, many of whom work in areas heavily populated by minorities, he said.
"There is mutual respect by Han cadres and ethnic minorities, and we are friends. When we go into their houses as guests we are treated to meat and wine, with song and dance," Shi said.
"The ethnic minorities are simple-hearted and honest, very kind and unaffected. They love guests," he added. "I hope people don't have misapprehensions and go to Xinjiang and see for themselves."
China dismisses accusations its policies are connected to unrest, saying armed Uighur groups have links to Central Asian and Pakistani Islamist militants, and of carrying out attacks to establish an independent state they call East Turkistan.
"Those minority of people, the violent terrorists, ethnic splittists and religions extremists who want to cause trouble, their organizations are all outside the country, as are their backers behind the scenes," Shi said.
"How could we let this minority of people split Xinjiang off from the rest of the country and destroy this peaceful and harmonious society? It's impossible."
Many rights groups say China has long overplayed the threat posed to justify its tough controls in Xinjiang, which lies strategically on the borders of Central Asia, India and Pakistan.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese are correct. Ahmed Rashid has written two books about the rise of militant islam in central Asia. In China, there are occasional attacks, but the continental US suffers more damages, more causalties, and greater frequency from muslims inside the US. The five year plans from 2011 to 2020 focus on the center, west, and north, so economic opportunities are increasing rapidly in Xinjiang for all residents. Xinhua has an article today about the visit of Yu Zhengsheng, a member of the CPC¡¯s politburo, to Xinjiang where he visited Uygurs in Hotan, Kashgar, Yili, and Urumqi. Yu visited mosques, individual families, schools, and agricultural and economic improvement projects. This type of attention at high levels can help when it is accompanied with huge development projects that create rising prosperity. Numerous islamic countries are in economic disarray after colonialism followed by western and eastern interference during the Cold War. A decade later, they received the War on Terror that most of them did not and do not want. Badly fought US and NATO wars, interventions, and drone campaigns have made everything worse. Fortunately, China has the resources and determination to succeed because China cannot retreat to North America and hide behind oceanic moats if it fails.
May 28, 20133:24pm EDT--
Looks like MikeBarnett is really just an official mouthpiece of the Chinese government propaganda department. However, most people there (Xinjiang, East Turkey, whatever you want to call it) are doing better than in the past and relative to the even worse off people in the Central Asia and Middle East. Yes there are inequality mainly due to education level difference and the migration of Han Chinese crowding out the ethnic Uighur people, but overall they get along (other than the radicals that would rather be independents via terrorism or ethnic clashes). It¡¯s difficult to pacify both the Hans and the Uighur there because their peaces are kept under high pressure and control like many things communist China, if you loosen it up things could go ugly, but if you don¡¯t their tensions would easily build up.
May 28, 20136:24pm EDT--
May 29, 20132:42pm EDT--
