China rejects U.S. charges of bogus weapons parts
2011-11-08 09:47:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Nov 7 2011
Fri, Nov 4 2011
Thu, Nov 3 2011
Wed, Oct 19 2011
Mon, Oct 10 2011
Tue  EST
Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Carl Levin said committee investigators had identified about 1,800 cases involving one million counterfeit parts since 2009, and those numbers were "just the tip of the iceberg."
Parts for defense systems are bought from many sources, which often are infiltrated with counterfeit items, the senators said. China has been identified nearly five times more frequently than any other country as a source of counterfeit parts, according to a U.S. Commerce Department report.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei, asked about those comments, said China was committed to fighting fake products.
"The Chinese government has always paid a great deal of attention to, and has promoted, cooperation with relevant overseas bodies in the fight against counterfeits. This is universally acknowledged," Hong told a daily news briefing.
Levin said that rather than cooperating, Chinese authorities had impeded the committee's investigation, with one embassy official telling them it could be damaging to U.S.-China relations.
Senator John McCain, the top Republican on the committee, said the issue needed to be addressed urgently because counterfeit parts posed real dangers to U.S. troops and contributed to the high costs of weapons systems.
Last week, a U.S. intelligence report concluded that China was the most active and persistent country using cyber espionage to steal U.S. trade and technology secrets.
McCain and Levin said various measures were being considered to address the issue, including amendments that would clearly spell out that contractors should be held responsible for the cost of replacing any counterfeit parts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Unlike so-called counterfeit handbags which violate copyright, counterfeit hardware may work as well ¨C for a lower cost ¨C than the original. Chinese manufacturers are guilty of nothing more than a cover recording of a Lady Gaga tune. If anyone is guilty of a potential crime, it¡¯s US manufacturers who don¡¯t check the specs on components they purchase. Cripes. Grow up into the early 20th Century business world ¨C at a minimum.
Nov 08, 201111:08am EST--
A lot of these parts fail due to the poor quality manufacturing process and use of alternative components. The same issue exists with airplane replacement parts. Quality isn¡¯t exactly the focus of Chinese entrepreneurs looking to make a quick buck off of cloned parts.
A lot of these parts fail due to the poor quality manufacturing process and use of alternative components. The same issue exists with airplane replacement parts. Quality isn¡¯t exactly the focus of Chinese entrepreneurs looking to make a quick buck off of cloned parts.
Nov 08, 201111:37am EST--
The question lies whether the buyers in USA know the parts are counterfeit or not? Is there a massive corruption and fraud within USA? If they are willing to buy CHinese parts then are Chinese manufactures at fault or these buyers?
Nov 08, 20112:44pm EST--
