Goldman selling up to $1.54 billion in China ICBC stake
2011-11-09 13:49:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Nov 9 2011
Tue, Nov 8 2011
Tue, Nov 8 2011
Mon, Nov 7 2011
Sat, Nov 5 2011
Wed  EST
) stock, the Wall Street firm's third sell-down of the world's largest bank by value.
Foreign banks selling shares in China's banks is a sensitive issue in Beijing, which has not taken the sales lightly since they began in 2009.
), RBS (
Goldman's latest sell down came with ICBC's support, and the New York bank told the Chinese lender the transaction was coming, according to a source familiar with the matter.
Sources familiar with matter told Reuters on Wednesday that Goldman was selling 2.4 billion shares, or 2.8 percent of ICBC's Hong Kong listed stock. ICBC, officially known as Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd, is one of China's Big Four state-backed banks. All four banks were technically insolvent roughly five years ago, crippled by bad loans built up over many years.
Goldman invested in ICBC before its 2006 dual listing in Hong Kong and Shanghai. China's Big Four are now among the largest banks in the world by market value.
IFR, a Thomson Reuters publication, was first to report the sale, which comes at a time when ICBC shares have recovered about 50 percent from October lows.
A source said Goldman was executing the sale to reduce its market exposure to the stake. The Wall Street bank notified the Chinese bank about the impending sale, another source said.
"It's likely a reflection of Goldman's own desire to book some profit and hedge their risk rather than a negative view on Chinese banks," said Warren Blight, lead analyst for Chinese bank research at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods in Hong Kong.
The sale also comes at a time when several European and U.S. banks are under pressure to raise capital. In August, Bank of America sold a $8.3 billion stake in China Construction Bank (
Goldman first bought 4.9 percent of ICBC for about $2.6 billion before the 2006 IPO, which was then the world's biggest public offering. Goldman has raised a total of $5.9 billion through its three sell-downs and its stake, still worth around $5 billion after the sell down, is worth twice the original investment.
Yet as equity markets have swung wildly in recent years, Goldman's ICBC stake has led to big paper gains and losses that add volatility to its quarterly earnings.
So far this year, Goldman has lost $905 million on the ICBC investment, including a $316 million gain in the first quarter, followed by two much-larger losses. In 2010, the bank earned $747 million on the stake.
Goldman is offering the shares in a range of HK$4.88-5.00 each, a discount of between 3.7 and 6 percent to the last traded price, a term sheet seen by IFR showed.
"Goldman Sachs have told us that they still recognize the investment value of ICBC (shares)," Yang said.
(Reporting by Fiona Lau and Kelvin Soh in Hong Kong; Additional reporting by Charlie Zhu, Kelvin Soh and Terril Jones in Hong Kong and Lauren Tara LaCapra in New York; writing by Denny Thomas; Editing by Chris Lewis, Muralikumar Anantharaman, Michael Flaherty and Bernard Orr)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I don¡¯t believe that GS would sell something if they thought they would make a lot of money by hanging on to it. Warren Blight is either mistaken or intentionally trying to show the transaction in a good light. The unnamed source that claimed that GS is trying to reduce market exposure is surely correct. It appears to me that major American banks are reducing exposure to China because the Chinese bubble is even bigger than the American bubble that popped in 2007. That bubble might pop on its own or the reverberations from the Eurozone might accelerate the process.
Nov 10, 201112:55am EST--
