China urges Iran be flexible on nuclear program
2011-11-04 05:27:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Nov 3 2011
Thu, Nov 3 2011
Wed, Nov 2 2011
Wed, Nov 2 2011
Tue, Oct 25 2011
Fri  EDT
The United States, Britain and France have turned up the pressure on Tehran ahead of next week's release of a keenly awaited U.N. report that may offer new details about the military side of Iran's nuclear program.
"The International Atomic Energy Agency should adopt an impartial and objective stance and seek positive cooperation with Iran to clarify certain questions," Hong said. "Iran should also show flexibility and sincerity and have earnest cooperation with the IAEA."
The IAEA's report is expected to unveil detailed intelligence pointing to military dimensions of Iran's nuclear program, while stopping short of saying explicitly that Tehran is trying to build such weapons.
The United States and Israel have repeatedly hinted at the possible use of force against Iranian nuclear sites, eliciting threats of fierce retaliation from the Islamic Republic.
"China opposes the use of force or the threat of the use of force in international affairs. At present, avoiding any new upheaval in the Middle East is extremely important."
China would play a "constructive role" in pushing for the peaceful resolution of the Iran nuclear issue by diplomatic means, Hong added.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Nov 04, 20117:36am EDT--
What¡¯s really interesting here is that the countries that have Nuclear Weapons, U.S., Britain, France and yes Israel all want to keep the monopoly. Israel especially knows that if Iran goes Nuclear they will have to be more circumspect when dealing with their neighbors. Would NATO have attacked Iraq or Libya if they had nukes? We all know the answer to that. The strong attack the weak and Iran is aware that they need to level the playing field. The double, triple, etc. standard here is mind boggling.
Nov 04, 201110:43am EDT--
Iran ¨C another prime example of exploitation of the common people by corrupt leaders. Shameful, disgusting, pathetic¡­no other words to describe how that country is run. Too bad for the Iranian people, they don¡¯t deserve such lousy leadership.
Nov 04, 20117:16pm EDT--
