Thrift, innovation to win from U.S.-China solar row
2011-11-04 05:24:00.0
(Reuters) - A row between China and the United States over imports of cheaper solar products won't be the sector's death-knell but will ultimately speed innovation and cut costs, a top U.S. renewable energy official said.
Seven U.S. solar manufacturers last month asked the Obama administration to impose duties of more than 100 percent on China solar imports, which they said were unfairly undercutting U.S. prices and destroying American jobs.
"It's inevitable. It had to happen. I don't believe that in the long run it does anything more than accelerate the pace at which we need to generate new technologies," said Dan Arvizu, director of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado. NREL is part of the U.S. Department of Energy.
"From the perspective of the clean-tech sector, it's not a death knell to the trend or growth of the industry. It's a rough spot," Arvizu said in an interview on Friday at the Singapore International Energy Week.
The controversy comes at a sensitive time in U.S.-China trade relations, which are plagued by U.S. concerns over market access in China, Beijing's treatment of intellectual property rights, and raging debate over the value of China's currency.
Arvizu said while the Chinese had been successful in building a vast solar industry and helped drive down global costs, government patronage could not last.
"I don't think that over the long haul you can continue to subsidize at those levels. I think the next generation (of technologies) will take over and there will be new wave of market competitiveness."
NREL helps develop clean energy technologies from solar to wind, green buildings and biofuels with the aim of reducing the risk for private investors.
Offshore wind, next-generation geothermal and wave and tidal power remained promising but still costly, Arvizu said. Energy efficiency was an easy win. "The easiest thing to do is make the building code acknowledge energy usage. It sounds pretty obvious. We don't do that," he said.
He said the current solar bubble could help drive development of new generation solar, such as ink-jet printing solar cells on to a flexible surface, which does not need high pressure or temperatures and could cut costs.
NREL is already trialing ink-jet production, with the cost to build a large-scale plant around $2 per watt of production capacity. But Arvizu said it could take another decade of further development and scaling up trial manufacturing plants.
The failure of Solyndra, which had close ties with NREL, has become a political embarrassment for the administration of President Barack Obama, which had championed the loans as a way to create "green energy" jobs.
A second recipient under the controversial Department of Energy loan program, energy storage firm Beacon Power Corp, filed for bankruptcy late last month.
But Arvizu said most of the investment bets under the $35.9 billion energy support program were viable. So far about $25 billion of the program's loan portfolio had been finalized.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Nobody with half a brain would buy this ridiculous solar power garbage with their own money, no matter where it¡¯s built. If the idiots in DC would quit propagandizing the Global Warming scam and subsidizing ¡°Green Energy¡± with tax credits neither the Chicoms nor anybody else would have any customers to sell the junk to in the first place.
Nov 04, 20115:54am EDT--
