China May official PMI stronger than expected
2013-05-31 22:23:00.0
(Reuters) - China's official PMI rose to 50.8 in May from 50.6 in April, data showed on Saturday, beating market expectations and raising optimism that the world's second-largest economy may be stabilizing.
The official purchasing managers' index (PMI), issued by the National Bureau of Statistics and China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing, indicated activity in China's vast manufacturing sector picked up slightly in May.
"The slight pick-up in May PMI reinforces signs of stabilizing of the economy," Zhang Liqun, an economist at the Development Research Centre, a top government think tank in Beijing, said in an emailed statement accompanying the index.
China's annual economic growth slowed to 7.7 percent in the first quarter from 7.9 percent in the previous quarter, despite a credit boom fuelled by the thriving shadow financing.
A sub-index measuring new orders inched up to 51.8 in May from 51.7 in April, indicating stronger demand for Chinese goods. A sub-index of new export orders also edged up to 49.4 from 48.6.
Saddled with excess capacity, China's factories are struggling against weak demand, as Beijing's campaign against extravagance among state officials takes a toll on domestic consumption.
A flash private PMI survey released last week by HSBC showed China's manufacturing sector shrank for the first time in seven months in May as new orders fell, an unexpectedly poor outcome that caused a rout in global financial markets.
The official PMI, which focuses on big and state-owned firms, has been generally rosier than the private survey, which targets small and private companies.
The International Monetary Fund this week cut its 2013 economic growth estimate for China to 7.75 percent from 8 percent, while the OECD slashed its 2013 growth forecast to 7.8 percent from a previous forecast of 8.5 percent.
The economy's lack of vigor could make it difficult for the government to meet its 7.5 percent growth target for this year, analysts said.
Chinese leaders are reluctant to roll out fresh stimulus steps to support the economy, as they fear increased state spending could lead to a further acceleration of credit expansion and fuel a property bubble.
Premier Li Keqiang said last month that China has limited room to use government spending and policy stimulus to boost its economy, though Beijing has been pushing structural reforms in put the economy on a sounder footing.
(Reporting by Judy Hua and Kevin Yao; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is not a great surprise to those who live and work in China¡¯s central and western provinces that have been receiving development projects for the five year plans from 2011 to 2020. Most of the West¡¯s PMI¡¯s and even coastal Chinese PMI¡¯s have not shifted their focus to increasing construction activities in the new areas. The stores and businesses serving the construction workers are growing despite problems in the traditional PMI sources for exports along the south and east coasts. The EU, China¡¯s biggest trade partner, is in recession, and the US, China¡¯s 2nd biggest partner, struggles with lower overall wages that reduce US consumer abilities to spend. The official PMI numbers count the entire country and not just the coastal areas that were robust before the recession and sluggish recovery in the West.
Jun 02, 20135:45pm EDT--
