China paper says U.S. solar complaint driven by envy
2011-10-29 23:17:00.0
(Reuters) - An anti-dumping complaint filed by U.S. solar firms against their Chinese counterparts is driven by envy at China's rapid growth in the field and goes against global efforts to fight climate change, a major state-run newspaper said on Sunday.
Seven U.S. solar manufacturers this month asked the Obama administration to impose duties of more than 100 percent on China solar imports, which they said were unfairly undercutting U.S. prices and destroying American jobs.
In a front-page commentary, The China Energy News, published by Communist Party mouthpiece the People's Daily, said this was a foolish, misguided attempt at trade protectionism driven by jealousy.
"In the space of just five years, the rapid development of the Chinese companies has attracted envious eyes overseas," wrote Wang Yuehai, secretary general of the All China Federation of Industry and Commerce's new energy commission.
President Barack Obama had failed to live up to his promises to boost growth by supporting the renewable energy sector, leaving China to lead the way, he said.
"The U.S. solar industry is using the awkwardness of the Obama government to try and force it into trade protectionism and attack the rapid development of China's solar industry," Wang wrote.
The complaint also runs counter to the consensus reached by the two countries to develop clean energy, an important sector to support as the world tries to stimulate growth at a time of global financial crisis, he added.
The controversy comes at a sensitive time in U.S.-China trade relations, which are plagued by U.S. concerns over market access in China, Beijing's treatment of intellectual property rights, and stern debate over the value of China's currency.
China's Commerce Ministry has already warned the United States not to take protectionist measures over the solar energy issue that could harm the global economy.
The U.S. companies' complaint -- filed with the International Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Commerce against the world's no. 2 economy -- has drawn scepticism from within the industry, as many fear a trade war could disrupt growth.
Many executives from the United States and Europe have complained privately for years about China's impact on solar markets, but most have also said the business had become so globalised that penalising one country would not help companies that are struggling to survive.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s easy for China to say anything like this when their currency has been so grossly undervalued for so long as to make it impossible for any country to compete. In the USA and EU it¡¯s not even possible to purchase the raw materials to make anything cheaper than China can deliver a completed product to the USA and EU. China needs to be forced to raise the value of their currency to an appropriate level through tariffs. For those that might disagree and harken back to the days of protectionism during the depression, let¡¯s not forget that almost no consumer products sold and used in America are actually made in America. If tariffs were put in place, manufacturers would have no choice but to relocate in America bringing jobs back to ordinary people. Sure, the rich will scream and howl because they don¡¯t get to keep their golden goose that gives them hundreds and even thousands of times more money than their workers but when there¡¯s no money and no customers left in America even the rich will lose out too¡­
Nov 03, 20117:33am EDT--
¡°most have also said the business had become so globalised that penalising one country would not help companies that are struggling to survive.¡± Yeah, and the electronics industry is just peachy in the USA.
¡°most have also said the business had become so globalised that penalising one country would not help companies that are struggling to survive.¡± Yeah, and the electronics industry is just peachy in the USA.
The Chinese have stolen everything they make today and are looking to steal the future too. They say don¡¯t whine. The truth is the ¡°west¡± develops high technology and the Chinese use it against us to steal what they intellectually can¡¯t develop themselves. They hack into our computer systems. They flood the market with cheaper goods driving the ¡°home grown¡± companies out of business. Realistically, the products you buy that are made in China are inferior to their counterparts made by the ¡°west¡±. Nothing lasts forever but Chinese made products do not last long at all. But cheaper is as cheaper goes and as long as big business and the government in the US are in cahoots together to drain the middle class of their limited means, the cheaper products will still be what people look for.
Nov 03, 20117:41am EDT--
