U.S. influence at G20 not diminished, White House says
2011-11-04 08:04:00.0
(Reuters) - White House officials bristled on Thursday at the suggestion U.S. power within the G20 had been diminished by budget woes back home, as Europe looked toward an economically self-confident China for help.
"Our ability to contribute, our ability to lead and our ability to influence the outcome of these sorts of issues is not tied necessarily to having the American taxpayer pay for every problem," said top White House aide Michael Froman.
European officials hope to coax China into using some of its massive foreign exchange reserves to play a role in a euro zone rescue fund, although Beijing has so far not publicly voiced its intentions.
With spending cuts placing U.S. foreign aid in the crossfire of this bitter election campaign issue, Washington has made no suggestion that it might come to Europe's aid.
Instead, the White House argues Europe has the resources to help itself, while the fact the U.S. economy remains the world's largest means that its views still carry great weight.
"Across all of the issues on the G20 agenda, countries look to the United States for ideas, for advice on issues that they are working through," Froman said.
Washington is also lukewarm toward any increase in the resources of the International Monetary Fund, which might dilute U.S. influence if the new money came from China or other emerging economies.
"The IMF has a substantial amount of resources to deal with a range of challenges in Europe and around the world," said White House deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes.
"We can't speak to what other countries may do. What we do want to address is what is the role of the IMF, what type of steps does it take to help address this crisis?" he said.
(Reporting by Alister Bull; editing by Ralph Boulton)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
When you have to announce that your influence has not diminished, then your influence has diminished. But then again¨Cisn¡¯t this what you wanted, President Obama? After all, we¡¯re no more exceptional than Greece, right? If I were Merkel or Sarkozy or Cameron, I would be relieved you chose to hug Erdogan (the Muslim) from Turkey and not me. You are becoming internationally radioactive, Mr. President. You are your senior advisers remind me of the analogy that the lobster doesn¡¯t realize he¡¯s boiling until it is too late.
Nov 04, 201111:24am EDT--
Obama has done more damage to the United States than any President in our history. He has damaged our economy and killed millions of jobs with his extreme left wing insanity. His foreign policy of bows, apology, and appeasement simply has failed and has the Russians, Chinese, Iranians, and N Koreans all laughing with glee. The U.S. under Obama isn¡¯t just diminished, it is in a deep deep decline. Obama is not respected by anyone! How can anyone respect a nation under Obama that lost its AAA credit rating, and is $15 trillion in debt and in hock to the Chinese? Obama is a disaster. His lies won¡¯t make it any better!
Nov 04, 201111:13pm EDT--
LOL. If you have to tell everybody that your influence hasn¡¯t diminished¡­¡­.. Although the WH is probably right. They didn¡¯t listen to Obama during the last G20. Most leaders dismissed, out of hand, Obama¡¯s plan to use Keynesian intervention in the crisis. They wanted to focus on debt reduction and responsible government spending.
Nov 05, 20116:09am EDT--
