Drug resistance in new China bird flu raises concern
2013-05-28 10:10:00.0
(Reuters) - The new bird flu strain that has killed 36 people in China has proved resistant to Tamiflu for the first time, a development scientists said was "concerning".
The H7N9 virus was found to be resistant to Roche's widely used flu drug in three out of 14 patients who were studied in detail by doctors from Shanghai and Hong Kong.
Tamiflu, which is given as a pill, belongs to a group of medicines known as neuraminidase inhibitors that currently offer the only known treatment option for bird flu. GlaxoSmithKline's inhaled medicine Relenza has the same mode of action.
In one patient, the gene mutation responsible for resistance appears to have arisen after infection took hold, probably as a result of treatment with Tamiflu, leading to concerns that medication may be the trigger for resistance to develop.
"The apparent ease with which antiviral resistance emerges in A/H7N9 viruses is concerning; it needs to be closely monitored and considered in future pandemic response plans," the researchers wrote in an article published online by The Lancet medical journal on Tuesday.
For most of the 14 patients studied, Tamiflu successfully reduced the amount of virus found in throat swabs and helped speed clinical recovery. But it had no impact on the amount of virus found in swabs from three patients who became severely ill.
A spokeswoman for Swiss-based drugmaker Roche said rates of Tamiflu resistance remained low globally, but it took the issue of resistance "very seriously" and was collaborating with health authorities to monitor the situation.
The H7N9 virus is known to have infected 131 people in China since February, but no new cases have been detected since early May, according to the World Health Organization.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Tamiflu has never been that good anyway. Vietnamese doctors working at the ¡®coal-face¡¯ in 2009 said that it was ¡®useless¡¯ as it did not save any Vietnamese that were infected. The only way to stop the killer virus emerging is to address it at ¡®source¡¯. That¡¯s what they did in 1997 in Hong Kong and it stopped the human-to-human killer virus in its tracks. That strategy was http://www.thewif.org.uk/home/shortridge_thailand_2008.pdf , but because there are not the tens of billions in drug sales it has been suppressed by the pharmaceutical companies. The irony of it is when it comes, as it will like the Spanish Flu did, it will decimate the global pharmaceutical industry in its wake. Indeed it will make the financial meltdown look like a storm in a teacup in comparison ¨C that¡¯s how mad the vaccine strategy really is. Dr David Hill
Tamiflu has never been that good anyway. Vietnamese doctors working at the ¡®coal-face¡¯ in 2009 said that it was ¡®useless¡¯ as it did not save any Vietnamese that were infected. The only way to stop the killer virus emerging is to address it at ¡®source¡¯. That¡¯s what they did in 1997 in Hong Kong and it stopped the human-to-human killer virus in its tracks. That strategy was http://www.thewif.org.uk/home/shortridge_thailand_2008.pdf , but because there are not the tens of billions in drug sales it has been suppressed by the pharmaceutical companies. The irony of it is when it comes, as it will like the Spanish Flu did, it will decimate the global pharmaceutical industry in its wake. Indeed it will make the financial meltdown look like a storm in a teacup in comparison ¨C that¡¯s how mad the vaccine strategy really is. Dr David Hill
May 29, 20132:47pm EDT--
