Manila, Hanoi forge cooperation on South China Sea
2011-10-26 07:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The Philippines and Vietnam on Wednesday signed agreements to expand non-military cooperation of their maritime forces in the South China Sea, avoiding formal military pacts on the disputed waters that could provoke protests from China.
Philippine President Benigno Aquino and Vietnamese President Truong Tan Sang witnessed the signing of four agreements, including a blueprint for a five-year cooperation in 13 areas that included agriculture, energy, and technology.
The more important deals involved information sharing and creating a hotline to deal with maritime issues, such as piracy, smuggling, disaster response and protection of marine resources.
"The agreements on the establishment of a hotline communications mechanism between our coast guards, and the agreement linking our two navies mark significant progress in ensuring a safer and more secure maritime area," Aquino said after bilateral talks.
Sang promised his government's support for Manila's proposal for a Zone of Peace, Freedom, Friendship and Cooperation (ZoPFFC) in the South China Sea. The proposal will complement implementing guidelines of an informal code of conduct by the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China.
"We again confirmed the importance of the maintenance of peace, stability, security, safety and freedom of navigation in the East Sea," Sang said, adding he hopes ASEAN would come up with a binding code.
Vietnam refers to the South China Sea as East Sea, while the Philippines calls it West Philippine Sea.
Manila and Hanoi had protested earlier this year China's activities in the South China Sea, and both had planned a joint complaint on Beijing's claim in the disputed waters.
The Philippines, Vietnam, China and two other Southeast Asian states have conflicting claims over parts of the South China Sea, a potentially oil- and gas-rich body of water spanned by key shipping lanes.
(Reporting By Manny Mogato; Editing by Rosemarie Francisco)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Some of the media have to awaken from the illusion of calling the West Philippines sea the China Sea, If the Philippines can get just a Little respect from the international Community which is Very easy, stop calling this Sea the China Sea, as it is and Has been called the West Philippines Sea, How can someone make a determination on an issue if they have the facts wrong and decide to mutilate the real facts, The President of the Philippines has asked the media to correct their naming these waters improperly,
Some of the media have to awaken from the illusion of calling the West Philippines sea the China Sea, If the Philippines can get just a Little respect from the international Community which is Very easy, stop calling this Sea the China Sea, as it is and Has been called the West Philippines Sea, How can someone make a determination on an issue if they have the facts wrong and decide to mutilate the real facts, The President of the Philippines has asked the media to correct their naming these waters improperly,
Example, If each of you owned something we will say Property, and You have Bought it years ago, and then the neighbors or the Town Where you pay taxes continue to call it by the last owner, I bet none of you would like this! Imagine this happening to you,
Do each of you realize that The Spanish-American War ended with the Treaty of Paris of December 1898 that ended the war granted independence to Cuba. Spain turned over Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippine Islands to the United States, for which the U.S. paid Spain $20 million for the Philippines Islands, All of them and the Sprattie Islands were marked with dots on that map which now belonged to the United States, China is using those dots now in 2008 making claims it now Owns them but it is clear that the U.S. Paid for all of this land. Thanks to Dewey¡¯s victory in Manila, American military forces occupied the Philippine Islands. which resulted in the United States acquiring sovereignty over the Philippines from Spain 1898 which ended that war, the Philippines as a U.S. territory and later as a U.S. Commonwealth;
The United States had to pay Spain the sum of twenty million dollars ¡­ or give it back to Spain, the U.S. in 1946, made an Offer to the Philippines People, to be Part of the United States by becoming a state if not the Philippines will be given its Independence in 1946, at which time could not depend on the U.S. To solve all their problems, they choose their independence and to this day would like now to become a state within the United States acknowledging it was a mistake,
The end results is the Spratties is owned by the Philippines because we as America Gave this territory to the Philippines People!
Wherefore; Please stop calling the West Philippines Sea, the China Sea, as it is a confusing statement and each time you do you are acknowledging this is and Belongs to China:
Oct 26, 201111:48pm EDT--
