USTR says China policies hobbling U.S. business
2011-10-25 09:44:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Oct 24 2011
Fri, Oct 21 2011
Fri, Oct 21 2011
Wed, Oct 19 2011
Wed, Oct 19 2011
Tue  EDT
"Many of these troubling policies reflect China's strengthening of state control over its economy and a retreat from its initial strong push to liberalize markets in the first years after its World Trade Organization accession," Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Demetrios Marantis said in remarks prepared for a congressional hearing.
"Our approach is founded on proven, vigorous enforcement and results-oriented dialogue," Marantis said, claiming the administration has already achieved some success.
House Speaker John Boehner has refused to allow a vote in the Republican-controlled House on the currency bill for fear it could start a destructive trade war between the world's two biggest economies.
Other House Republicans, including Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp, have said Congress should look at the broad array of Chinese trade practices that harm U.S. business rather than just focus on currency.
Treasury Under Secretary Lael Brainard, who also was testifying before the panel, said China's currency was "misaligned" and that faster appreciation of the yuan was needed. But she said this would not erase the U.S. trade deficit.
Marantis told the panel the Obama administration was "alarmed" by reports that China was forcing foreign automakers to transfer valuable electric car technology to participate in China's "New Energy Vehicles."
He also criticized China for maintaining an eight-year-old import ban on U.S. beef, lavishing subsidies on its steel, chemical and other industrial sectors and restricting foreign investment in fields such telecommunications, financial services, express delivery, pharmaceuticals, mining and media.
He called China's export restrictions on numerous raw materials, including rare earths, "deeply troubling" and said discriminatory Chinese policies to promote domestic innovation remain a top administration concern.
"We know that we have a steep and difficult road ahead. For all of this, we have a plan that is comprehensive, strategic and flexible," he said.
The United States has already successfully tackled some trade barriers in the 12 cases it has brought against China at the World Trade Organization, he told lawmakers.
Washington has also made progress on a number of trade irritants in two high-level U.S.-China forums -- the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade and the Strategic and Economic Dialogue -- that meet each year, Marantis said.
The Obama administration has a actively enforced U.S. trade remedy laws by imposing 15 countervailing duty orders and 22 antidumping orders on Chinese products since taking office in January 2009, he said.
(Additional reporting by David Lawder; Editing by Andrea Ricci)
