China Middle East envoy urges Syria to speed reforms
2011-10-30 10:45:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Middle East envoy called on the Syrian government on Sunday to speed up the reforms it has promised in response to popular demands, saying the situation was dangerous and the bloodshed could not continue.
Foreign pressure on Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's government to end a bloody, seven-month crackdown on protesters demanding political reforms has so far had no apparent effect.
The United States blames China and Russia for failing to throw their weight behind its efforts to isolate Assad's government diplomatically and toughen economic sanctions.
Speaking in Cairo after a visit to Syria, Chinese envoy Wu Sike told reporters that Assad's government must take "palpable steps" to end the bloodshed.
"The Syrian government has to speed up implementing its promises of reform," said Wu. "There must be respect and response to the aspirations ... of the Syrian people."
He said he had met Syria's deputy president and foreign minister and members of the opposition movement while in the Syrian capital Damascus, and insisted that China was neutral in the conflict.
"I emphasized to top officials the danger of the situation in Syria and that the situation cannot continue," he said.
Wu was speaking at the Arab League headquarters in the Egyptian capital, where some 150 demonstrators had gathered to condemn what they saw as a timid response from the regional body to crackdowns on pro-democracy movements in Syria and Yemen.
The protesters held up banners reading: "Your silence is killing us, League".
(Reporting by Shaimaa Fayed; Writing by Tom Pfeiffer; Editing by Tim Pearce)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As others have observed, yet again we have a local dictator throwing around his verbal weight, with nothing really substantial to back up his threats. No one seems to be impressed by his promises of local disaster except him, even among his own constituents, whom he is killing. Is this going to become yet another ¡°mother of all battles¡±? Gimme a break. However, the demonstrating Syrians have shown over time that the issue for them is basic freedom, and apparently thousands of Syrians have believed in that enough to have given their lives pressing that issue and continue doing so. Contrast their experience with the ¡°Occupy Wall Street¡± protests ¡ª here in the U.S., the ¡°law-breakers¡± are thrown in jail for a few days and slapped with a misdemeanor. In Syria, they are shot. So for those advocating we should not get involved, you are simply encouraging a replay of history. We should remember that the same unconcerned, fear-based, pacificist attitude heavily contributed to Hitler¡¯s rise to power. A lot of good people did nothing in response to his atrocities until it was too late. It seems worth repeating the truism: ¡°The only thing we learn from history is that we don¡¯t learn anything from history.¡± If we want to avoid a very real meltdown in that region, we must continue our pattern of supporting those oppressed citizens demanding freedom, regardless of where they are. We must persist in a very real way opposing (and possibly deposing) those regional tyrants who have continued to deprive them of it. Anything less is to morally be no better than the tyrants. As Americans, we should remember these foundational words that define who we are: ¡°We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.¡± Are we selfish and blind enough to think freedom only applies to us? Have we forgotten what it took and has taken to guarantee and preserve our own freedom? Think about it, please.
Oct 30, 201111:34am EDT--
As others have observed, yet again we have a local dictator throwing around his verbal weight, with nothing really substantial to back up his threats. No one seems to be impressed by his promises of local disaster except him, even among his own constituents, whom he is killing. Is this going to become yet another ¡°mother of all battles¡±? Gimme a break. However, the demonstrating Syrians have shown over time that the issue for them is basic freedom, and apparently thousands of Syrians have believed in that enough to have given their lives pressing that issue and continue doing so. Contrast their experience with the ¡°Occupy Wall Street¡± protests ¡ª here in the U.S., the ¡°law-breakers¡± are thrown in jail for a few days and slapped with a misdemeanor. In Syria, they are shot. So for those advocating we should not get involved, you are simply encouraging a replay of history. We should remember that the same unconcerned, fear-based, pacificist attitude heavily contributed to Hitler¡¯s rise to power. A lot of good people did nothing in response to his atrocities until it was too late. It seems worth repeating the truism: ¡°The only thing we learn from history is that we don¡¯t learn anything from history.¡± If we want to avoid a very real meltdown in that region, we must continue our pattern of supporting those oppressed citizens demanding freedom, regardless of where they are. We must persist in a very real way opposing (and possibly deposing) those regional tyrants who have continued to deprive them of it. Anything less is to morally be no better than the tyrants. As Americans, we should remember these foundational words that define who we are: ¡°We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.¡± Are we selfish and blind enough to think freedom only applies to us? Have we forgotten what it took and has taken to guarantee and preserve our own freedom? Think about it, please.
Oct 30, 201111:35am EDT--
