China welcomes Taiwan president's peace proposal
2011-10-26 03:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Wednesday welcomed a proposal by Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou to consider a peace treaty with its long-time rival, but warned Taiwan's China-skeptical opposition not to whip the matter up to make political capital.
China has never renounced the use of force to regain control of Taiwan, though Taiwan unilaterally announced the end of hostilities in 1991.
"Ending the state of hostility between the two sides and reaching a peace agreement accords with the overall interests of the Chinese nation and is the common wish of compatriots on both sides of the Strait," Yang Yi, spokesman for China's Taiwan Affairs Office, told reporters.
Ma set off a controversy last week when he suggested a peace treaty with China could be signed in 10 years, drawing expressions of disquiet from his own party and charges from the opposition that he was jeopardizing Taiwan's security.
Following the criticism, he later said that any deal would be preceded by a referendum to gauge public opinion, a comment that risked upsetting Beijing, for whom referendums in Taiwan on political matters are anathema.
After Ma's comments, the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) submitted a parliamentary proposal to change the island's referendum law to require all political talks with China to be submitted to a referendum.
However the ruling Nationalists, with their big majority in the parliament's procedural committee, voted against adding the proposal to the parliament agenda, effectively blocking it.
"Political consultations are something ... for the future when conditions are right, and no political force ought to be allowed to use this as an opportunity to whip things up and seek political gain," he added.
China has stepped up is rhetoric against the DPP in the past few weeks, despite the DPP's softening of its pro-independence stance which has angered Beijing in the past.
Ma is facing a tight battle for re-election in January presidential polls and is campaigning on the success of his policy of engaging China economically, which he says has kept the peace between the one-time Cold War foes.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Sally Huang; Additional reporting by Jonathan Standing in Taipei; Editing by Nick Macfie)
