Factbox: Top issues facing U.S. defense chief on Asia trip
2011-10-23 02:07:00.0
(Reuters) - Leon Panetta started on Sunday his first visit to Asia as U.S. defense secretary where he is expected to confront concerns over territorial disputes in the South China Sea and questions about North Korea's latest overtures.
Panetta will hold talks later on Sunday with Southeast Asian defense ministers meeting on the resort island of Bali as well as meet with his Indonesian counterpart. He next heads to Japan on Monday and South Korea on Wednesday, countries where the United States has a total of around 80,000 troops stationed.
Here are some of the top issues in Asia facing Panetta, who took over the Pentagon's top job in July after serving as the director of the CIA:
In May and June, Vietnam, which is deepening ties with the U.S. military, accused Chinese vessels of harassing Vietnamese ships within Vietnam's exclusive economic zone.
The two countries recently signed an agreement aiming to contain the dispute, including opening a hotline to deal with flare-ups.
Close U.S.-ally Japan, where Panetta will head on Monday, warned in its annual defense white paper that it expects China's naval forces to step up their activities in waters around Japan.
Panetta, in a preview of a theme he is expected to stress throughout the trip, told reporters on his flight to Indonesia that Beijing needed "to be working with us to try to recognize international rules so that all countries can enjoy security and enjoy navigation rights, right of passage."
Panetta's trip to South Korea from Wednesday through Friday comes at a moment of overtures by the reclusive North.
The United States and North Korea reached an agreement last week on resuming recovery of the remains of American soldiers killed in the 1950-53 Korean War, activities halted since 2005.
The United States and North Korea will also meet on Monday and Tuesday in Geneva over the North's nuclear program, although major breakthroughs are not expected.
Panetta, in comments to reporters on his flight to Indonesia, noted that the relationship with North Korea has "always been one of either accommodation or provocation."
"And at the present time it appears that they're trying to be accommodating in some ways and try to work with us in some areas. And you know, obviously, we would want them to do that," he said.
"But I think we always have to be prepared, from a security point of view, to deal with the likelihood that as succession develops in North Korea that it could lead to greater provocations."
North Korea's Kim Jong-il is gradually preparing to be replaced by his son Kim Jong-un, and some analysts worry that the succession of power could lead to more provocations.
Last year, the North also unveiled a uranium enrichment facility giving it a second route to making an atomic bomb.
One big issue during Panetta's trip to Japan will be the long delayed effort to move the U.S. Marines' Futenma air base off Japan's Okinawa island, which plays reluctant host to about half the U.S. military in Japan.
The plan would move the base to a less populated area of Okinawa, as part of a broader realignment of U.S. forces that would shift some 8,000 troops to Guam.
But local Okinawa residents oppose the move, while U.S. lawmakers -- who are under pressure to trim defense spending -- could find the costs of a transfer to Guam a tempting target.
Senator Jim Webb, in a letter to Panetta last week, cited deep U.S. concerns about the affordability of the 2006 plan.
INDONESIA'S SPECIAL FORCES
In Indonesia, Panetta is expected to discuss, among other things, the status of U.S. military cooperation with that country's special forces.
The United States last year dropped a ban on ties with Indonesia's special forces, imposed over human rights abuses in the 1990s. The decision was taken after Indonesia took steps requested by Washington including removal of convicted human rights violators from the organization's ranks.
Human rights groups voiced concern at the time, however, that the roughly 5,000-strong special forces unit, known as Kopassus, still harbored rights offenders who committed abuses in East Timor and elsewhere but were never convicted.
(Reporting by Phil Stewart; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
