U.S. lauds China's measured response to Taiwan arms
2011-10-23 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta on Sunday lauded China for its measured reaction to the latest U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, which has triggered harsh words from Beijing but, at least so far, apparently nothing else.
Past U.S. arms sales to Taiwan have prompted Beijing to temporarily cut-off ties with the U.S. military, as happened after last year's $6.4 billion arms package. China deems the self-ruled island an illegitimate breakaway from Beijing's rule that must accept eventual reunification.
But last month's U.S. announcement of a $5.85 billion arms package for Taiwan, including upgrades to F-16 A/B fighter aircraft, has been different, Panetta said.
"I've heard nothing that indicates that they're taking any steps in reaction to that," Panetta told reporters on the Indonesian resort island of Bali, where he will meet Southeast Asian defense ministers later on Sunday.
"As a matter of fact, I guess I would commend them for the way they've handled the news of that sale to Taiwan ... I think they handled it in a professional and diplomatic way -- and we appreciate that."
Panetta's comments on China came during his first trip to Asia since taking over the Pentagon's top job in July, and at a moment of uncertainty in the region over the implications of China's military buildup and its territorial disputes in the South China Sea.
Chinese military advances come as the U.S. Congress is cutting the Pentagon's budget, and Panetta, who is due to visit Japan on Monday, acknowledged concerns among U.S. allies in the region that America's belt-tightening could affect its military's posture in the Pacific.
"There's no question that those concerns have been expressed. And the purpose of my visit is to make very clear to this region, and to our allies in the Pacific, that ... the Pacific will remain a key priority," Panetta, a former CIA director, said.
The U.S. military is facing at least $450 billion in defense spending cuts over the next decade, and some U.S. lawmakers have seized upon China's buildup as one of the reasons to oppose further reductions.
Speaking to U.S. forces in Italy earlier this month, Panetta cited his concerns about China as he explained plans to keep a strong U.S. presence in the Asia-Pacific region.
"In the Pacific, we're concerned about China. The most important thing we can do is to project our force into the Pacific," he said.
"To have our carriers there, to have our fleet there, to be able to make very clear to China that we are going to protect international rights to be able to move across the oceans freely."
Panetta leaves for Japan on Monday before continuing to South Korea on Wednesday, two countries where the U.S. military has a combined total of around 80,000 troops deployed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let＊s face it 每 China government and its military are the world＊s most evil forces in the world. Secretly, their goal is to conquer the world and make the Han race the race that controls all important decisions in the world. I would say their aims are racist, cruel and destructive. The US is calling for all countries around the world to join in undermining China＊s military and boosting democratic values in China to overthrow their one party dictatorship. We hope that one day China become a force for good in the world and abandons its destructive goals.
Oct 23, 20117:28am EDT--
Sure, let＊s give our military yet another reason to increase the military budget that we are suppose to be reducing. Think of the many things we could do here in this country with that amount of money we are giving Taiwan. How many bridges could we build, how many schools, how many veteran＊s hospitals 每 you know 每 things that really would matter to Americans?
Oct 23, 20118:28am EDT--
The chinese haven＊t been at war with anyone for several decades. They have embraced capitalism which we created and promoted. We have blasted so many countries during this same time, and increased our government＊s domestic power as well 每 interfering in our personal lives has only grown. As the US loses its ability to pay for the greatest military machine the world has ever known, the weapons companies will seek to actively increase foreign markets. We are already the largest arms dealer in the world by far and this is set to grow.
Oct 23, 20119:16am EDT--
