SABMiller joins with Efes for No 2 spot in Russia
2011-10-19 09:59:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Oct 11 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Fri, Sep 30 2011
Wed, Sep 21 2011
Wed  EDT
SABMiller, which last month agreed to buy Australian rival Foster's FGL.AX for $10 billion, said on Wednesday the deal will put it behind Carlsberg (
) in the world's fourth largest beer market and yield cost savings of $120 million a year.
Under the deal, SABMiller will swap its Russian and Ukrainian beer business for a 24 percent stake in Anadolu Efes, with Anadolu Group, controlled by the Turkish Yazicilar and Ozilhan families, holding 42.8 percent, leaving a free float of just over 33 percent following a capital increase.
"The strategic alliance may go some way to countermanding investor concern over SAB's European exposure, with the deal set to bolster the group's position in Russia," said analyst Martin Deboo at Investec Securities.
) and behind Carlsberg's share of nearly 40 percent. In value terms, the new group will be ahead of AB InBev.
Analysts added it was a sensible move for SABMiller to bring together the number four and five players in Russia - joining Efes's 11 percent market share to SABMiller's 7 percent to move ahead of former No 3 player Heineken (
SABMiller shares rose 0.8 percent to 2,280 pence, near its record high hit in July of 2,372 pence while Anadulo Efes increased 5.4 percent to 21.65 lira by 1230 GMT.
The alliance will be the focus of both groups' interests in Turkey, Russia and the former Soviet Union, central Asia and the Middle East, and will include the Turkish group's 89 percent share of its domestic beer market.
The deal puts an enterprise value of around $1.9 billion on SABMiller's Russian and Ukrainian business, and values these assets at around 13 times historic EBITDA profits and in line with previous deals in the brewing world, analysts said.
Both parties had been considering a partnership for some time and SABMiller's Chief Executive Graham Mackay said the move would boost their growth prospects in the region, strengthen their position in Russia and give costs savings.
Under the deal, expected to be completed by the end of 2011, SABMiller and Anadolu have first rights over each other's shares if either party seeks to sell shares in Anadolu Efes.
"Although SAB obtains only a minority stake today, the deal provides it with the right of first refusal in any future sale by the controlling Efes shareholder, which is relevant in a world with fewer beer acquisitions left available," said Citi analyst Adam Spielman.
Russian anti-trust problems would be added to concerns over the U.S. and Chinese markets for any $80 billon potential deal to unite the world's top two brewers.
SABMiller also said its underlying beer volumes rose 3 percent in the first half (April-September) of its financial year compared with a Reuters survey of analysts which forecast a 4 percent rise, due largely to poor summer weather in Europe and flooding in China.
(Additional reporting by Sudip Kar-Gupta; Editing by David Cowell and Hans-Juergen Peters)
