Nomura set to buy GE Capital unit in China: source
2011-10-19 07:39:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Oct 18 2011
Tue, Oct 18 2011
Mon, Oct 17 2011
Mon, Oct 17 2011
Thu, Oct 13 2011
Nomura Securities' signboards are seen at its branch in Tokyo April 28, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Kim Kyung-Hoon
Wed  EDT
) is set to buy a China unit of GE Capital, in a deal allowing Japan's largest brokerage to expand deeper into the Chinese financial market.
While Nomura has had a presence in China for around three decades, the purchase of the GE unit would put the Japanese bank in a stronger position to drive securities transactions there.
The bank currently has representative offices in Beijing and Shanghai, allowing for contact with clients and regulators.
) consumer finance business will allow Nomura to offer yuan-denominated products to local investors, according to the Wall Street Journal, which first reported the tie-up.
The paper added that Nomura was also still seeking a securities joint-venture partner to allow it to underwrite stock and bond transactions in China, where rivals such as Goldman Sachs (
Underwriting securities in China is the long coveted goal of non-Chinese investment banks, given the rapid speed of China's economy, future growth projections and fee potential. Big profits at foreign banks in China, however, have proven hard to grasp, thanks to several factors, including intense and growing competition from local competitors.
Nomura purchased the Asia and European Lehman Brother's business in 2008 following the Wall Street bank's collapse. That deal gave Nomura the opportunity to broadly strengthen its presence across Asia and the world through Lehman's investment banking division, among other units.
However, the GE deal and any other securities joint venture Nomura pursues is at the mercy of China's regulators, namely the China Banking Regulatory Commission.
The status of a CBRC approval for the Nomura-GE Capital deal, and the price of the offer, was not immediately clear.
(Reporting by Tim Kelly; Editing by Edmund Klamann and Michael Flaherty)
