Peabody nears Macarthur bid success as Citic backs deal
2011-10-20 21:35:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Oct 20 2011
Fri, Oct 14 2011
Thu, Oct 6 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
A truck is loaded at Macarthur Coal's Coppabella mine located about 760km (472 miles) northwest of Brisbane in this undated handout photograph. Credit: Reuters/Macarthur Coal/Handout
Thu  EDT
) cleared the biggest hurdle to its long-running ambitions to buy Australia's Macarthur Coal MCC.AX after the target's major shareholder, China's Citic Resources, backed its $4.9 billion ($5 billion) bid.
Citic, which owns a quarter of Macarthur, said on Friday it had accepted the A$16-per-share offer despite speculation it had been holding out for a higher price or could launch a rival offer of its own.
) will control more than 49 percent of Macarthur with the acceptance from Citic. They can declare the offer unconditional when acceptances reach 50.01 percent, which now looks certain, according to analysts.
A previous bid by Peabody to acquire Macarthur last year collapsed after Peabody cut its offer, blaming a new government mining tax.
A successful deal gives it control of the world's biggest producer of pulverized coal as demand for raw materials used to make steel intensifies.
It also would be the latest in a slew of coal deals in Australia, with Chinese, Indian and global firms snapping up mines best positioned to feed booming demand from Asian steel mills.
South Korea's top steel maker POSCO (
), which holds a 7.25 percent stake in Macarthur, was not immediately available for comment.
A successful deal would be the latest in a slew of coal deals in Australia, with Chinese, Indian and global firms snapping up mines best positioned to feed booming demand from Asian steel mills.
Peabody and ArcelorMittal raised their offer for Macarthur by 3 percent in August, winning over the Macarthur board, which had been holding out for A$18 a share.
(Additional reporting by Hyunjoo Jin in SEOUL and Donny Kwok in HONG KONG; Editing by Ed Davies Vinu Pilakkott)
