U.S. accuses China, India of hiding subsidy programs
2011-10-06 13:44:00.0
U.S. accuses China, India of hiding subsidy programs | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
U.S. accuses China, India of hiding subsidy programs
Wed, Sep 28 2011
Tue, Sep 20 2011
Thu  EDT
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk also said India had failed to notify 50 such programs, and the United States had taken the unusual step of presenting its "voluminous information" on both countries' programs to the WTO.
"The situation was simply intolerable," Kirk said in a statement.
"Every member of the WTO is required to come clean on its subsidy programs on a regular basis ... Because China and India have failed to meet their respective obligations, we had to act," Kirk said.
China has not notified the WTO of its subsidy programs for more than five years and India, in its first filing in almost 10 years, made known only three of the many subsidy programs the United States knows to exist, he said.
"The lack of transparency severely constrains the ability of WTO members to ensure each government is playing by the rules," Kirk said. "It is past time for China and India to be transparent about their subsidy programs."
The bill is directed mainly at China, which many U.S. lawmakers say undervalues its currency by as much as 25 percent to 40 percent to give its companies an unfair edge.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Did Mr. Kirk turn in a report to the WTO on the $3 Trillion subsidies given to the American financial industry after 2008? What is good must be universal, no? Or it is a case of the kettle vs. the teapot, etc.? $3 Trillion is likely more than the combined total of all subsidies by all other nations, no?
Oct 06, 20115:58pm EDT--
Oct 08, 20117:18pm EDT--
