France slams Russia, China after Syria veto
2011-10-05 00:05:00.0
(Reuters) - French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe criticized Russia and China on Wednesday for vetoing a United Nations resolution on Syria, saying their stance was based on "false arguments" that the resolution would have paved the way to military intervention.
The United Nations says 2,700 civilians have been killed. Damascus blames the violence on foreign-backed armed groups which it says have killed at least 700 security personnel.
The resolution, drafted by France with the support of Britain, Germany and Portugal, received nine votes in favor and four abstentions from Brazil, India, Lebanon and South Africa
"These votes are based on false arguments," Alain Juppe told lawmakers in the French parliament. "Nobody can say that this draft resolution would have paved the way for military intervention... nothing in this text points in that direction."
For months, Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa -- the "BRICS" countries -- have criticized the United States and European council members for allegedly allowing NATO to overstep its Security Council mandate to protect civilians in Libya.
Juppe said one thing Russia and China wanted from Western countries, and which France categorically refused, was a text that condemned the Syrian authorities and rebels in equal measure.
Juppe said Paris planned to strengthen sanctions at European Union level and would "multiply" contacts with the Syrian opposition, saying he hoped it would also embrace the Christian minority.
"We don't exclude reviving our initiatives at the U.N. Security Council with our European partners," he added.
Members of Syria's new transitional council will be part of a wider Syrian opposition group in Paris next week that aims to lobby the French government for help.
"France has a clear political line," Juppe said. "We will not ignore what is happening for the good of freedom in Syria."
(Reporting by John Irish; Editing by Brian Love and Matthew Jones)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Thank God Russia and China are putting a stop to this nonsense. ¡°protect civilians¡± ¡­ What about the civilians that supported Gaddafi?
Oct 05, 20111:47pm EDT--
France is blind to the people of Syria. There is more than one way to give freedom to the people of Syria and you have chosen violence. Peace can start from the current ruling party. It doesn¡¯t mean destroying the current system will definitely lead to freedom. What if it leads to more chaos, pain and suffering. What will eventually become of Iraqi, Libya, and Eygpt remains to be seen.
Oct 05, 20111:53pm EDT--
@ patriot2011 The only nonsense are the comments which you posted on Reuters. The civilians that supported Gaddafi won¡¯t end murderer by the new regime, contrarily to those whose opposed its decades old dictatorship a few months ago. I am tired of the usual Pavlovian parrots who can¡¯t keep themselves from siding with plain barbaric dictatorships and autocrats : you can whine all you want about the CIA and its history at planting dictatorships, about the Iraqi illegal invasion paved with WMD lies, but it won¡¯t make your delusional support of the Gaddafi and al-Assad regimes relevant. France is right, while Russia and China are just two dictatorships who want to keep selling weapons to their dictator pal while the Syrian democratic uprising is slaughtered.
Oct 05, 20112:33pm EDT--
