China: Currency law would hurt U.S. jobs growth
2011-10-10 08:29:00.0
(Reuters) - China warned the United States that it would damage relations, and American jobs, if it forces Beijing to let its currency rise under a law to be voted on in the U.S. Senate on Tuesday.
Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai on Monday underlined Beijing's opposition to the bill, saying it could trigger a trade war and hold back global economic recovery. He said that relations could also be hurt by U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
"(The currency bill) in no way represents the reality of the economic and trade relationship between China and the United States, and it might have an adverse impact on the development of the relations between the two countries," he said.
"Should the proposed legislation become law, the only result would be a trade war between China and the U.S. and that would be a lose-lose situation for both sides," said Cui, who currently heads the China delegation for G20 negotiations.
China's central bank, and commerce and foreign ministries last week jointly warned that enactment of the proposed currency law could lead to a trade war between the world's two top economies.
"If this type of situation occurs, of course it would be detrimental to the development of economic and trade relations between China and the U.S. and detrimental to U.S. economic and job growth," Cui said. "At the same time, it would hinder global economic recovery."
The White House has voiced concerns that the legislation, which calls for tariffs on imports from countries with deliberately undervalued currencies, could violate international trade rules.
Beijing says it is committed to gradual reform of the yuan, which has risen 30 percent against the dollar since 2005.
Cui also reiterated China's stance that U.S. arms sales to Taiwan seriously undermine the nation's core interests and would harm ties between Washington and Beijing, weeks after the United States said it would sell $5.85 billion in military hardware to the island China calls a breakaway province.
The sales to Taiwan have been a persistent irritant in Sino-U.S. ties, adding to economic strains between Washington and Beijing.
"These arms sales are not consistent with the trend and requirement of peaceful relations currently prevailing across the Taiwan Strait," Cui said. "From a long term perspective, I also don't think it serves the United States' own interests."
Such supplies would be on top of plans sent to Congress on September 21 to sell new hardware and defense services, including upgrades for Taiwan's 145 F-16 A/B fighter aircraft, bought in 1992.
Cui said China welcomed a positive and constructive U.S. military presence in the Pacific, but added that "some outside powers" had inflamed tensions in the disputed South China Sea. He did not specify which countries he was referring to.
"I think some people are stirring up the issue. That is to say, some people don't want to see stability in the region or the development of relations between China and relevant countries," Cui said.
China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan have conflicting claims of sovereignty over parts of the potentially oil-and gas-rich body of water crossed by key shipping lanes and dotted with uninhabitable small islands, rocks and reefs.
China's growing military might at sea is triggering regional jitters that have fed into long-standing territorial disputes, but Beijing insists it is merely holding to its centuries-old sovereignty over the waters.
(Reporting by Michael Martina, Writing by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ken Wills and Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Which side are we speaking of here China? Trade war? China you initiated the trade war with undervalued currency ETC. The world must bring you under control of the current established regulations. It seems this should have been accomplished long ago and not have waited up until when the world economy is on the brink of dismal earnings etc. In somewhat of China¡¯s defense however she is not to blame for the overspending of respective countries and self inflicted wounds. Consuming habits without the means to pay them back into the system that lent them the money to over purchase need to be brought under control.
Oct 10, 20115:07am EDT--
This is merely another example of American paranoia!
Oct 10, 20116:12am EDT--
There has been a trade war with China for decades, and it was started by China with massive subsidies to their industries, high tariffs on US imports, currency manipulation, and restrictions on investments. Even recently, china game 100 percent rebates on exports. Imagine that. You get 1 dollar from the government for every dollar you export. China is the protectionist nation here. The US can¡¯t kowtow to these goons and thugs any longer. Who cares if we hurt the feelings of 1.4 billion people. This isn¡¯t primary school.
Oct 10, 20116:47am EDT--
