Dalai Lama: China is built on lies, run by hypocrites
2011-10-08 00:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China is built on lies and its officials are hypocrites, the Dalai Lama said on Saturday, speaking via videophone after visa problems prevented him from joining Archbishop Desmond Tutu's birthday celebrations in South Africa.
"Some Chinese officials describe me as a demon," the Tibetan spiritual leader said to loud applause as he put his index fingers either side of his head to mimic devil's horns.
"In reality, for the communist totalitarian system ... hypocrisy (and) telling lies has unfortunately become part of their lives."
He said the Chinese government was "uncomfortable" with people who tell the truth, adding that honest people live longer and he would like to attend Tutu's 90th birthday.
"At that time, don't forget to send me an invitation ... then we can test your government," he said to Tutu in an apparent reference to his visa debacle with South African authorities.
The government's failure to allow the Dalai Lama into the country has been seen as bowing to pressure from China, South Africa's largest trading partner that pledged to invest $2.5 billion in Africa's largest economy last week.
(Reporting by Shafiek Tassiem; Editing by Phumza Macanda; and Louise Ireland)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Oct 08, 20119:40pm EDT--
Please, let the record be straight. Is this the same Dalai Llama who fled his country under the protection of the CIA in the 1950¡äs and left his people behind to suffer rather than martyr his precious life to re-incarnation? Hypocrite? that is the pot calling the kettle¡­. Now, China certainly could do some serious work on basic freedoms, but, the holy man has no right to call anyone a hypocrite. He ran like a coward to save his butt and that should be known.
Please, let the record be straight. Is this the same Dalai Llama who fled his country under the protection of the CIA in the 1950¡äs and left his people behind to suffer rather than martyr his precious life to re-incarnation? Hypocrite? that is the pot calling the kettle¡­. Now, China certainly could do some serious work on basic freedoms, but, the holy man has no right to call anyone a hypocrite. He ran like a coward to save his butt and that should be known.
What slays me is his arrogance as a false prophet with a great marketing spin. This world, these people, put their pants one leg at a time and then count on duping 100¡äs of millions with sanctimoniousness repartee¡¯. It is time to call out people for who they are in truth, not their press and their lies. He will most likely reincarnate as a dung beetle and China should not worry about his lies of peace and goodwill for his people, for he is a lying and he knows that he can continue his ruse a legitimate holy man. Out to save his own skin he is.
Oct 08, 201110:10pm EDT--
What does Dalai Lama want to do? Put the Tibetans back to the slavery that he represented and was turned down by CCP and PLA a half century ago? Does he still remember those slaves who were cut hands or feets, or removed two eyes, or were simply killed just because his temple needed to make drums using live human¡¯s skin and bones? Does he still enjoy using the bowls his lamas made using the slaves¡¯s skulls? Free Tibet? Yes, Tibetan slaves already freed in 1959 by Mao http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJY1eK9jQ28
Oct 08, 201112:08am EDT--
