Romney vows U.S. military supremacy if elected
2011-10-07 13:43:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Oct 6 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Republican presidential candidate and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney delivers his ''soap box'' speech at the Iowa State Fair in Des Moines, Iowa, August 11, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Jim Young
CHARLESTON, South Carolina
Fri  EDT
CHARLESTON, South Carolina
Romney's foreign policy address at the Citadel military college was an effort to show Republicans that he would pursue an aggressive U.S. role in an unsettled world and reverse what they contend has been an American retrenchment under Democratic President Barack Obama.
"This is very simple: If you do not want America to be the strongest nation on Earth, I am not your president," Romney said. "You have that president today."
Romney's speech was an updated version of Republican President Ronald Reagan's "peace through strength" doctrine. He identified China and Russia as nations with growing ambitions that must be watched carefully by U.S. policymakers, along with Iran, Pakistan, North Korea and Venezuela.
Romney said he would take an assertive approach toward China, maintaining a strong military presence in the Pacific to ensure open trade routes are maintained and deepen cooperation with countries in the region who share concerns about China's growing power.
"China has made it clear that it intends to be a military and economic superpower. Will her rulers lead their people to a new era of freedom and prosperity or will they go down a darker path, intimidating their neighbors, brushing aside an inferior American Navy in the Pacific?" he asked.
Romney, a former businessman, former Massachusetts governor and organizer of the 2002 Winter Olympics, has little foreign policy experience. He has packed his national security team with former aides to Republican President George W. Bush.
Some of his policies sounded similar to those of Bush, who launched costly wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Romney, lest he be compared unfavorably to Bush, said he would employ "all the tools of statecraft" to shape threatening situations before they demand military action.
"The United States should always retain military supremacy to deter would-be aggressors and to defend our allies and ourselves. If America is the undisputed leader of the world, it reduces our need to police a more chaotic world," he said.
The White House and Obama's re-election campaign pushed back hard at the charge that Obama has weakened the U.S. military and has shown a lack of resolve abroad. Democrats pointed specifically to Obama's order that led to the killing of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in May.
"We are stronger, we are safer, we have taken the fight to our principal enemy with ... a level of aggression and success that is unprecedented," said White House spokesman Jay Carney.
Romney leads his Republican rivals by a small margin in polls of Republican voters and has yet to separate himself from the pack despite a well-funded, disciplined campaign.
Conservatives harbor doubts about his convictions and have been tempted by Texas Governor Rick Perry. Romney's strategy is to slowly pick up steam.
His speech at the Citadel was part of that strategy, to make his foreign policy vision look different from that of Obama but not alienate independent voters should he become the Republican nominee to oppose Obama in November 2012.
And he would launch a review of Obama's troop drawdown from Afghanistan to ensure the United States has the force level necessary to secure gains against the Taliban.
This sets him apart from top rival Perry, who told Time magazine he thinks U.S. troops in Afghanistan and Iraq should come home as soon as possible.
- Work to bolster relations with Israel that some critics say have been damaged by what they feel was Obama's favoring of the Palestinians over Israel.
"America must lead the world, or someone else will," Romney said.
(Additional reporting by Jeff Mason; editing by Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What would he do. Nuke Iran?
Oct 06, 201111:43pm EDT--
War destroys wealth. Infrastructure increases the generation of wealth. We¡¯ve focused on the former and neglected the latter for far too long. Get you priorities straight! Haven¡¯t Bush and Obama proven that war is not a job creator?
Oct 06, 201112:47am EDT--
Romney¡¯s a freak-a-zoid. The PNAC Mafia elite are filling their pockets as they finish off the country. Defense spending went from under 300 billion a year in 2001, to 1+ trillion a year today and this freak want¡¯s to keep going. Doesn¡¯t he know that our Navy is already bigger than the Navies of the next top 14 richest countries ¨C combined? We spend 6 X more than China on Defense. The U.S. alone accounts for half the WORLDS Defense spending. The rich half. No way he gets elected.
Oct 07, 20111:08am EDT--
