China warns U.S. arms sale to Taiwan to hurt ties
2011-10-10 04:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China reiterated Monday that the United States' arms sales to Taiwan seriously undermines its core interests and would harm ties between Washington and Beijing.
China's Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai made the comments to reporters during a briefing, weeks after the United States said it would sell $5.85 billion in military hardware to the island China calls a breakaway province.
U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, a self-ruled island that China says eventually must unify with the mainland, have been a persistent irritant in Sino-U.S. ties, adding to economic strains between Washington and Beijing.
Such supplies would be on top of plans sent to Congress on September 21 to sell new hardware and defense services, including upgrades for Taiwan's 145 F-16 A/B fighter aircraft, bought in 1992.
China's People's Liberation Army had previously said the U.S. offer to Taiwan -- which also includes advanced air-to-air missiles, laser- and GPS-guided bombs and radars -- could disrupt relations between the two countries' militaries.
(Reporting by Michael Martina, Writing by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Maybe China ought to stay out of America¡¯s internal affairs. They seem to be fond of saying that, after all.
Oct 10, 20115:38am EDT--
If Taiwan issue is America¡¯s internal affairs, and issues in Afganistan, Iraq, the late Vietnam and Korea are also America¡¯s internal affairs by the same token. Then America deserves to have their men died in those battlefields and to have their wealth drained to the brink of broke for resolving their internal problems. America does not own the world. Sorry, I don¡¯t mean to offend every Americans particularly those friends of mine.
Oct 10, 20117:03am EDT--
Selling weapons to China¡¯s rebellion province Taiwan is US¡¯s interal affairs ¡ª that¡¯s a disguisting arrogance and need to be punished. China¡¯s PLA will take care of you when the day comes, like we did in NK 60 years ago.
Oct 10, 20116:10pm EDT--
