Key China currency vote hits snag in Senate
2011-10-06 10:46:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Oct 6 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Thu  EDT
The bill calling for U.S. tariffs on imports from countries with deliberately undervalued currencies had gained support from many lawmakers alarmed at high unemployment ahead of 2012 elections. But it has drawn warnings from Beijing that it could trigger a trade war, and the White House voiced concern the measure might go against international trade rules.
"It's difficult for me to understand (how) people could be switching their votes from Monday to Thursday," said Reid as the legislative drive bogged down in a dispute over amendments to the Currency Exchange Rate Oversight Reform Act of 2011.
"The people who are opposing this legislation are probably doing business in China and they are afraid of offending the Chinese," said Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican who is a co-sponsor of the legislation.
Reid said he still hoped the Senate would pass the bill before the weekend, but warned that work on the legislation would end if it fails to clear a "cloture" vote -- a key procedural step on Thursday morning.
"If cloture's not invoked, of course, that ends it, which would be a sad day, I think, in the relations between the United States and China, to think that we capitulated in something as important as this," Reid said.
Republicans were balking at cooperating with Reid because he rebuffed their effort to attach amendments to the currency legislation, including one containing President Barack Obama's jobs bill.
"We've offered to work with Republicans on several germane amendments. I stand by that offer," he said.
(Writing by Paul Eckert; Editing by Andrea Ricci)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Oct 06, 201111:17am EDT--
