White House voices concern on China currency bill
2011-10-05 18:42:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Mon, Oct 3 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
A 100 yuan banknote (R) is placed next to a $100 banknote in this picture illustration taken in Beijing November 7, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Petar Kujundzic
Wed  EDT
President Barack Obama has not personally joined the debate about the bill, which has won support from many lawmakers aware of how unemployment and the weak U.S. economy will feature in next year's elections.
By contrast, the proposal has drawn warnings from Beijing that it could trigger a trade war, and has met with opposition from top Republicans and U.S. business.
"We certainly ... have concerns about this particular legislation, and whether or not it would create consistency issues with our international obligations," White House press secretary Jay Carney told reporters.
"We have, from the beginning as an administration, worked on the issue of the undervalued Chinese currency. And it has appreciated to some degree as a result, we think, of those efforts. More needs to be done," he said.
Democratic Senator Charles Schumer told reporters the bill he helped write "has broad, broad support and it would send an important signal to China that they can't keep getting away with economic murder."
The controversial legislation's fate looks less certain in the House of Representatives. Its Republican leader, who has powers to block bills, called it "dangerous" on Tuesday.
Backers of the legislation in the House, however, said the measure had 225 co-sponsors, including 61 Republicans.
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown, one of the bipartisan bill's authors, said he was confident the Senate would vote on the bill on Thursday with minimal opposition.
"Other than those who want to stand with companies that outsource jobs to China, I don't see where any real opposition to this bill should come from," he said.
'TERRIBLE JOB LOSS'
On Monday, the U.S. Senate voted 79-19 to start debate on the bill, prompting an angry rebuke from China's central bank and foreign and commerce ministries.
Brown dismissed the criticism. "Where I come from we say that when you throw a rock at a pack of dogs, the one that yelps is the one you hit," he told the Senate. "These are all arms of the Chinese Communist Party. Of course they are not happy when we do this."
Brown urged his fellow Ohio lawmaker Boehner to return to his rustbelt home state to "see the kind of terrible job loss" that he blamed in part on China's currency policy.
Most major business groups oppose the bill, which they say will cause more harm than good and put at risk their access to one of the world's fastest-growing markets.
The Financial Services Forum, whose members include Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan and Bank of America, has urged Congress not to pass the bill. On Wednesday, the anti-tax Club For Growth boasted that it had scared Republicans away from the bill.
With the 2012 U.S. presidential race heating up and the jobless rate stuck above 9 percent, a top Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney, has called China a "cheater" and vowed to pursue the currency issue.
Republican Senator Mark Kirk of Illinois, arguing against the bill, told his Senate colleagues that China is the fastest growing export market for his and many U.S. states.
"A trade war with the second-largest economy in the world would be unwise, at best," he said. Chinese theft of U.S. intellectual property was a far greater problem, he added.
Fred Bergsten, director of the Washington-based Peterson Institute for International Economics, estimates that a 20 percent rise in the yuan would reduce the U.S. trade deficit by $50 billion to $100 billion. At a gain of about 6,000 jobs for every $1 billion improvement in the trade balance, $100 billion would work out to 600,000 jobs.
But other economists argue that a stronger yuan would simply shift manufacturing to other low-cost producers such as Bangladesh or Vietnam, and not benefit the United States.
(Writing by Paul Eckert; editing by Anthony Boadle and Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Charging countervailing duties on Chinese imports will raise prices on many consumer products. This will add a burden to an already stressed domestic population and will reduce consumer demand, further affecting business. Overall, buying cheap products allow Americans to focus on delivery of other more lucrative products and services. Duties will also create deadweight loss (i.e., money is lost because of inefficiency and nobody gains from it). This is bad for the overall state of the economy and will only benefit a small sector of domestic constituents. Our trade deficit is not our problem¡­getting people to work and getting the economy going again is.
Oct 04, 201111:33pm EDT--
What a fool idea. I would like to see a trade war. So China won¡¯t buy the airplane from us, instead China buying from France. China bought GM cars like Hot Cake. If we have a trade war, China will buy from Korea.
What a fool idea. I would like to see a trade war. So China won¡¯t buy the airplane from us, instead China buying from France. China bought GM cars like Hot Cake. If we have a trade war, China will buy from Korea.
Come on, how can he justify an accusation for currency manipulation when the RMB has appreciated 33% since 2006. see the fact here http://www.forexblog.org/category/chinese-yuan-rmb
I had loss 33% purchasing power since 2006 when I am spending US Dollars in China. This is a political agenda to get popular vote from painful Americans. It¡¯s so easy to blame others for our pain. Instead let¡¯s discuss the root cause of the crisis. WHO broke the economy? They are the Greedy, Banks, Wall St. Toxic Assets Engineers, Credit Rating Agency, CPA Firms, all work together a scam. Guess what, they still working and earning a high paying job, shopping for Luxury goods. If you notice, luxury items and department, cars are selling very well. Let¡¯s focus on how we going to have them pay back. They are very tricky though, they keep telling us that if they go down, we go down as well. So they hold us Hostage. Come on, don¡¯t be con. We just hang the banks, Wall St. just long enough to pay back the debts, return the money to US Tax Payers. Don¡¯t listen to the blame game. As JF Kennedy said, what we can do for our country.
Oct 04, 201112:31am EDT--
Those who¡¯ve funded the careers of the ¡°Top Republicans¡± have made a lot of profit from the way we currently do business with China. The financiers of the ¡°Top Democrats¡± have made out like bandits as well. It¡¯s time for a real change. I consider myself a progressive voter and am switching my registration to Republican so I can vote for Ron Paul in the primaries.
Oct 05, 201111:44am EDT--
