White House voices concern on China currency bill
2011-10-05 15:49:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Wed, Oct 5 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Tue, Oct 4 2011
Wed  EDT
While reiterating that it shared lawmakers' desire to ensure that U.S. workers and businesses face a level playing field when competing with China, the White House hardened its criticism of the legislation, which has drawn trade war warnings from Beijing.
"We certainly ... have concerns about this particular legislation, and whether or not it would create consistency issues with our international obligations," White House press secretary Jay Carney told reporters.
"We have, from the beginning as an administration, worked on the issue of the undervalued Chinese currency. And it has appreciated to some degree as a result, we think, of those efforts. More needs to be done," he said.
The bill would then go to the House of Representatives, whose Republican leader underscored the bill's uncertain prospects on Tuesday by calling it "dangerous" and questioning whether it was the best approach.
"I think it's pretty dangerous to be moving legislation through the United States Congress forcing someone to deal with the value of their currency," House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner, who has the power to prevent debate in his chamber, told reporters.
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown, one of the bipartisan bill's authors, said he was confident the Senate would vote on the bill on Thursday with minimal opposition from lawmakers keen to take action to bring down stubborn U.S. unemployment.
On Monday, the U.S. Senate voted 79-19 to start debate on the bill, which calls for U.S. tariffs on imports from countries with deliberately undervalued currencies, prompting an angry rebuke from China.
"This bill doesn't cost taxpayer dollars. It actually will help reduce the budget deficit, so ... other than those who want to stand with companies that outsource jobs to China, I don't see where any real opposition to this bill should come from," he said.
Fred Bergsten, director of the Washington-based Peterson Institute for International Economics, estimates that a 20 percent rise in the yuan would reduce the U.S. trade deficit by $50 billion to $100 billion. At a gain of about 6,000 jobs for every $1 billion improvement in the trade balance, $100 billion would work out to 600,000 jobs.
But other economists argue that a stronger yuan would simply shift manufacturing to other low-cost producers such as Bangladesh or Vietnam, and not benefit the United States.
U.S. steel and other domestic manufacturers are hurt by the artificially-low yuan, while consumers benefit from lower prices on household goods. Most major business groups oppose the bill, which they say will cause more harm than good.
(Writing by Paul Eckert; editing by Anthony Boadle)
