China on track for modern military by 2020: U.S.
2011-08-24 20:35:00.0
(Reuters) - China appears on track to forge a modern military by 2020, a rapid buildup that could be potentially destabilizing to the Asia-Pacific region, the Pentagon said on Wednesday.
Fueled by its booming economy, China's military growth in the past decade has exceeded most U.S. forecasts. Its aircraft carrier program, cyber warfare capabilities and anti-satellite missiles have alarmed neighbors and Washington.
Some China watchers, including members of the U.S. Congress, note with apprehension that rising Chinese defense spending coincides with Washington's plans for defense cuts.
"China clearly believes that it can capitalize on the global financial crisis," said House Armed Services Committee Chairman Howard McKeon, adding the U.S. military presence in the Pacific must not be sacrificed in an attempt to control U.S. spending.
The U.S. Defense Department's annual assessment to Congress on the Chinese military flagged all the major concerns about China's growing military might, including Beijing's widening edge over Taiwan. It also noted cyber attacks in 2010 -- including those on U.S. government computers -- that appear to have originated in China.
"We have some concerns (on cyber) about some of the things that we've seen. And we want to be able to work through that with China," said Michael Schiffer, a deputy assistant secretary of defense.
The report focused on 2010, a year when the Pentagon said China's military modernization program paid "visible dividends." It cited China's fielding of an operational anti-ship ballistic missile, continued work on its aircraft carrier program and the completion of a prototype of China's first stealth fighter jet, the J-20.
The J-20 program, the Pentagon report said, would not achieve "effective operational capability" prior to 2018.
"Despite continued gaps in some key areas, large quantities of antiquated hardware and a lack of operational experience, the PLA (China's People's Liberation Army) is steadily closing the technological gap with modern armed forces," the report said.
A spokesman for China's embassy in Washington said the report was "a reflection of Cold War mentality" and would be used as a tool to depict China as a threat.
"We hope the U.S. will take practical steps to work with China for stable and healthy military ties by following the spirit of mutual respect, mutual trust, reciprocity and mutual benefit," embassy spokesman Wang Baodong said in an email.
DESTABILIZING EFFECT?
The military buildup could have a destabilizing effect on the region, Schiffer said, calling for greater openness by the People's Liberation Army and more bilateral military dialogue.
"The pace and scope of China's sustained military investments have allowed China to pursue capabilities that we believe are potentially destabilizing to regional military balances," Schiffer said.
The Pentagon said despite its progress at becoming a more potent regional military power, Beijing was not expected to be able to project and sustain large forces in high-intensity combat operations far from China before 2020.
That is something the United States, still the predominant military power in the Pacific, has been able to do throughout the world for decades.
Still, the report said any domestically produced Chinese aircraft carrier would not be operational until at least 2015, if construction were to start this year.
"Whether or not this (China's carrier program) proves to be a net plus for the region or for the globe or proves to be something that has destabilizing effects and raises blood pressure in various regional capitals I think remains to be seen," Schiffer said.
Schiffer said the U.S. government has not yet made a decision on any new arms sales to Taiwan, comments echoed at the State Department.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I grew up during the Cold War, so the U.S. borrowing massive amounts of money from China is alarming and bizarre. We ¡°owe¡± China! I cannot help but think our Congress has been on the wrong track a very long time to get us here. How short sighted can a government be? It¡¯s a real shame that American corporations have made China what it is today by exporting American jobs to Asia. Thus, most products on American shelves are made in China. I search around for U.S. made goods in vain.
Aug 24, 20118:57pm EDT--
The one thing we exceed them in is military. We can¡¯t afford all our aircraft carriers sell couple to china. Sell them airplanes Sell them tanks, sell them weapons. Even if they exceeded us militarily the can never take us over. We have been the free policeman of the world for far too long. Let china share in some of that responsibility. Let their children killed in these stupid wars that america keeps on getting drawn into. With the nuclear capabilities the united states has we do not need to fear any country or combination of any country. We could make 100¡äs of billions if not trillions of dollars off of the chinese. they want to beat the big boys on the block I say let them have it. I for one am tired of being the big boy the only one the policeman of the world. Bottom line let china have the job and we could make hey fortune. 20 years from now We will own trillions of china¡¯s treasury certificates.
Aug 24, 201110:20pm EDT--
Aug 25, 201111:13pm EDT--
