Japan exports disappoint, full benefits of weak yen yet to show
2013-05-21 20:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's exports rose less than expected in April from a year earlier due to weak demand from Europe and China, highlighting the challenges confronting the world's third-biggest economy as policymakers try to engineer a sustained revival.
The result also underscores the limitations of a weak yen in bolstering the trade sector, especially as external headwinds crimp demand for exports.
The uncertainty was underlined recently by a string of weak data from the United States and China, Japan's major export markets.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's policy mix of sweeping fiscal and monetary stimulus, dubbed "Abenomics", has driven the yen to a 4-1/2 year low against the dollar and boosted Tokyo shares
However, the benefits of a weak yen has not been fully reflected in the trade sector, partly because manufacturers have been moving production overseas.
"The yen's weakness has pushed up values of both exports and imports, but the benefits from a weak yen have not appeared in export volumes yet," said Yuichi Kodama, chief economist at Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance.
"The economy is expected to stay on a moderate recovery path. It will be difficult to picture the economy being led by external demand. Instead, it will probably be supported by fiscal policy."
Exports to China rose 0.3 percent year-on-year in April, while exports to the United States jumped 14.8 percent year-on-year, according to the data.
Imports jumped 9.4 percent year-on-year in April, up for a sixth straight month, due to an increase in liquefied natural gas purchases, compared with a 6.7 percent gain expected by economists.
That has brought the country's trade balance into a deficit of 879.9 billion yen, the biggest trade gap for the month of April under comparable data series going back to 1979, according to the finance ministry.
It compared with the economists' forecast for 621.1 billion yen deficit, leaving the trade balance in the red for ten months in a row, the longest such run since 1979-1980 when Japan was hit by surging oil prices.JPTBAL=ECI
For decades, Japan had accumulated solid trade surpluses, but its trade balance swung to a deficit in recent years with a spike in the import bill as Japan's fuel requirements grew substantially following the idling of nuclear plants in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake and tsunami in 2011.
The economy grew 0.9 percent in January-March from the previous quarter led by firm private consumption and a pick-up in exports, with economists expecting the recovery to firm up in the coming quarters.
The Bank of Japan is expected to keep monetary policy steady on Wednesday, having unleashed a massive burst of stimulus last month, promising to inject about $1.4 trillion into the economy in less than two years to end two decades of stagnation.
(Reporting by Tetsushi Kajimoto; Editing by Shri Navaratnam)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Japanese is an export-driven economy relying on overseas markets and innovative consumer products. At present its biggest markets, the USA and EU are both declining. Its foreign policy is stifling its biggest potential market, China. It lacks popular innovative consumer products for the last 10 years, such as from VHS/Beta video tape recording, then LD, and then DVD for home video consumers. In addition to its aging population and etc Abe cannot turn the tide by just using monetary policy. Ironically the golden era of Japan, about 4 decades before 1980s, was when it was ruled and dominated by one political party, the Liberal Democratic Party.
May 22, 20133:16am EDT--
The err ¡°growth¡± was in yen terms¡­ one could wonder if it was not all due to the yen losing value¡­
The err ¡°growth¡± was in yen terms¡­ one could wonder if it was not all due to the yen losing value¡­
Do anyone remember Hollande after he was elected president? All BS demagogy about growth and no to austerity¡­ Now how the gov is going to hold the interest over its debt will be an interesting mexican tv novel adding to Greece, Spain, Italy and cia¡­ a lot of money is been printed¡­ including the plan to finance 70% of the gov debt at zero interest to finance white elephants¡­ so banks, people and retirement funds have their money in form of zero interest investment in a currency losing value like a meteor¡­and not expect err ¡°turbulence¡± lol¡­ soon they will begin to ¡°vow¡± daily they will fix everything¡­ like ask investors to be nice¡­
May 22, 20136:31pm EDT--
