China on track for modern military by 2020: Pentagon
2011-08-24 18:17:00.0
(Reuters) - China appears on track to forge a modern military by 2020, a rapid buildup that could be potentially destabilizing to the Asia-Pacific region, the Pentagon said on Wednesday.
Fueled by its booming economy, China's military growth in the past decade has exceeded most U.S. forecasts. Its aircraft carrier program, cyber warfare capabilities and anti-satellite missiles have alarmed neighbors and Washington.
Some China watchers, including members of Congress, note with apprehension that rising Chinese defense spending coincides with Washington's plans for defense cuts.
"China clearly believes that it can capitalize on the global financial crisis," said Representative Howard McKeon, adding the U.S. military presence in the Pacific must not be sacrificed in an attempt to control U.S. spending.
The Defense Department's annual assessment to Congress on the Chinese military flagged all the major concerns about China's growing military might, including Beijing's widening edge over Taiwan. It also noted cyber attacks in 2010 -- including those on U.S. government computers -- that appear to have originated in China.
"We have some concerns (on cyber) about some of the things that we've seen. And we want to be able to work through that with China," said Michael Schiffer, a deputy assistant secretary of defense.
The report focused on 2010, a year when the Pentagon said China's military modernization program paid "visible dividends." It cited China's fielding of an operational anti-ship ballistic missile, continued work on its aircraft carrier program and the completion of a prototype of China's first stealth fighter jet, the J-20.
The J-20 program, the Pentagon report said, would not achieve "effective operational capability" prior to 2018.
"Despite continued gaps in some key areas, large quantities of antiquated hardware and a lack of operational experience, the PLA (China's People's Liberation Army) is steadily closing the technological gap with modern armed forces," the report said.
Officials at China's embassy could not be immediately reached for comment.
DESTABILIZING EFFECT?
The military buildup could have a destabilizing effect on the region, Schiffer said, calling for greater openness by the People's Liberation Army and more bilateral military dialogue.
"The pace and scope of China's sustained military investments have allowed China to pursue capabilities that we believe are potentially destabilizing to regional military balances," Schiffer said.
The Pentagon said despite its progress at becoming a more potent regional military power, Beijing was not expected to be able to project and sustain large forces in high-intensity combat operations far from China before 2020.
That is something the United States, still the predominant military power in the Pacific, has been able to do throughout the world for decades.
Still, the report said any domestically produced Chinese aircraft carrier would not be operational until at least 2015, if construction were to start this year.
"Whether or not this (China's carrier program) proves to be a net plus for the region or for the globe or proves to be something that has destabilizing effects and raises blood pressure in various regional capitals I think remains to be seen," Schiffer said.
Schiffer said the U.S. government has not yet made a decision on any new arms sales to Taiwan, comments echoed at the State Department.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
With revenue from exports, desire amd a billion people they could accomplish anything in a year.. Desire something we use to have¡­ Wonder were it went?
Aug 24, 20114:20pm EDT--
Maybe we could just trade them our military as a pay off of our debt. Save them alot of effort and our CiC could pride himself in extending an arm of love, peace and all things fuzzy to yet another enemy of the USA.
Aug 24, 20116:13pm EDT--
Just address the trust deficit. Although US and CHINA is apprenhensive of each other, there is no denying that they also envy and respect the other¡¯s achievements. The problem preventing US and CHINA from clicking together is the fear that one will eventually lose out. The blow on ego is tough to swallow especially for these who are so used to pride in so many ways. If a formula can be found to guarantee that both will progress coherently, it is most likely that both will sign up.
Aug 25, 20118:02am EDT--
