Merkel, Li call for end to EU-China solar trade row
2013-05-26 14:21:00.0
(Reuters) - German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Chinese Premier Li Keqiang on Sunday called for an end to a trade row between Europe and China over solar panels and wireless equipment, telling a joint news conference they were both for free trade.
"Germany will do what it can so that there are no permanent import duties and we'll try to clear things up as quickly as possible," Merkel told reporters after a meeting with Li in Berlin. "We don't believe that this will help us so we want to use the next six months intensively."
Li, standing next to Merkel at the briefing that followed the signing of a range of business agreements, said a trade dispute between the EU and China would harm both sides and benefit neither.
"We don't agree with this decision and emphatically reject it," Li said, adding the step was "especially dubious" because the global economic recovery was still in fragile shape.
"It not only endangers jobs in Germany. It will also endanger the development of the sector in Europe. That will harm the interests of the European consumers and Europe's industry."
European Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht said earlier this month he and fellow commissioners agreed in principle to open an anti-dumping and anti-subsidy case against China, but would first seek to negotiate a solution with Chinese authorities.
"Germany will do all it can so that this won't lead to import tariffs," she said. "That's not something we believe in."
The EU is China's most important trading partner, while for the EU, China is second only to the United States. Chinese exports to the 27-member bloc totaled 290 billion euros ($375 billion) last year, with 144 billion euros going the other way.
Earlier on Sunday, China announced it would hold informal talks with the European Commission on Monday to try to defuse the row over solar panels and wireless equipment.
(Reporting by Erik Kirschbaum; editing by Mike Collett-White)
