In China, Biden pulls punches, not punch lines
2011-08-19 09:00:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, in China on a five-day charm mission, has worked hard with his hosts to inject a little amity into the sometimes fractious relationship, pulling punches but not his punch lines.
On Thursday, China's vice president and likely leader-in-waiting, Xi Jinping, met Biden at the Great Hall of the People.
"Good to see you again," Xi said. "I know you are very busy with national affairs at home."
"You ARE national affairs," Biden told his counterpart from the United States' largest creditor.
After on a stroll up the red carpet, Biden found a familiar face during introductions to the Chinese delegation.
"Remember what I told you last time: if I had hair like yours I'd be president," the 68-year-old VP with a well-groomed but receding silver hairline said.
Pleasantries out of the way, Xi and Biden got down to real issues -- shoring up prospects for Sino-American relations and offering a dose of optimism about the U.S. economy.
Eating at a tiny Beijing restaurant renowned for its fried liver and pig intestines, the vice president balked: "Noodles or dumplings."
That meal for five, which included the new U.S. ambassador to China Gary Locke and Biden's granddaughter, cost about 79 yuan ($12), and seemed to have struck the right chord with Chinese microbloggers.
By noon the next day tens of thousands had weighed in on the lunch, many admiring the careful choreography to show how wisely Americans spend their money. Lend away, China.
After a good meal, it was back to business at the Great Hall, where he met with the Chairman of China's National People's Congress, Wu Bangguo.
He did not, however, apologize to the media.
Wu reminisced about the two leaders' last meeting in D.C.
"I remember I said to you back then that your office was exquisite, but not very big," Wu said.
"Very diplomatic," Biden quipped.
More diplomatic, anyway, than the Georgetown Hoyas and China's Bayi Military Rockets basketball teams, who ended a "friendly" match that night across town, not with Biden-esque jokes off the cuff, but with fisticuffs.
Best to leave the diplomacy to the professionals, who know the value of a little self-deprecating office humor.
"I used to have an important job when I was chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee," Biden told Wu. "I had a big office, large staff. Then I became vice president."
Members of the press pool speculated that joke, at least, may have been lost in translation.
(Reporting by Michael Martina, editing Miral Fahmy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sicko Biden calls patriotic Americans ¡°terrorists¡± but he is all chummy with communists. 2012 please hurry!
Aug 19, 20119:21am EDT--
Nidan, those tea party types offered up 3 plans that were all rejected by Senetor Reid and the President. The world wide panic was because you can¡¯t continue to live on borrowed money. You eventually have to pay it back. We still didn¡¯t see a plan from the President. All we get is I will turn things around. Yeah, right. He is a blame everyone else and do nothing President. Stop drinking the kool aid.
Aug 19, 20119:45am EDT--
As usual, Biden tells jokes not realizing HE is the punchline. Keep Gaffin¡¯ Joe.
Aug 19, 20119:58am EDT--
