Coca-Cola to invest $4 billion more in China starting 2012
2011-08-18 05:41:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Aug 18 2011
Thu, Aug 18 2011
Fri, Aug 5 2011
Wed, Aug 3 2011
Tue, Aug 2 2011
Bottles of Coca-Cola are seen on sale at a supermarket in Xiangfan, Hubei province March 19, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Thu  EDT
), the world's largest soft drinks producer said on Thursday it will invest $4 billion more in China over the next three years starting from 2012.
By the end of 2011, Coca-Cola and its China bottling partners would have invested more than $3 billion in the country over the last three years, bringing the total investment to $7 billion by the end of 2014.
"China is one of our most important growth markets in the world," said Muhtar Kent, Coca-Cola's chief executive, in a statement.
"The new investment is a part of our long-term commitment to invest in innovation, partnerships and a portfolio that will enable us to grow our business in a sustainable and responsible way," Kent said.
Kent told Xinhua in an interview that the investment will be used to expand the company's product lines, infrastructure and distribution systems as well as invest in cold drinks equipment.
Coca-Cola said sales in China topped 1 billion unit cases in the first six months of the year, double the rate five years ago.
On the possibility of listing on the international board of the Shanghai Stock Exchange, which is still under discussion, the Coca-Cola CEO told Xinhua if the opportunity arose, it would be interested.
"It will be a mutually beneficial action if we are listed," Kent told Xinhua, adding that "it would be a good thing not just for the reasons of capitalization but also for reasons of being a stronger part of the Chinese community."
(Reporting by Ken Wills and Melanie Lee; Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
