China rejects report of bin Laden raid copter access
2011-08-16 13:52:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Aug 15 2011
Mon, Aug 15 2011
Sun, Aug 14 2011
Sat, Aug 13 2011
Fri, Aug 12 2011
Part of a damaged helicopter is seen lying near the compound after U.S. Navy SEAL commandos killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad, May 2, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Tue  EDT
During the raid, one of two Blackhawk helicopters -- believed to use advanced stealth technology -- crashed, forcing U.S. commandos to abandon it. The Financial Times reported on Sunday that Pakistani authorities gave China access to the wreckage, despite CIA requests to Islamabad to keep the wreckage under wraps.
China's Ministry of Defense denied this in a one-sentence statement, Beijing's first public response to the report.
"This report is totally unfounded and extremely absurd," said the statement on the ministry's website. (www.mod.gov.cn)
Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate, the country's top spy agency, also earlier denied the report.
One U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, earlier told Reuters there was reason to believe Pakistan had allowed the Chinese to inspect the aircraft. But the official could not confirm with certainty that this had happened.
The surviving tail section of the downed helicopter was returned to the United States after a trip by U.S. Senator John Kerry in May, a spokesman for the U.S. embassy told Reuters.
Pakistan's already tense relationship with the United States, its major donor, was badly bruised after U.S. forces killed bin Laden in May in Pakistan where he appears to have been in hiding for several years.
Meanwhile, China and Pakistan call each other "all-weather friends" and their close ties have been underpinned by long-standing wariness of their common neighbor, India, and a desire to hedge against U.S. influence across the region.
After the raid that killed bin Laden -- the mastermind of the September 11, 2001, terror attacks -- China called the event a "progressive development" but also defended the Pakistani government, which has been criticized in the U.S. for failing to find bin Laden, if not harboring him.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Louise Ireland)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The people who speak for China have no way of knowing if the Chinese military had access to the helicopter, just as the people who speak for Pakistan have no way of knowing if the Pakistani military provided access to the helicopter.
Aug 16, 20115:15pm EDT--
Oh China says it¡¯s not so. I feel so much better now. Because China is so trustworthy and would never lie, I guess.
Aug 17, 20116:52am EDT--
