Vietnam stops anti-China protest, detains many
2011-08-21 02:31:00.0
Vietnam stops anti-China protest, detains many | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Vietnam stops anti-China protest, detains many
Fri, Aug 19 2011
Thu, Aug 18 2011
Wed, Aug 17 2011
Tue, Aug 16 2011
Sun, Aug 14 2011
Sun  EDT
It was the 11th anti-China rally in an unprecedented series of public protests that have taken place nearly every Sunday since early June against what Vietnamese see as China's violations of their country's sovereignty in the South China Sea.
"We're very concerned that protesters were arrested by the police and call for their immediate release," said Phil Robertson, deputy head for Asia of Human Rights Watch.
"Sadly, the over-reaction of the authorities was shown by the fact that the police outnumbered the protesters, and their aggressive actions to prevent the assembly from going forward. These protesters have done nothing wrong, the police should release them unconditionally."
The Hanoi city government on Thursday had issued an order to end "gatherings, demonstrations and spontaneous marches" and threatened to take "necessary measures" against those who defy the order.
In response, 25 prominent intellectuals and others connected to the demonstrations wrote a petition to the Hanoi People's Committee saying the order was unconstitutional. The letter was posted online.
In addition to Vietnam and China, four other nations -- Brunei, Malaysia, Taiwan and the Philippines -- also have competing claims to parts of the South China Sea.
The demonstrations have so far not exceeded 300 people, but Vietnam's Communist Party brooks no opposition and analysts say it is nervous about Arab-style protests against autocratic rule.
The blogger, Nguyen Xuan Dien, said police had several people in recent days to urge them to refrain from participating in the protests. Another activist who declined to be identified said "scores" of people had been confined to their homes or otherwise hindered from attending on Sunday.
(Reporting by John Ruwitch, editing by Miral Fahmy)
