Philippines' surprisingly strong first-quarter growth eclipses China
2013-05-30 03:27:00.0
(Reuters) - The Philippines on Thursday posted surprisingly strong growth in the first quarter, knocking China from pole position in Asia, driven by robust domestic consumption and government spending.
The stellar pace of expansion, which blew past expectations, pulled the peso up from an 11-month low and cemented views the central bank would leave its key policy rate on hold this year.
Growth is seen powering on after the Philippines earlier this month got an investment grade rating from Standard & Poor's, the second debt agency to do so this year. That lowers borrowing costs and helps to attract foreign capital for an economy mired with high unemployment and poverty.
First quarter GDP grew a seasonally adjusted 2.2 percent over the prior three months, the fastest clip since the first quarter of 2012. A Reuters poll of economists had forecast 1.6 percent growth.
From a year earlier, the economy grew 7.8 percent, helped by robust domestic spending, making the Philippines the fastest growing economy in Asia as it pushed past China's 7.7 percent annual pace and 1.6 percent quarterly growth.
The Philippines' year-on-year GDP figure also topped the 6.1 percent growth forecast in a Reuters poll and was the fastest since the second quarter of 2010, then boosted by spending related to national elections that put President Benigno Aquino in power.
"We may now be moving along a new growth trajectory," economic planning chief Arsenio Balisacan told reporters.
Public construction climbed 45.6 percent as a faster budget roll-out and better fiscal position allowed for more spending to rehabilitate decrepit school buildings, roads and bridges.
Per capita GDP grew an annual 6.1 percent in the first quarter, the highest in at least two years, although unemployment was at a year-high of 7.1 percent as of March.
With a fast-growing population, estimated at 96.8 million as of March, job creation can't keep pace with the around 1 million new entrants to the job market every year, Balisacan said.
The challenge was to create more broad-based growth so that the poorer sectors of society could benefit from jobs in high growth sectors, he added.
Bernard Aw, analyst at Forecastweb in Singapore said the Philippines' improved risk and debt profile would help shield the peso from external vagaries.
But the global slowdown had little impact on manufacturing. Data showed the sector grew an annual 9.7 percent in the first quarter on domestic demand for food items, household appliances, chemicals, and communication, transport and machinery equipment.
Market reaction was mixed. While the peso was up at 42.28 per dollar, the local stock market slid as much as 3.4 percent in line with sharp declines in regional bourses.
At a time when several regional central banks have cut rates to bolster growth, economists said the Philippine central bank would most likely leave its key overnight borrowing rate on hold for the rest of the year. Inflation is forecast to stay within the central bank's 3 to 5 percent target band this year despite strong growth.
The central bank next meets to review policy on June 13. It has kept its policy rate steady at a record low of 3.5 percent since December 2012, but has slashed the rate on its special deposit account (SDA) facility by more than 200 basis points since July 2012 to divert credit to more productive use.
"We think the BSP will continue to cut the SDA rate to lift domestic spending as well as save costs," said Trinh Nguyen, economist at HSBC in Hong Kong. The central bank has incurred heavy losses as the SDA facility attracted huge liquidity.
With the outlook on exports still murky, domestic consumption will remain as the main driver for economic growth this year. Manila is targeting growth of 6 percent to 7 percent in 2013 after an upwardly revised 6.8 percent expansion the prior year.
(Writing by Rosemarie Francisco; Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The dishonest idiot who wrote this article should be told that a 0.1% difference is not an eclipse when comparing the Philippines to China. In addition, any examination of the typhoon track would show that the storms likely will eliminate any temporary gain that the islands make. China has a continental sized irrigation plan in place to take a typhoon¡¯s naturally desalinated water from the south and east coasts where it is not needed and move it to the center, west, and north where it is needed. China has worked on this plan since 2001; it should be complete by 2020 to 2025; and it will enable China to feed 3 to 4 billion people by that time and gain major influence with all nations that need to eat. The Philippines has done nothing on this scale and may become dependent on China¡¯s food production in the next decade.
May 30, 20135:23pm EDT--
Wow, very impressive for the Philippines. I hope it will be sustained and properly managed by the current administration and whoever succeeds in 2016. I believe the author compared the First Quarter growth of The Philippines and China instead of the whole scenario. Its true that there is a lot (when I say a lot its more than a lot) of effort and good governance to be done to be able to be compared with China. But they are just 2 different countries in whatever sense there is. The only thing that they have in common is that they belong to the same continent. As big as China and as may resources you can have, They should be on the top while being compared to an Island Nation and that has chronic economic problems plus the fact that we are visited regularly by almost 20 Typhoons a year, what more can we ask?
May 31, 20134:38am EDT--
Mike Barnett, I know you are just a little commie chinkz who is hiding behind this American sounded name. Eat your heart out . The Philippines is growing better than your filthy, fetus eating mainland.
May 31, 201310:33pm EDT--
