China, EU to discuss trade disputes on Monday
2013-05-26 11:34:00.0
China, EU to discuss trade disputes on Monday | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, EU to discuss trade disputes on Monday
Fri, May 24 2013
Thu, May 23 2013
Tue, May 21 2013
Mon, May 20 2013
Mon, May 20 2013
European Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht speaks during a news conference at the EU Commission headquarters in Brussels April 10, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Francois Lenoir
Sun  EDT
China denies the allegations and Premier Li Keqiang, who is touring Europe this week said the EU plans would "harm others without benefiting oneself."
China's Vice Commerce minister Zhong Shan will meet EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht in Brussels on Monday, China's Ministry of Commerce said on Sunday. An EU spokesman confirmed the talks, but stressed they were informal.
The fall-out over solar panels, which came to a head this month when the European Commission announced plans to impose import duties averaging 47 percent on Chinese panel makers, is the largest to date.
The duties are expected to become EU law in early June. Formal discussions between China and the European Union towards reaching a negotiated settlement can only begin after that, the Commission spokesman said.
Duties would affect 21 billion euros ($26.9 billion) worth of Chinese solar panels sold in Europe - sales that account for 60 percent of China's total solar panel exports and 7 percent of the country's total exports to the European Union.
China's manufacturers are also battling a glut in capacity and falling demand.
Beijing is set to decide in June whether it wishes to levy its own duties on European, U.S. and South Korean imports of solar-grade poly silicon, a raw material used in making solar panels.
(Reporting by Aileen Wang and Koh Gui Qing; Additional reporting by Barbara Lewis and Robin Emmott in Brussels; Editing by Pravin Char)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
So the EU companies who are going bust due to the lower priced Chinese product¡¯s are Germany, Euro Zone, Italy, Eurozone, ,Euro Zone France Eurozone. So that would be the three Eurozone big boys. Had it been Cyprus, Malta or Greece would a 47% import tax been levied on Chinese imports? Sorry for presenting such a stupid question. The European golden trough gobbler in Brussels yet again cow-towed to a German directive and totally disregarded what the effects would be on none EZ members such as the UK, Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden. It is about time the recession infected, sinking Eurozone had its own Parliament one totally separate from the wealthy Northern non EZ, EU states. That way if the Germans French or Italians wish to shoot themselves in the EZ trading foot their act of crass stupidity will not effect those outside their federalist dictatorship.
May 26, 20138:29pm EDT--
