Compliance the buzzword for foreign firms in China after Glaxo
2013-07-17 07:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Jul 17 2013
Wed, Jul 17 2013
Tue, Jul 16 2013
Mon, Jul 15 2013
Mon, Jul 15 2013
A flag (L) bearing the logo of GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) flutters next to a Chinese national flag (C) and a Union Flag (R), outside a GlaxoSmithKline office building in Shanghai July 12, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Aly Song
Wed  EDT
) has sent tremors through multinational pharmaceutical firms in China, prompting at least one to review how they do business in the country.
Experts said foreign companies across the spectrum were watching closely to see what happened to GSK and its four detained Chinese executives given bribery and business go hand-in-hand in the world's second biggest economy.
Britain's biggest drug maker said it was deeply concerned by the developments, which it called "shameful".
On the same day police announced their revelations, senior managers from another multinational pharmaceutical firm in China were telling staff to make sure they complied with Chinese regulations governing the industry, one employee said.
"The message from the top is that if I have to choose between compliance and winning business, I would rather lose the business," the employee told Reuters, requesting anonymity because of the sensitivity of the matter.
Bribes to government officials, underfunded hospitals and poorly paid doctors have long facilitated the regulatory approval, distribution and the pricing of medicines in China.
On top of the police probe, China's National Development and Reform Commission is examining prices charged by 60 local and international drugmakers including units of GSK, Merck & Co Inc (
"All the other players in the industry will be taking a look at their procedures, whether they face any active investigations or not," said John McFarland, head of fraud prevention at Hill & Associates, based in Singapore.
) have both settled with Washington in the past 11 months over alleged corrupt payments in foreign markets, including China, and more cases under the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act are pending.
China is increasingly important for big drug makers, which rely on growth in emerging markets to offset slower sales in Western markets. IMS Health, which tracks pharmaceutical industry trends, expects China to overtake Japan as the world's second-biggest drugs market behind the United States by 2016.
But Richard Cassin, an expert on the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and author of a popular FCPA blog, said China had drawn a line in the sand for foreign companies.
"The China investigation and detentions of executives of a giant Western company will shake up anyone responsible for compliance," he said.
"Businesses outside of the sector are really watching this to see whether this is an isolated circumstance," the executive, who was not authorized to speak to the media, told Reuters.
When announcing the accusations against GSK, Chinese police said they had uncovered information that pointed to similar violations made by other multinational pharmaceutical firms, although they have not named any companies.
Pharmaceutical companies are at the mercy of Chinese regulators in getting products licensed for import or manufacture in China, or to get them listed on the national drug registry. They typically rely on hired distributors to get their drugs to market and into hospitals.
State broadcaster CCTV on Tuesday night aired an interview with one of the detained GSK executives, who said he funneled money through travel agencies by arranging conferences, some of which were never held.
That money was then used to bribe officials, doctors and medical associations to facilitate sales or drug registrations.
According to sources with knowledge of the industry, China's sophisticated and thriving market for fake documents also allows local employees to provide forged paperwork to more senior or global managers.
Efforts made by drug firms at compliance training can even backfire, as some employees learn how to avoid detection.
China's government is faced with a $1 trillion healthcare bill by 2020, according to a report by consultants McKinsey, and is keen to cut the prices of medicines while at the same time trying to provide universal access to healthcare.
That has made pharmaceutical companies vulnerable, said James Zimmerman, managing partner of law firm Sheppard Mullin Richter & Hampton and a former chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in China.
"My take is that the PRC government is targeting the industry given that cost-effective health care for the masses is a critical current policy objective for China's aging population, and the government's legitimacy is at risk if it fails to deliver on its promise of affordable and accessible health care," Zimmerman said.
(Additional reporting by Rachel Armstrong in SINGAPORE and Matt Haldane in WASHINGTON; Editing by Dean Yates and Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Compliance would be a new concept for most businesses in China (or around the world) where bribery and cheating are business as usual. The only shameful part of this is getting caught. Most business executives should be able to do better than that. Those who can¡¯t hide a few hundred million in bribes should be replaced.
Jul 22, 20135:53am EDT--
