Chinese foreign minister to meet Sudan's Bashir
2011-08-08 10:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China's foreign minister was due to meet Sudanese President Omar Hassan al-Bashir Monday for the highest-level talks between the two allies in the Sudanese capital since South Sudan seceded to form an independent state.
Yang Jiechi met north Sudanese Foreign Minister Ali Ahmed Karti in Khartoum and announced that China was giving North Sudan a 100 million yuan ($15.60 million) interest-free loan, a Sudanese government statement said.
Yang said Monday that China will not alter its policy to develop friendly relations with Sudan no matter how Khartoum's internal situation and regional situation may change, the Chinese foreign ministry said in a statement on its website.
"We are willing to step up the cooperation in oil industry and encourage and support more qualified Chinese companies to invest in Sudan," he said.
North Sudan and South Sudan both hope to include Abyei in their territory, but Khartoum and Juba have yet to agree on who will control Abyei, stirring fears a long-running quarrel over the region could sour the secession and spark a broader conflict.
Yang said China is paying attention to the ongoing violence in Southern Kordofan, a volatile and oil-rich Sudan border territory.
"China is following the recent development of the situation in South Kordofan State and it has exerted efforts with the concerned parties to calm the situation there," Yang said, adding that China supports the mediation efforts led by the African Union.
Yang said the Darfur issue could only be resolved through elimination of poverty and through development, which would lead to peaceful co-existence among the tribes in the Darfur region.
U.N. peacekeepers have said North Sudan has carried out air strikes in Darfur, killing one civilian, in the first confirmed strike since Khartoum signed a peace deal with small rebel group Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) in July.
(Reporting by Khalid Abdelaziz in Khartoum and Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing, Writing by Sherine El Madany; Editing by Ed Lane)
