China's ICBC to take over Standard Bank Argentina
2011-08-05 08:04:00.0
China's ICBC to take over Standard Bank Argentina | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
China's ICBC to take over Standard Bank Argentina
Fri, Aug 5 2011
Fri, Aug 5 2011
Thu, Aug 4 2011
Thu, Aug 4 2011
Wed, Aug 3 2011
Fri  EDT
) is to pay $600 million to take control of the Argentina operations of South Africa's Standard Bank (
), it said on Friday, becoming the first Chinese lender to enter Latin America's third-largest economy.
ICBC, the world's biggest bank by market value, will take 80 percent of commercial lender Standard Bank Argentina and its two affiliates, asset manager Standard Investments and Inversora Diagnol, a commercial service provider.
The deal highlights the booming growth of Chinese finance in emerging markets beyond Asia. ICBC has been the top shareholder in Standard Bank since 2008, and is looking to benefit more as Chinese corporates extend their reach into Africa and other frontier markets.
"Chinese government policy probably had some influence on ICBC's decision. When you look at the other Chinese banks, none of them are doing acquisitions like ICBC is," said Ivan Li, an analyst at Kim Eng Securities in Hong Kong.
Johannesburg-based Standard will reduce its stake in all three firms to 20 percent. It owns 75 percent of Standard Bank Argentina, which it acquired in 2007 for $120 million, and 70 percent in the other two units.
Standard Bank, Africa's largest by assets, this year scaled back its overseas strategy to rein in costs and boost its return on equity. The bank said it no longer has ambitions to buy or build commercial banking operations outside of Africa.
In March it sold its stake 36 percent stake in Russia's Troika Dialog to Sberbank SBER03.MM for $372 million.
"Through hard lessons they've realized that it's very difficult to compete outside of Africa," said Faizal Moolla, an analyst at Avior Research in Cape Town.
Following the transaction, the Argentine bank will get a $100 million capital injection, of which Standard Bank will pay $20 million. Its net proceeds from the deal will be $380 million.
Standard Bank is not considering any more assets overseas, chief executive Jacko Maree told a conference call, including its Turkish unit, Standard Unlu.
He also said the bank aimed to be more than a "passive investor" in Argentina, and aimed to use its remaining stake to continue to do deals between Africa and Latin America.
"It enables us to still have a connection to Argentina. I think ICBC are very keen for us to partner with them in Argentina, they clearly don't have any expertise in the country," Maree said.
Standard Bank Argentina's chairman, Myles Ruck, said the South African bank was "almost spoiled for choice," having received about 10 offers from Argentine and overseas banks for the units.
"ICBC has a much larger balance sheet and will be able to take the business to a new dimension... It givest them first-mover advantage," said Avior's Moolla.
Argentina's center-left president, Cristina Fernandez, met with ICBC officials in Buenos Aires and said she asked the bank to present an investment plan to her government.
"We want investment but investment for the real economy, investment that will generate production, investment that sustains growth for Argentines," Fernandez said in a televised speech.
Shares of ICBC fell more than 3 percent in Hong Kong trade while Standard Bank dropped 1.6 percent in Johannesburg by 1053 GMT, as both were hit by the global sell-off in equity markets.
(Additional reporting by Kelvin Soh in Hong Kong; Hilary Burke in Buenos Aires; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman and Greg Mahlich)
