GDF-Suez outlines China alliance, shares rise
2011-08-10 00:09:00.0
GDF-Suez outlines China alliance, shares rise | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
GDF-Suez outlines China alliance, shares rise
Wed, Aug 10 2011
Mon, Aug 8 2011
Sun, Aug 7 2011
Fri, Aug 5 2011
Fri, Aug 5 2011
GDF Suez Chief Executive Gerard Mestrallet attends a news conference to present the company's first-half earnings in Paris August 10, 2011. Credit: Reuters/John Schults
Wed  EDT
The world's biggest utility outlined the details of the partnership, its second large deal in a year after the purchase of 70 percent of International Power, as it unveiled first-half earnings that beat forecasts.
Under the partnership, China's sovereign wealth fund CIC CIC.UL will pay 2.3 billion euros ($3.24 billion) for a 30 percent stake in GDF Suez's exploration and production unit.
CIC will also purchase the French group's 10 percent stake in a natural gas liquefaction plant in Trinidad and Tobago for 600 million euros, a joint statement said.
The fund will also co-finance GDF Suez's projects in Asia and the Pacific, expanding a gas exploration and production business that has represented less than three percent of its sales, and help the utility win deals in the high-growth region.
"The Asia-Pacific is clearly a very promising region for gas operations. It is crucial that a key gas operator like GDF Suez has the means to play an important role in the region," GDF Suez Chief Executive Gerard Mestrallet told a conference call.
Mestrallet, who has said the Fukushima nuclear disaster in March opens the way for a "golden age" of gas, estimated that Asia accounted for two-thirds of the world's LNG market.
In China alone, three LNG plants are being built, with 14 more planned in coming years. GDF Suez hopes to capitalize on the CIC's local knowledge and network of contact to win power and environmental service deals in the country.
GDF Suez shares climbed 2.75 percent to 20.57 euros by 6:53 a.m. EDT, outpacing the rest of the European utilities sector .SX6P, which was up 1.87 percent.
OUTLOOK DOWNGRADE?
GDF Suez's first-half earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) rose 8.2 percent to 8.9 billion euros, beating analysts' expectations. The gain was largely fueled by the acquisition of International Power.
GDF Suez reaffirmed its full-year EBITDA target of 17-17.5 billion euros, but downgraded it in the view of some analysts by excluding a likely 465 million euro shortfall for warmer weather at the start of the year and the potential impact of a risk France might freeze gas tariffs ahead of the 2012 presidential election.
GDF Suez plans to spend an average 11 billion euros a year in 2011-2013 on gas and power production projects in emerging countries, where it expects 80 percent of the world's new power production capacity to be built over the next 20 years.
Getting the backing of China's CIC means GDF Suez will be able to share the funding effort on capital-intensive exploration and production projects. In Australia for instance, GDF Suez is due to make an investment decision for the Bonaparte LNG project, which analysts estimate at around $8 billion.
Last month, China's top offshore oil producer CNOOC (
) agreed to buy struggling oil sands company Opti Canada OPC.TO, soon after PetroChina (
(Additional reporting by Blaise Robinson and Alexandre Boksenbaum-Granier; Editing by Andrew Callus)
