Exclusive: AmEx to keep ICBC stake after hedging deal
2011-08-03 09:08:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Aug 2 2011
Tue, Aug 2 2011
Mon, Aug 1 2011
Fri, Jul 29 2011
Wed, Jul 27 2011
Employees of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) wait for customers on its opening day in Brussels January 20, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Francois Lenoir
Wed  EDT
) it wants to keep its stake in the lender after entering into a contract to hedge fluctuations in the stock price, a source with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters on Wednesday.
Shares in ICBC, the world's biggest bank by market value, has fallen 5.7 percent in the past two days after Goldman Sachs (
) executed a $479 million block deal. Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng index
There has been some speculation that American Express was paring its exposure to ICBC, but two sources close to the deal said American Express was only locking in the value of its ICBC holdings through a hedging contract structured by Goldman.
The sources were not authorized to speak to the media. American Express did not immediately respond to a request for comment, while ICBC was not available for an immediate comment.
One of the sources said American Express's stake in ICBC and its role as a strategic investor was unchanged, adding that the hedging deal was struck with Goldman to reduce the impact on earnings from any volatility in ICBC's share price.
American Express holds 638 million shares in ICBC, valued at about $463 million based on its closing price of HK$5.64 on Wednesday.
(Reporting by Denny Thomas, Wei Gu and Charlie Zhu; Editing by Chyenyee Lee and Will Waterman)
