New Hanoi anti-China rally tests tolerance of protests
2011-08-07 08:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Anti-China demonstrators staged another in a series of weekly marches in central Hanoi on Sunday, testing authorities' tolerance of protests on an emotive issue in Vietnamese society.
Up to 200 people singing patriotic songs, carrying banners and flags and chanting slogans drew stares from bemused tourists and honks of approval from motorists as they filed around Hoan Kiem Lake.
How much longer protesters will be allowed to hold rallies on a sensitive issue - accusations that China violates Vietnam's sovereignty in the South China Sea - is unclear.
Demonstrations are rare and normally snuffed out swiftly in Vietnam. Similar anti-China protests in Ho Chi Minh City, which drew more than 1,000 people, were shut down by police in June.
But the Hanoi rallies have been staged for nine of the last 10 weeks, despite two weekends in July when police detained several protesters and journalists.
"This has become a regular thing. In the minds of the people who come out to do this it's like having a meal or drinking water," said Nguyen Quang Thach, a regular at Hanoi protests.
On Sunday, traffic police redirected cars and motorcycles past the demonstration. Plainclothes police followed the protesters and filmed the procession.
Protesters have tried hard not to antagonize the police by sticking to their anti-China message, staying on the sidewalk and remaining far from the Chinese embassy.
"When the problem of the Sea is solved, when we find some just solution, then there is no reason for demonstrations anymore," said Nguyen Quang A, an economic analyst and retired businessman who attended the demonstration.
That could take a while. The South China Sea disputes stretch back hundreds of years and also involve the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan.
Activists, demonstrators and others say they have come under pressure from police to stay away from the protests -- a sign the government does not want the demonstrations to grow.
"They are worried about a Vietnamese-style Jasmine Revolution," said one activist who declined to be identified.
"I'm sad. People should be stopping their cars and motorcycles to get off and join the protests," said a retired teacher. "But they're scared. And they want Chinese money."
(Reporting by John Ruwitch, Editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The only way to stop chinese expansionist: Japan, S Korea, The Philippines, and Vietnam need to work together and to have a powerful coastal defense capabilities to control the chinese movement. Chinese bullies cannot be tolerated and will meet with a strong respond with force. If China killed vietnamese fishermen and captured their trawlers then the chinese will meet with same faith when invaded into Vietnam EEZ.
Aug 07, 20117:51pm EDT--
a retired teacher said that people want Chinese money?
Aug 07, 20118:59pm EDT--
@Temujin I don¡¯t think Japan, S. Korea, The Philippines and Vietnam will work together because all these countries have competing claims to various islands in the South and East China Seas. And, as the article alludes, traditional rivalries. It isn¡¯t just China bullying these countries so much as a bunch of bully boys fighting over a piece of old ham. China is just the biggest bully boys amongst a gang of bully boyos. If by magic, China disappears, then those countries will fight amongst themselves. Yes, China has harassed Vietnamese trawlers but they were traveling in waters that frankly China has a historical claim to (based upon archeological evidence and evidence of historic usage). If you wish to argue with me further, I can expound on that.
@Temujin I don¡¯t think Japan, S. Korea, The Philippines and Vietnam will work together because all these countries have competing claims to various islands in the South and East China Seas. And, as the article alludes, traditional rivalries. It isn¡¯t just China bullying these countries so much as a bunch of bully boys fighting over a piece of old ham. China is just the biggest bully boys amongst a gang of bully boyos. If by magic, China disappears, then those countries will fight amongst themselves. Yes, China has harassed Vietnamese trawlers but they were traveling in waters that frankly China has a historical claim to (based upon archeological evidence and evidence of historic usage). If you wish to argue with me further, I can expound on that.
And Vietnam also has a history of persecuting its ethnic Chinese minorities; a minority that has contributed tremendously to that nation. So you see, no clean hands in that part of world. It¡¯s also a region where distrust and lack of mutual cooperation is normal. Little chance of alliance there.
Aug 08, 20112:46am EDT--
