Debt still a threat to global economy: report
2011-08-02 08:21:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States' debt woes still threaten the global economy despite a last-minute deal struck by the White House and political party leaders, China's main official newspaper said on Tuesday, nonetheless adding there was no short-term escape from the dominance of the dollar.
The comments were published by the People's Daily, the chief paper of China's ruling Communist Party, in anticipation of a final debt deal reached in Congress between Republicans and Democrats.
"Although the United States has basically avoided default, its sovereign debt problems remain unresolved. They have merely been pushed off, and there is a tendency for them to grow," a brief commentary in the paper said of the U.S. debt deal.
"This has cast a cloud over U.S. economic recovery, and also increased the risks and perils facing the world economy."
Such comments in an official Chinese newspaper do not necessarily reflect the conclusive views of top leaders. But these latest wary comments echo other recent critical remarks in official media from Beijing, which is worried about its big holdings of dollar assets.
The House of Representatives on Monday approved a last-gasp deal to raise the U.S. borrowing limit in a decisive step toward averting a catastrophic debt default by the world's largest economy. The Senate will vote on the deal on Tuesday. and it will then go to the desk of President Barack Obama.
As the largest creditor to the United States, China has repeatedly urged Washington to protect its dollar investments, estimated to account for about 70 percent of its $3.2 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, the world's largest.
The People's Daily said the credibility of U.S. treasury debt had been damaged since the outbreak of the sub-prime mortgage crisis, but other economies still have no way of shaking off dependence on the dollar.
"Although confidence in U.S. debt has suffered a short-term fall, and credit agencies could downgrade its rating, its basic credibility has not altered," said the paper.
"The agreement is likely to avert default by Washington and it certainly is a relief for China," Chen Daofu, a researcher at the State Council's Development Research Center, was quoted as saying by the newspaper.
Several Chinese economists fretted that the world's largest economy is still saddled by a mountain of debt.
Zhu Baoliang, chief economist at a government think-tank the State Information Center, said a $1 trillion reduction in the U.S. fiscal deficit over the next 10 years was not enough to avert another debt crisis in future.
"As alarm over a debt default eases, China will not suffer any immediate impact," he was quoted as saying in the China Daily. "But any impact would eventually be seen in the long term."
Although the deal prevented a sudden shock to the U.S. economy, Li Xiangyang, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, said U.S. politicians in the future could ignore creditors' interests while pursuing domestic politics.
To escape the dollar trap, China must stop investing its foreign exchange reserves in dollar assets in future, he said.
"The raising of the U.S. debt ceiling is a double-edged sword for China," Li wrote in an article published in the People's Daily's overseas edition.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley and Aileen Wang; Editing by Ken Wills and Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Here is the problem the US is in right now. We spend too much, we have made too many people dependent on the Government for monetary assistance ( currently to the tune of more than $2.2 Trillion of the $3.7 Trillion we are currently spending ) Now if we raised the MINIMUM tax rate to 30% and the Upper tax rate to 50% ( no exemptions ) we would be at that magical number of break even ( actually we would be at $100 Billion Surplus when we add in Social Security monies ) The truth is that we are slated to spend between Federal, Local, and state Governments $6.2 Trillion Dollars this year. There are about 120 Million Households in the USA. This means, since in one way shape or form consumers/wage earners end up paying for taxes whether it be through the products they purchase and the profits being taxed or direct taxation, each household is ¡®responsible¡¯ for about $51,500 in Government Spending this year. Heck go ahead and take out the military, simply send us the check and I am sure we all could figure out ¡®some way¡¯ to educate our children and ¡®provide¡¯ policing at that point, that would leave every household with a check from the government of a little over $42,000.00 just for being a household. Heck okay partition it a little more fairly there are about 60 million dual households and 60 million single heads of households, so that means we would divide 180 Million. So some households would get a check for $27,500 and some would get a check for $55,000 ( again accounting for the military which we still pay ) This is how insane our current spending is on Government. It is bigger than the WHOLE OF CHINA¡¯S GDP, the second largest economy in the world ( well it may have passed it, but still it is still close! ) So yeah debt is still a problem, it is artificially inflating our GDP without providing real value and I am so tired of the ¡®shared sacrifice¡¯ Once all households are on a flat tax we can talk of a shared sacrifice, until then you are only saying that some people have to try to load up a wagon beyond capacity and tow it uphill just because they are ¡®stronger¡¯ than the rest of us despite the fact that we have legs and could simply walk up the darn hill ourselves. Now I am ranting, I am tired of this stupid debate, I am tired of politicians simply mouthing platitudes and believing that cutting a possible 3% of projected increases off the possible debt that we will incur IF the economy regains strength, IF we do not try to stimulate it more, and IF we do not run into another problem. Stupid, Stupid, .
Aug 03, 201111:55pm EDT--
