China orders firms to get bond holders' nod on restructuring
2011-07-29 03:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China's economic planning agency has recently ordered companies to obtain bond holders' approval if they want to conduct any restructuring of assets while they still have bonds outstanding, two sources with direct knowledge of the directive said.
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) said in a notice to bond issuers that companies must submit any asset restructuring plans to bond holders' meetings for approval before they may proceed with such plans, the sources told Reuters on Friday.
The directive follows a move by Chengxin International, one of the country's top credit rating agencies, to put two bonds linked to a financing vehicle of the Yunnan provincial government on review for a possible downgrade earlier this week.
That step came in response to plans to shift certain assets of the related local government financing vehicles (LGFVs), which could have left bond holders exposed without access to the assets promised them as collateral when they lent the money.
"It is a clear ban on random restructuring of LGFV assets," said an investment bank analyst in central China, who asked not to be quoted by name because he is not authorized to speak to the media.
The analyst explained that if the NDRC did not take such action, many LGFVs might follow the example of the Yunnan LGFV.
Restructuring before a company has paid back existing debt could allow it to raise money via another debt floatation by a new entity set up by the local government, he added.
Chengxin, which is 49 percent owned by Moody's, put two financing vehicles of southwestern Yunnan province -- Yunnan Investment Holdings Group (YIHG) and Yunnan Electric Power Investment (YEPI) -- on watch for a possible downgrade on Wednesday, citing planned asset transfers involving them.
In its directive, the NDRC also ordered local governments and shareholders of debt issuers to obtain ratings regarding the impact of any restructuring on the issuers, the sources said, adding that those ratings must not be lower than the previous ratings if the restructuring is to move forward.
Under China's complex regulatory system for bond issuance, the NDRC is responsible for approving issuance of corporate bonds of one year and above by non-listed companies.
(Reporting by Shanghai Newsroom; Editing by Jason Subler and Ken Wills)
