China boosts naval power with carrier program: sources
2011-07-27 00:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China is building two aircraft carriers as part of a military modernization program that is causing concern among other Asian countries, sources said on Wednesday.
President Hu Jintao has made the navy a keystone of China's defense upgrade and the carriers will be among the most visible signs of its rising military prowess.
China is ramping up its military spending as the United States considers cutting its defense budget, although Washington still far outspends China on security and is much more technologically advanced.
"Two aircraft carriers are being built at the Jiangnan shipyard in Shanghai," one source with ties to China's Communist Party leadership told Reuters, requesting anonymity because he was not authorized to talk about the program.
The Defense Ministry has confirmed the existence of one carrier, a former Soviet vessel which was bought from Ukraine in 1998 and was once destined to become a floating casino.
That will be used for training and research purposes, ministry spokesman Geng Yansheng said, seeking to reassure other countries that China would stick to its defensive military policy.
"This is the sacred responsibility of China's armed forces," Geng said in a statement.
"Building a carrier is extremely complex. We are currently refitting an old aircraft carrier, to be used for research and testing."
"An aircraft carrier is a weapons platform; it can be used for offensive or defensive purposes. It can also be used to maintain global peace and for rescue and relief work," he added.
Sources with ties to the Communist Party and the military said that the ship would likely be based in the southern island province of Hainan, which sits atop the trade lanes of the sensitive South China Sea.
China has been flexing its muscles more aggressively in those waters, where a territorial dispute with Taiwan and several nearby countries, including Vietnam and the Philippines, has festered for years.
"China can now project its power to even further away from its coastline," said Alexander Huang, professor of strategic studies at Taiwan's Tamkang University.
"That will have significant security implications to forces operating in the Western Pacific, including the U.S., Japan and Australia, so this is a watershed development."
The carrier will add to regional concerns about China's military modernization and arms build-up. Defense spending is rising fast and Beijing continues to test new high-tech equipment, including a stealth fighter.
"China's next moves have to be watched carefully, or there eventually could be a negative impact on maritime safety in Asia," said Yoshihiko Yamada, a professor at Japan's Tokai University.
The old Soviet carrier's refitting has been one of China's worst-kept military secrets. Pictures of it sitting in Dalian harbor have circulated on Chinese websites for months, and it has been widely discussed in state media.
"It will be a long while before China develops a fully-fledged carrier capability, it will take a long time to train the necessary crews... it may be up to decade until China has carrier capability," said Tim Huxley, director for defense and military analysis at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in Singapore.
For Beijing, the rationale of an aircraft carrier is more than just about modernizing a navy whose most notable engagements of the past few years have been skirmishes in the South China Sea with some of the other claimant nations.
Sending naval vessels further afield, to the waters off Somalia to fight pirates, and through the southern Japanese islands, has also partly been about ensuring trade routes are protected.
China frets about the powerful U.S. military presence close to its shores, in particular U.S. bases in Japan and South Korea, and Washington's close but unofficial ties with Taiwan, the self-ruled island Beijing claims as its own.
"Aircraft carriers are essential for China primarily to defend its territory and territorial waters and bring a semblance of parity among the world's big powers," Wang Baokun, a defense studies professor at Beijing's Renmin University, wrote in the China Daily earlier this month.
(Additional reporting by Daniel Magnowski in Singapore, Kiyoshi Takenaka in Tokyo and Christine Lu in Taipei; Editing by Angus MacSwan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I hope the so-called carrier won¡¯t be rushed to build to put to sea where it would sink like the high-speed rail project. In just a few years from zero capability to owning a formidable battle carrier group, there will be a lot of learning by doing that would be skipped altogether. They can copy design that works, but skills need time to build up.
Jul 27, 201110:51am EDT--
We should sell them the Nimitz and the Eisenhower, the russian aircraft carrier is no threat to the united states, the chinese government has the right to defend itself. Also the american government can no longer afford to keep or military presence around the world as a policeman. China wants to be the new boy on the block, a economic and military powerhouse. I say hey why not it is done so much for the united states, trillions of dollars into debt. American service men and women dying in every little crap hole in the world. If we play our cards right, we can get china to give us hundreds of billions of dollars to dismantle some of our outdated military equipment. Like the soviet union has done to the US. As an american I am tired of being superboy, I say let tryna take the job. We sell them all the equipment They need and soon they will be in trouble into triillions of dollars worth a debt and will be buying their treasury bonds.
Jul 27, 201111:18am EDT--
I guess they will eventually sail up to california and demand their money back or else!
Jul 27, 201111:20am EDT--
