Analysis: Local government debt alarm may delay China muni bonds
2011-07-20 23:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Concern that local Chinese governments could default on some of their debt may persuade Beijing to push back important reforms to the country's bond market, risking a further flare-up in local debt problems down the road.
Beijing has said it is interested in allowing provincial, city and other local governments to issue bonds directly to bring greater transparency to their finances and discipline to their investments in infrastructure.
The timing, however, could be pushed back significantly due to storm clouds that are appearing on the horizon of the bond market, as at least a portion of the debt owed indirectly by local governments appears to be at risk of default.
China's ever-cautious policymakers are unlikely to want to launch the new form of bonds amid worries about what could become an unprecedented wave of credit downgrades, or even defaults, meaning the introduction of the municipal bond market could be delayed by a year or even more.
"With the reputation of local governments now in question, how can the central government launch municipal bonds right now?" said Zhou Bo, head of the fixed-income business at Shenyin & Wanguo Securities in Shanghai.
"A delay of a year or two is quite possible until the dust settles, although municipal bonds will eventually be launched."
The debt burden of local governments, which analysts warn could lead to a heap of sour loans and bonds that could threaten growth and the financial health of the world's second-biggest economy, underscores the need for a municipal bond market.
Barred by Chinese law from borrowing directly to pay for projects such as highways and bridges, city, district and provincial governments have rushed to set up thousands of special investment companies to beat the rules.
At the height of the government stimulus package meant to help the economy get through the global downturn in 2008-2009, pronouncements from Beijing actually urged local officials to hurry up to raise their share of the funds needed for the stimulus. Most projects were funded only in part by the central government.
That greased the wheels on trillions of yuan in loans and a flurry of bonds issued by those entities, dubbed local government financing vehicles (LGFVs).
But the finances of many of those vehicles are very opaque, and some of the projects rushed out were of questionable economic value, meaning analysts now estimate that anywhere from 2.5 to 6 trillion yuan ($387-928 billion) in local government debt will not be repaid.
Allowing local governments to issue bonds themselves, akin to municipal bonds in the United States, would not only prompt greater transparency of their own balance sheets, but let market forces play a greater role in deciding which projects are most worthy of funding.
That was the thinking behind a statement by the central bank on the issue in early June, days after Reuters reported, without naming a timetable, that plans for a municipal bond market were afoot as part of a broader effort to clean up some 2-3 trillion yuan in local debt.
Such a move would also contribute to long-running efforts to enhance the country's bond market, by making it more liquid and encouraging greater trading of bonds, many of which are currently held to maturity.
Despite authorities' intent to launch such bonds, Beijing's history of pushing back reform plans when the market conditions are not right suggests their debut will be some time away.
Similarly, Beijing brought appreciation of its yuan currency to a dramatic halt from mid-2008 to mid-2010, as it sought stability in the face of the fallout from the global financial crisis.
Investors have already made their concerns known, pushing up yields on LGFVs' bonds broadly in the past several weeks.
Further, IFR, a Thomson Reuters publication, reported over the weekend that domestic rating agency China Chengxin International could soon lower its credit ratings on two LGFV-issued bonds on account of core assets of the issuer potentially being transferred to another entity.
Such a downgrade, a rarity in the country's nascent bond market, would raise alarm bells about local debt and push up yields on new issues, even if it did not lead to widespread defaults -- not the kind of environment in which authorities would want to launch new municipal bonds.
Beijing is likely therefore to focus for now on dealing with any of the existing problem debt, analysts say.
"Clearing the big amount of local government debt will take time, so we won't be able to see the launch of U.S.-style municipal bonds at least for another year," said economist Wang Haoyu at First Capital Securities in Shenzhen.
Barring any overhaul of requirements for LGFVs' borrowing, that means that they could continue to take on yet more questionable debt in the form of both loans and bonds, especially as Beijing is now pressing local governments to find funding for its new push for affordable housing.
A delay in the launch of municipal bonds could hold back a broader push to add sufficient depth to the bond market, seen as a prerequisite for future reforms such as more derivatives.
It would also hinder the improved asset allocation that a municipal bond market is seen as supporting, as bond investors are expected to frown on the trophy projects some local officials have a penchant for, and for which they have in the past often borrowed directly from banks.
Even when authorities do set about launching the new market, the effort involved in getting local governments ready to issue bonds -- including getting their books in order to meet disclosure requirements -- will take considerable time.
"Because of the disclosure requirements, the progress will be extremely slow," said Victor Shih, a political economist at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois.
