German companies lie in wait for China listing
2011-07-25 11:34:00.0
(Reuters) - German companies have long been banking on Chinese consumers to fuel earnings growth, and now they are looking to enlist the country's estimated 90 million investors as shareholders.
The ban on overseas companies' listing in mainland China may not be lifted until next year. Still, working on such plans is all the rage in German boardrooms, according to investment bankers and lawyers involved in the preparations.
The Shanghai Stock Exchange has proposed setting up a so-called International Board to offer foreign companies a dual listing, but progress has been slower than expected.
) are cases in point," said Herbert Harrer, a partner focusing on capital markets at global law firm Linklaters.
Financial market sources told Reuters several German blue-chip companies are mapping out a listing in China over the next 12 months, with sporting goods maker Adidas (
They would, however, have little to gain from admitting to such plans -- an additional listing usually requires a capital increase, which would weigh on the share price. Companies also do not know how heavily regulated they will be in China.
About a decade ago, companies including Allianz (
), Bayer (
) went to Wall Street to win a more diverse shareholder pool and closer ties to the world's largest economy.
By 2009, all except SAP (
The Shanghai investor audience, however, is expected to bring fresh blood.
While a listing in Hong Kong would mainly reach global investors present in the former British colony for decades, one in Shanghai would tap into tens of millions of thrifty retail investors with few investment options beyond savings accounts.
In addition, shares to be issued in China could be used to fund takeovers and for stock option programs for staff.
"A dual listing in Shanghai is particularly attractive for German companies with a strong operating presence in China," said Christian Zorn, co-head of Morgan Stanley's (
Among hurdles companies will probably face is a ban on repatriating funds raised in China, the need to adopt a set of Chinese accounting principles and disclosure rules, and the challenge of communicating with inexperienced retail investors.
"It's an adventure and it can be quite expensive," said another lawyer, who has been fielding German companies' requests for advice on a China listing.
"Nobody wants to be first, but once a critical mass has been reached, many will want to jump on the bandwagon," said the lawyer, speaking on condition of anonymity.
(Additional reporting by Alexander Huebner, Frank Siebelt, Hendrick Sackmann, Victoria Bryan and Jason Subler in Shanghai; Editing by David Hulmes)
