Blogger sparks worldwide hunt for fake Apple stores
2011-07-22 11:43:00.0
(Reuters) - An American blogger who stumbled upon a near flawless fake Apple Store in China has become an Internet sensation after her post went viral and triggered a feisty debate about piracy in the world's second largest economy.
The 27-year-old, who goes by the name "BirdAbroad", said her story about the fake store in the southwestern city of Kunming had attracted nearly 1 million hits over the past three days after it caught the imagination of the world's media.
A search on Google showed nearly 1,000 media outlets picked up the story and pictures of the fake store, with the topic one of the most talked-about subjects on Twitter and Chinese Internet sites.
"I originally put the post up not because it was news that Western brands get ripped off in China, but because these Apple stores had taken the fakery up a serious notch to the point where it's practically a work of art in itself," the blogger, who works for an international health organization, told Reuters in an email.
Complete with the white Apple logo, wooden tables and cheery staff who appeared to genuinely believe they worked for the iPhone maker, the store looks every bit like Apple Stores found all over the world.
"I did actually email the blog post to Steve Jobs when I first put it up, purely for fun. Sufficed to say, he has not responded," said the blogger, who declined to be named.
After the stir provoked by her first blog, titled "Are you listening, Steve Jobs", the woman invited readers to send their photographs of fake Apple stores worldwide -- and has received responses from place including Costa Rica, Caracas and Vietnam.
"You just made me realize, I, too, have been in a fake Apple Store without knowing it! While I was living in Bogot¨¢, Colombia last year I found an Apple Store in the middle of a very trendy area of the city,," wrote a reader named Laura.
"I swear to you it looked like any store I've been to in the States. But nowhere does it show on the Apple website that there is a store in Colombia, nor did I find any authorized resellers there. This is too funny!!!!"
Apple, which was slow to establish its brand in China, has just four retail outlets in Beijing and Shanghai, and plans two more this year.
But the immense popularity of its iPads, iPhones and MacBook computers has spurred a bumper crop of resellers with dubious credentials.
"Some Chinese people have written to me very upset that so much abuse of intellectual property right (IPR) happens in China, others have written to me saying that they believe IPR is basically irrelevant here -- and a small group have even said that Apple deserves to get ripped off because their products are too expensive and they're made in China anyway!"
The latter view was echoed in some of the reaction from Chinese micro bloggers such as "Will loves Mickey", who wrote: "U.S. imperialism is so rampant that we help you to sell your product but you get angry."
Amid all the buzz, some readers have advised the blogger to call it quits on her day job.
"You can quit your day job now that your going viral. Stock up on coffee, get an agent, then hang on for dear life. Beware of paparazzi."
(Additional reporting by Sabrina Mao in Beijing; Writing by Anshuman Daga; Editing by Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If they are selling real Apple products, why should anyone really care? Intellectual property could be the anvil on which capitalism gets hammered into a new shape, one that causes less destruction to the planet. There is clearly a conflict between so-called ¡°free market¡± principles and the indefinite extension of copyrights for the sake of, say, Disney. At what point did ¡°laissez faire¡± start to mean ¡°free to collude with government to fleece the public¡±?
Jul 22, 201110:17am EDT--
Well, the main issue has to do with warranty. If you need to get your product serviced (unless it is a knockoff), you need to provide a receipt or some type of proof of purchase to get that free service within the first year, you also need to have the receipt to buy and enable AppleCare¡¯s extended warranty. So if you¡¯re not buying from an authorized reseller, and (like the person who wanted a receipt) are told it¡¯ll be emailed to you and you don¡¯t get one, you¡¯re stuck having to pay for repairs which are included in the price you¡¯re paying initially. And if you take it in to the store, and they say they¡¯ll repair it for you, and they¡¯re not an authorized service center, they void the warranty the second they open it up. So, there is something to be said for making sure the place is legit when you buy, as the legal backend of the purchase screws you over concerning service if you can¡¯t have a receipt much less purchase it from someone who hasn¡¯t been authorized by Apple to sell it. Sure, your anti establishment rhetoric is well founded in theory, but in practice the fine print rules all.
Jul 22, 20114:03pm EDT--
From more than two years ago, in Bogot¨¢ Colombia there are at least two apple resellers; iShop and Mac-Center which resemble an apple store, but identify themselves as Apple Premium Resellers, i don¡¯t know any place in Bogot¨¢ who actually claims to be an apple store, and is likely that the women in the article has referred to one of those resellers, who are in fact authorized by apple
Jul 22, 20116:04pm EDT--
