Stronger yuan won't help China trade partners: IMF
2011-07-21 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - A 20 percent jump in the yuan would barely improve the economic growth and current accounts of China's top trade partners, the International Monetary Fund said, countering arguments that a firmer Chinese currency can help rebalance the world economy.
In an IMF paper published on Thursday, the fund noted the need for a firmer yuan, but stressed that alone is of little use to the world if it is not accompanied by other measures to boost China's consumption.
"The exchange rate alone may have only modest direct effects in addressing global imbalances," the IMF said.
It did note, however, that the yuan is "substantially below the level consistent with medium-term fundamentals".
The yuan is often a lightning rod in China's ties with its trade partners, who accuse Beijing of deliberately suppressing the currency to sell Chinese exports at their expense. Beijing has always denied those allegations.
An analysis conducted by the IMF showed that a 20 percent jump in the yuan would boost economic growth in the United States by between 0.05-0.07 percent, and that in the euro area by less than 0.12 percent.
The impact of a firmer yuan on the current accounts of China's trade partners was equally muted, the IMF said.
The U.S. current account would rise 0.02-0.08 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) should the yuan climb 20 percent, while the euro zone's current account would expand by between 0.05-0.1 percent of GDP.
But if China succeeds in boosting its domestic consumption while letting the yuan rise, the growth and trade balance effects would more than double, the IMF said.
Beijing, for its part, recognizes that it needs to boost demand at home to wean the world's second-biggest economy off investment-led growth and expand more evenly.
To boost China's domestic demand, the IMF called on Beijing to:
-- Free up the financial system; develop new markets and financial instruments
-- Lift the cost of land, energy, pollution and capital
-- Improve corporate governance; reduce monopoly power in key sectors; raise dividend payouts from state firms
(Reporting by Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Ken Wills)
