China's Hanlong makes $1.5 billion bid for Sundance
2011-07-18 12:55:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Sichuan Hanlong Group made a bid to buy out the shares it doesn't already own in West African iron ore exploration company Sundance Resources (
), valuing the private conglomerate at A$1.4 billion ($1.5 billion).
Last week, Hanlong, which is seeking to expand its reach in global resources, launched a A$144 million takeover bid for Bannerman Resources (
), which is looking for uranium in Namibia.
Hanlong is already Sundance's majority shareholder with 18.6 percent of the company.
West Africa is fast emerging as an upcoming global iron ore province. Despite the region's turmoil in recent years, West Africa has attracted a lot of attention from the likes of Rio Tinto (
), Vale (
), and Xstrata XTA.L in countries including Guinea, Mauritania, Sierra Leone and Republic of Congo.
Sundance's board is recommending its shareholders take no action until it meets with Hanlong over the terms of the bid, which Sundance deems inadequate, according to a company statement.
Hanlong's A$0.50 a share offer is a 25 percent premium to Sundance's closing price of A$0.40 on Friday. By 0425 GMT, the shares were up 20 percent.
Sundance has made no secret it's seeking Chinese investors to help fund its $4.7 billion Mbalam iron ore project straddling the Republics of Congo and Cameroon.
In addition to digging a mine, the projects requires hundreds of kilometers of new rail lines and other infrastructure work to go ahead, based on a feasibility study into the project completed in April.
"Sundance is going to need to build a rail for 500-600 kilometers, not to mention an associated port and that's not going to be cheap," said Andreas Kouremenos, a mining analyst with Foster Stockbroking in Sydney.
"These things add billions and billions of dollars and the only way they can be done is by getting investors and end users involved and having them finance it," Kouremenos said.
In March, Sundance Managing Director Giulio Casello told Reuters in an interview Sundance was in talks with Chinese steel mills as candidates to invest in the project. Hanlong has no direct interest in steel production.
), which together control about 70 percent of seaborne-traded ore.
China has plenty of its own iron ore. But much of it is low grade, meaning it is cheaper to import ore that has higher iron content from countries such as Australia, Brazil and Africa.
That's nearly equal to the annual iron ore production of AngloAmerican (
) in Africa, much of it through its majority stake in Kumba Iron Ore (
"It's early days at this point," said Clive Donner, managing director of Linq Resources, a long term shareholder in Sundance.
"I think the project is a very attractive, large project, and will make a lot of money when it's up and running. So at this point, we clearly expect the board of Sundance to go through the motions and undertake their view of the proposed offer and ultimately get the best deal for all shareholders," Donner said.
), which is developing a molybdenum and copper mine in Australia and Marenica Energy (
), which is looking for uranium, also in Australia.
In November 2010, Hanlong signed a cooperation agreement with the Export-Import Bank of China for loans of up to $1.5 billion to fund its overseas expansion plans.
Outside of mining, Hanlong has interests in energy, real estate, pharmaceuticals, industrial chemicals and technology.
Hanlong is being advised by Bank of America-Merrill Lynch, and Sundance is being advised by UBS.
(Additional reporting by Sonali Paul in Melbourne; Editing by Anshuman Daga)
