China admits long way to go for citizens to enjoy human rights
2011-07-13 06:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China still has "a long way to go" before its citizens can enjoy full human rights, a senior Chinese official said in a rare admission of the challenges ahead, pointing to social conflict and even rising house prices as stumbling blocks.
Wang Chen, head of the State Council Information Office, said in a speech published in the English-language China Daily Wednesday that while China had made remarkable developments on this front, the way forward would be hard.
"Affected and restricted by natural, historical and cultural factors, and economic and social development levels, the cause of human rights in China is still facing many difficulties and challenges, and there is still a long way to go before achieving the lofty goal of the Chinese citizens fully enjoying human rights," Wang said.
"Our national development remains significantly unbalanced and uncoordinated because of ... wide gaps in income distribution, increasing pressures on prices, soaring housing prices in some cities, food safety problems, insufficient and unevenly distributed educational and medical resources, unbalanced urban and rural development, and increasing social conflicts caused by illegal land requisitioning," he said.
China has long rejected criticism of its human rights' record, saying providing food, clothing, housing and economic growth are far more relevant for developing countries like it, pointing to success at lifting millions out of poverty.
Wang, whose office is the Cabinet's main propaganda organ, said that China must "prioritize the people's right to subsistence and development in the course of human rights development."
Wang said that China plans to draft a new "human rights action plan" for 2012-2015, "with the aim of expanding democracy, enhancing the rule of law, improving the people's livelihood and safeguarding human rights."
While senior leaders, including Premier Wen Jiabao, periodically promise China's citizens democracy and human rights, the last few months in particular have been marked by a sweeping crackdown on dissidents and activists.
And after some muted moves to give citizens stronger legal protections early in his time as president, Hu Jintao has made enforcing firmer control over China's increasingly diverse and fractious society a feature of his time in power.
In an apparent admission that the rule of law the government so stridently proclaims it upholds has problems, Wang said that
"we should ... be aware of our weakness in safeguarding the people's democratic rights and interests."
Wang's comments underscore Beijing's continuing concerns about rising discontent sparked by a growing wealth gap, rampant corruption and illegal land seizures, issues that the current crop of top leaders have staked their legacy on.
But Wang's speech is unlikely to appease many rights activists, under mounting pressure from authorities who have cracked down on dissent since February, fearing that anti-authoritarian uprisings in the Arab world could inspire protests against one-party rule.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ben Blanchard and Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Wow, this is an amazing admission 每 that China has human rights problems. It is equally amazing to hear a top Chinese official admit that China has any problems at all. The truth is, only a great nation that admit such a problem but only a superpower can try to honestly address it for a country the size of China. I noticed the excuses cited ※cultural, historical, etc.§ but, again it is a small step forward for China. I think I can speak for the world when I say that we want China to become a superpower as much as the Chinese do, but the entire world wants a China that is not threatening to the world or to its citizens when they try to offer helpful criticism. As long as China keeps Liu Xiaobo in prison, China does not have my respect. As long as China treats Tibetan and Uighurs like secondclass citizens, they do not have my respect. Lastly, as long as China continues brainwashing their citizens with propaganda, they will not have my respect. It is truly time for the leaders of China to come clean to the world, follow the rule of law, release prisoners of conscience, and work to end authoritarian rule throughout the world so that people, not political leaders, are the ones who are free to choose for themselves.
Jul 13, 20116:26am EDT--
Two portions of the discussion within China concern not only the inertia of a self-conscious national culture that is millennia long; but, the ennui that associates with such a long-standing national history. And that is something that won＊t 每 and doesn＊t 每 appear in the discussion on the public face presented to the rest of the world. Oh, and marisa 每 take the time to study some Asian history. Few will support the extension of theocracies 每 even one like the Tibetan model 每 which is what Tibetan Buddhism sadly became. Take it through some of those centuries and there were as many occasions when Tibet was the imperial power invading western China. That may not mean much to someone chiming in from the outside; but, it＊s part of the consciousness of history shared by the Chinese nation.
Jul 13, 201110:46am EDT--
Remember back in 2008, Obama supporters expected Obama to get in office and tell the Chinese whatfor about human rights? ＃.wow, that seems like a very long time ago. Reality Alert: When the Dali Lama visited the White House, Obama had him exit through the back door past the garbage cans to not offend the Chinese. (Don＊t believe me? There＊s pictures!)
Jul 13, 201111:00am EDT--
