Analysis: China metals curbs may end up boosting smelting
2011-07-12 07:15:00.0
(Reuters) - China has issued fresh orders to slash capacity at steel and base metal smelters as it revamps its industrial sector, but the move could backfire and boost capacities instead as outdated units are replaced and modernized.
The world's top consumer of copper, aluminum and steel told local governments to phase out more than 2 million tonnes of aluminum, copper, lead and zinc smelting capacity in a plan to crack down on energy-heavy and polluting industries, around 13 percent more than targets set in May.
China also ordered a cut of nearly 28 million tonnes in steel smelting capacity, 6 percent more than the May number, but analysts say the campaign may just force producers to modernize facilities and increase output in the process.
China's previous attempts to curb raw material output by phasing out outdated capacities have had limited success and its latest attempt could enjoy a fate no different, said Henry Liu, regional head of commodity research at Mirae Asset Securities in Hong Kong.
"Local governments usually rely on these businesses to generate fiscal revenues and job opportunities for their economy," said Liu. "In most cases, 'capacity elimination' turned out to be a 'capacity replacement' exercise: old and small-sized equipment was exchanged for large modern ones.
"This is the reason why capacities increased rather than being scaled back even after years of crackdown by the government. In this case, the policy actually stimulated capacity expansion."
In the steel sector, many Chinese mills have been building bigger blast furnaces, helping boost China's annual capacity by at least 50 million tonnes in 2003 to 2008, just before the global financial crisis, said Liu.
Even if China cuts its steel smelting capacity by 27.94 million tonnes, that would be a small dent in total production capacity estimated at around 800 million tonnes.
"The closures will not be able to help ease the oversupply issue for years, particularly when steel production has clung to record levels," said Wang Dezhi, an analyst with China Orient Futures.
The world's biggest steel producer, China made a record 627 million tonnes of crude steel in 2010 to fuel a booming economy, next in size only to the United States.
Based on China's daily steel output average of more than 2 million tonnes toward the end of June, a record high, the country is on track to produce well over 700 million tonnes of crude steel this year as it races to build more low-cost houses and boosts infrastructure investment.
China may push regional governments harder in curbing output of lead, a key raw material to make batteries, following cases of lead poisoning in the early part of 2011, said Heng Kun, chief analyst at Essence Securities.
"The environmental protection standards in the country have changed and they are tougher. The central government's pressure on local governments is stronger than previous years," Heng said.
China's production of refined lead fell 13.3 percent in May from April, partly because Beijing ordered tighter controls over lead producers and lead-acid battery makers accused of poisoning more than 100 children and scores of adults in eastern Zhejiang province by careless handling of the highly toxic metal.
But Heng said this year's production of copper, aluminum, lead and zinc were unlikely to be affected as new capacities can more than offset the closure of outdated ones.
The overall capacity utilization rate of these base metals stand at about 70 to 80 percent and the rate could rise to 85 percent or higher even if the outdated capacity was closed, he added.
China has annual smelting capacity of 6.4 million tonnes for copper, about a third of the world's total of 20 million, according to Reuters metals production database.
It has around 21 million tonnes smelting capacity for aluminum versus the world's 52 million, and 3.7 million tonnes for lead against the global total of nearly 10 million.
China's annual zinc capacity stands at 4.9 million tonnes, nearly 40 percent of the world's total of almost 13 million.
Based on estimates for this year's output, China has excess aluminum capacity of more than 2 million tonnes and more than 1 million tonnes for copper, Reuters database shows.
Over the past two years, China shut down hundreds of small coal mines notorious for their poor safety record and inefficiency, or merged them with bigger coal producers.
"If the Chinese government is strong enough to phase out outdated capacity, it should be able to do that with a bit more success compared to the past," said Yingxi Yu, a commodity analyst at Barclays Capital.
"But it won't happen very quickly. It will be a very long-term process," she said.
(Additional reporting by Polly Yam in Hong Kong and Ruby Lian in Shanghai; Editing by Clarence Fernandez)
