Factbox - Raw materials covered by China loss at WTO
2011-07-05 18:27:00.0
(Reuters) - A World Trade Organization panel ruled on Tuesday that various quotas, duties and other devices used by China to restrict exports of key raw materials violated commitments it made to join the world trade body.
The raw materials covered by the U.S., EU and Mexico in their June 2009 case against China are used in applications such as alloys, ceramics, mobile phones and light bulbs.
BAUXITE - The most important aluminum ore, used for refining into alumina -- the raw material used to make aluminum.
FLUORSPAR - A mineral composed of calcium fluoride, or fluorite. Used to manufacture products such as aluminum, gasoline, insulating foams, refrigerants, steel and uranium fuel.
MANGANESE - Manganese is essential to iron and steel production because of its sulfur-fixing, deoxidizing, and alloying properties. Steelmaking, including its ironmaking component, has accounted for most manganese demand worldwide in the range of 85 percent to 90 of the total demand.
MAGNESIUM - A fairly strong, light metal used in aluminum alloys and to remove sulfur in the production of iron and steel. It is the third most commonly-used structural metal. It is often used in automotive and truck components.
SILICON - Used in transistors, solar cells, rectifiers and other electronic devices like computer chips. It is also used to make concrete and bricks; in medicine for silicone implants. Silica, as sand, is a main component of glass.
SILICON METAL - Used in manufacture of special steels and cast iron, aluminum alloys, glass and refractory materials, ceramics, abrasives, water filtration, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, paper, insecticides and textiles.
Fused silica is used as an ablative material in rocket engines, spacecraft, silica fibers used in reinforced plastics.
Silicon metal is important to the electronic industry as the base material used in the manufacture of semiconductors, microchips for computers and solar cells used to capture electrical energy from the sun.
YELLOW PHOSPHORUS - Used widely in many products including fire extinguishers, explosives, nerve agents, pesticides, detergents, animal foods and baking powder.
(Reporting by Washington and Brussels newsrooms; editing by Todd Eastham)
