China's Jinchuan trumps Vale's Metorex bid
2011-07-05 00:29:00.0
(Reuters) - South African miner Metorex MTXJ.J said on Tuesday it had received a $1.32 billion offer from China's Jinchuan Group, trumping a bid by Brazilian giant Vale SA (
The battle for the South African-listed copper and cobalt producer is the latest saga in the scramble for African resources by emerging market giants China and Brazil, which have an insatiable appetite for raw materials to fuel their growth.
Vale, the world's largest iron ore producer, seemed unlikely to be drawn into a bidding war after its chief financial officer earlier told Reuters in London that it would stick with its bid.
"It is a fair price, but right now the shares are trading below the offer price so there is room for Vale to make a better bid. It depends on their long-range review of the copper price," said Stephen Meintjies, an analyst at Imara SP Reid.
Jinchuan, China's dominant nickel producer, added almost 22 percent to Vale's offer, making 8.90 rand per share for a cash bid at current exchange rates of around $1.32 billion.
Metorex's share price soared 8.46 percent on the news to 8.72 rand.
Metorex said it had not approved any agreement in relation to the Jinchuan offer. However, the companies said in a joint statement that it already had the firm backing of shareholders representing eight percent of Metorex voting rights.
Its assets include the Chibuluma copper mine in Zambia which produces about 16,000 tonnes of copper per year.
"The proposed acquisition of Metorex represents a unique opportunity for Jinchuan to build a platform to acquire, develop and operate African copper and cobalt projects with substantial growth potential," Jinchuan said in a statement.
This will remove the costs and political risks associated with operating in South Africa, which include compliance with a mining charter aimed at putting more ownership into the hands of previously disadvantaged blacks, union militancy and nationalization talk by radical elements of the ruling party.
South Africa's Standard Bank (
) is the adviser and transaction sponsor for Metorex , while Goldman Sachs International is Jinchuan's adviser on the deal.
(Additional reporting by Tiisetso Motsoeneng and Yumna Mohamed in Johannesburg; Editing by Marius Bosch and David Hulmes)
