Shares slide as economy worries resurface; euro
2011-07-10 21:45:00.0
Shares slide as economy worries resurface; euro | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Shares slide as economy worries resurface; euro
Sun, Jul 10 2011
Fri, Jul 8 2011
Fri, Jul 8 2011
Thu, Jul 7 2011
Thu, Jul 7 2011
Sun  EDT
As markets began recovering from an extended period of volatility in the first half of 2011, a perfect storm in the shape of slowing growth in China, worrisome news from the euro zone and little progress to avert a looming U.S. debt default sapped demand for risky assets.
U.S. stocks fell on Friday after data showed the economy created only 18,000 jobs in June, well short of an expected 90,000, dashing optimism that the economy was emerging from a soft patch.
Still, a broad based sell-off is unlikely as some investors said inflation in China may have passed an inflationary peak, reducing the need for heavy policy tightening, while others preferred to wait for the earning season beginning this week.
On Saturday, data showed annual inflation in China accelerated to a three-year high in June with the consumer price index up 6.4 percent from a year earlier, slightly above analyst expectations.
"The market will come under pressure again due to overseas macroeconomic factors," said Kim Byung-yeon, an analyst at Woori Investment & Securities.
"But losses will be limited, as investors are also betting China's inflation has peaked and is set to ease."
In currency markets, the euro fell to a two-week low before an emergency meeting among European leaders on concerns that the debt crisis was spreading to Italy, the region's third largest economy.
European Council President Herman Van Rompuy has called an emergency meeting of top officials dealing with the euro zone debt crisis for Monday morning, sources told Reuters.
Even as investors fretted about its fiscal health, pushing Italian bond yields to euro lifetime highs on Friday, the Financial Times reported that some EU leaders were considering allowing a selective default by Athens to put its debt on a more sustainable footing.
