China's Hanergy buys U.S. solar panel maker in technology push
2013-07-25 08:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Hanergy Holding Group Ltd said it had acquired U.S. firm Global Solar Energy Inc, its third overseas purchase of a solar company in the past year as it beefs up its solar panel production technology.
The deal follows its purchases last year of Silicon Valley start-up MiaSole and of Solibro, a unit of insolvent German solar group Q-Cells QCEG.UL, and will allow Hanergy to "accelerate the development and large-scale application" of thin-film modules, Hanergy Chairman Li Hejun said in a statement on Thursday.
Global Solar, based in Tucson, Arizona, specializes in making solar cells with copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) technology. The thin-film products, which are lighter than traditional crystalline silicon modules, are applied in integrated and rooftop solar projects, electronic vehicles and portable solar products.
"Global Solar has run into some financial difficulties, and Hanergy bought it for its technology at a reasonable price," a source with knowledge of the matter said. The person declined to be identified because he was not authorized to comment to the media on the financial health of the target.
China has become the world's largest solar panel maker and the dominant supplier to solar power industry. Hanergy, a private renewable energy producer, controls Hong Kong-listed Hanergy Solar (
) and employs more than 8,000 people.
) have sold stakes to South Korean conglomerate SK Group and China's TFG Radiant Group, respectively.
MiaSole, which raised hundreds of millions of dollars as one of Silicon Valley's hottest cleantech startups, was sold to Hanergy for $30 million, a source familiar with the matter said in October 2012.
Both the United States and European Union accuse Chinese panel makers of receiving state subsidies and dumping their panels below costs, posing unfair competition.
Such panels, analysts say, are less efficient in converting sunlight into power but are lighter and potentially cheaper than crystalline silicon modules, the core products of most Chinese solar panel makers such as LDK (
Hanergy said it completed the acquisition of Global Solar after winning approvals from the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States and China's National Development and Reform Commission.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Natio where does the buying of ons elite elected officials have fought green energy. Obama promoted green energy and got pushed back. I guess China thinks Obama¡¯s green energy ideas are valid.
Jul 25, 201310:08am EDT--
China presented a $1.7 trillion, 5 year ($340 billion per year), 22 point plan at the Durban Climate Change Conference in 2011. Solar and wind energies are part of the plan. China leads the world in solar and wind energy generation, and their plan should show serious results by the middle of 2014 that will improve until 2016 when a new 5 year pollution plan will start. If the plan needs improvements, China chose President Xi Jinping who has a degree in chemical engineering to oversee the plan, and China¡¯s leaders have the power to make necessary improvements. The current purchase will help save US jobs and allow the US to export whatever is not sold in the US, cutting US trade deficits. China will buy the solar panels if no one else does because they have their own power and environmental needs. Their leaders also have the political power to pursue China¡¯s environmental goals while the US must pander to obstructing propagandists in the US Con-gress.
Jul 25, 20137:30pm EDT--
