Petrovietnam eyes oil assets in disputed South China Sea
2011-07-08 05:50:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Jul 6 2011
Mon, Jul 4 2011
Thu, Jun 30 2011
Wed, Jun 29 2011
Tue, Jun 28 2011
Fri  EDT
) to help protect Hanoi's territorial claims, the chief executive of the state oil group said.
Vietnam and the Philippines have protested against aggressive action by China in the resource-rich area, which covers the world's busiest sea lanes and straddles oil-and-gas deposits. It is also rich in fishing grounds.
China has made the largest claim over the area, and Taiwan, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines also claim territorial sovereignty.
Petrovietnam Chief Executive Phung Dinh Thuc said ConocoPhillips may sell the oil assets because it was scaling back its presence, possibly as part of a restructuring.
"There is also an opinion that this oil field is in a complicated stage" and they are no longer increasing production, he said. He did not say when a deal could occur.
Thuc was quoted in a statement published by PV Oil, Petrovietnam's marketing arm.
"We should know how to balance our interests between the two superpowers," Ronald Llamas said at a forum, adding Manila should negotiate through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Tensions over sovereignty of the region have escalated this year. The Philippines and Vietnam have accused China of cutting the seismic cables of ships exploring for oil and gas, threatening to ram vessels and firing shots at fishermen.
Last month, the Philippine military reported an unidentified fighter jet harassed Filipino fishermen in the Spratlys, the second incident involving unidentified fighters since May.
The Lowy Institute, an Australian think tank, warned late last month of growing risks that incidents at sea involving China could lead to war, potentially drawing in the United States and other powers.
Beijing says it has historical sovereignty over the region, which it says supersedes claims of other countries under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
Officials at ConocoPhillips in Vietnam could not be reached for comment on Petrovietnam's comments. Thuc spoke with domestic media on Tuesday, but his comments were not released until Friday.
ConocoPhillips owns a 23.3 percent stake in a complex of five oil fields in block 15-1 in the area. It owns 36 percent of the Rang Dong oil field in block 15-2 in the Cuu Long basin and 16.3 percent in the Nam Con Son gas pipeline project, the PV Oil statement said.
It said ConocoPhillips' assets in Vietnam totaled $1.5 billion.
In Block 15-1, its partners include Petrovietnam with a 50 percent interest, state-run Korea National Oil Corp with 14.2 percent, Korea's SK Corp with 9 percent and 3.5 percent owned by Monaco's Geopetrol.
The firm's partners in block 15-2 are Japan Vietnam Petroleum Co with 46.5 percent of stake and Petrovietnam with 17.5 percent.
In the Nam Con Son gas pipeline project, BP (
Late last year, Petrovietnam said it had considered buying BP's stakes in offshore oil projects, but later waived the option, paving the way for BP to sell them to its Russian joint venture, TNK-BP, for $1.8 billion.
(Additional reporting by Manny Mogato in Manila; Editing by Matt Driskill)
