Hurdles abound in global recovery
2011-07-10 15:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jul 8 2011
Fri, Jul 8 2011
Thu, Jul 7 2011
Thu, Jul 7 2011
Wed, Jul 6 2011
Pedestrian's walk past a discount store in Dublin July 6, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Cathal McNaughton
Sun  EDT
It's against this background that U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke will step before Congress for his semi-annual testimony on Wednesday. He will likely be barraged with questions about Friday's jobs report -- a report so across-the-board disappointing that JPMorgan economist Michael Feroli called it "worse than Spinal Tap's 'Shark Sandwich.'"
The U.S. economy created just 18,000 jobs in June, much less than the 90,000 economists had expected.
"We're in a situation where the data is noisy and choppy," said Michael Hanson, a senior economist at Bank of America.
"For a central banker, you're now in risk management mode: 'We want to be ready to calm the markets in case we get more bad data, but we don't want to jump the gun, either.'"
Bernanke has argued that the biggest factors affecting growth in the first half of the year are temporary in nature: supply disruptions due to the Japanese earthquake, inclement weather and a surge in oil prices earlier this year.
"The weak jobs report does not rule out a second half recovery by any means. Employment is something of a lagging indicator," said Dean Maki, economist at Barclays Capital.
In addition, U.S. industrial production and manufacturing data on Friday may show the Japanese earthquake-induced supply chain disruptions to auto production and sales have eased somewhat.
Japan's central bank, which meets on July 11-12, will likely revise up its assessment of the economy next week as companies restore supply chains more quickly than expected. Factory output is seen returning to pre-quake levels in August. The BOJ is expected to hold off easing monetary policy further, though it will likely warn of lingering risks to the global economy.
One of those risks is Europe's escalating debt crisis.
But given the absence of a decision on how private bondholders might participate in any Greek debt rollover, markets are skeptical of how much progress can be made at the Eurogroup meeting.
Contagion is already evident from the growing risk premia on debt issued by Spain and Italy, which some analysts view as a warning signal. Lower-rated euro zone government bonds have faced increased pressure since Moody's cut Portugal's credit rating to junk last week.
"There is not expected to be much of a resolution, so all together there is a lot of asymmetric risk out there," said Mark McCormick, currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman.
Risky assets, particularly those with direct links to China's growth, sold off after the announcement on concerns the latest monetary tightening could choke an already sluggish global recovery.
On Wednesday, July 13, China will get a read on its second-quarter economic growth data and retail sales for June. Chinese consumer sentiment is expected to have been weighed down by surging inflation and high property prices.
"Unlike in Japan and the U.S., where we believe growth has slowed for temporary reasons, policy tightening in the euro area and China seems likely to yield a more persistent slowing in growth," Barclays' Maki wrote in a note to clients.
(Reporting by Kristina Cooke; Editing by Dan Grebler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
You can not call this a ¡°global recovery¡±. No world economy is firing on all cylinders and for all the G8 has done amounts to pretty well noting except waste our tax dollars on lousy photo ops and push to the brink of a ¡°double dip¡±.
Jul 10, 20113:54pm EDT--
Everything from the USA is so gloomy. Most of the rest of the world thinks that the Hamburger Crisis was a million years ago. In Thailand, Ford just signed bank loans for a new car factory in Rayong, inflation seems to be being tamed and the new government is about to hand out more goodies than ever. If there¡¯s any worries it¡¯s that the global economy is firing on all cylinders, not that it isn¡¯t. China hasn¡¯t been raising rates for no reason.
Jul 10, 20117:11pm EDT--
Western reporters write from a certain bias, and that bias fails to see the ¡®rest of the world¡¯ in its true light.
Western reporters write from a certain bias, and that bias fails to see the ¡®rest of the world¡¯ in its true light.
The changing of the guard is happening, and the US is on the way out as the ¡®boss¡¯ of the world economy. In 20 years it will be relegated to the same status as the UK, France, and Canada are now ¨C second tier. Hopefully, we don¡¯t fall into third-world status which is also highly likely¡­. Asia is rising, China, Singapore, Thailand, and even Vietnam are where the world is turning economically¡­. Get schooled, it¡¯s educational.
Jul 10, 20119:23pm EDT--
