Shenhua venture to own most of Mongolia coal project block
2011-07-05 06:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Jul 4 2011
Sun, Jul 3 2011
Wed, Jun 29 2011
Tue, Jun 28 2011
Fri, Jun 17 2011
Tue  EDT
) will hold a 40 percent stake in the western Tsankhi block of Mongolia's Tavan Tolgoi coal project, giving it the biggest share of one of the world's biggest coking coal deposit.
A Russian-led consortium would control 36 percent of the project, while U.S. miner Peabody Energy Corp (
) would own the remaining 24 percent, according to a draft proposal to be submitted to the Mongolian parliament on Wednesday, the government said in a statement.
"This is a big win for Shenhua and will give a significant boost to its long-term growth prospects," said Helen Lau, a senior commodities analyst with UOB-Kay Hian in Hong Kong.
Tuesday's statement confirmed a Reuters exclusive that Peabody, a venture between Shenhua and Japan's Mitsui & Co. (
), and a Russian-led consortium were chosen in the bid.
The project, which may require initial investment of more than $7 billion, is seen as vital to kick-start the land-locked nation's economy. It will also generate billions of dollars in revenue for the companies involved and add tens of millions of tons of increasingly rare coking coal used by steel makers.
China, Japan and South Korea are snapping up iron ore and coking coal mines globally to diversify from heavyweight suppliers such as BHP Billiton (
The focus has shifted to undeveloped Mongolia, which some analysts say could be one of the fastest-growing economies of the next decade because of its vast quantities of untapped mineral wealth.
), which has a joint venture with Peabody in China, would also benefit from more coal transportation to China.
Bai Xuefei, Shenhua's (
) investor relations director, said he had no information on the issue and couldn't confirm it. Shenhua's board secretary Huang Qing couldn't be reached for comment.
As part of the Mongolian government's proposal, the companies will make a $1 billion payment to it, including a non-refundable $500 million.
The Tavan Tolgoi coal deposit, in Mongolia's south Gobi region, has estimated reserves of 6 billion tons of coal, including the world's largest untapped deposit of steelmaking coking coal.
The western Tsankhi block holds around 1.2 billion tons of reserves, 65 percent of which is coking coal. It has an estimated production life of more than 30 years at 15 million tons a year.
The government also plans an up to $5 billion initial public offering for Erdenes-Tavan Tolgoi, the state-owned company in charge of the eastern Tsankhi block. Goldman Sachs Group Inc (
), Deutsche Bank AG (
), BNP Paribas SA (
), utility firm KEPCO (
), trading firm LG International (
) and Daewoo International, state-owned Russian Railways and Japanese trading houses Itochu Corp (
), Sumitomo Corp (
), Marubeni Corp (
(Additional reporting by Wan Xu in Beijing, Writing by Elzio Barreto; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Anshuman Daga)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
40% is not ¡°most¡±.36% isn¡¯t almost most and 24% isn¡¯t chump change. The distribution is more in line with the investment that each of the three groups are offering.
Jul 05, 20116:51am EDT--
