Military chief visits China, says to maintain Asia presence
2011-07-10 06:03:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States is committed to maintaining its military presence in Asia, its top military official said in China Sunday, adding that Washington was worried disputes in the resource-rich South China Sea could lead to serious conflict.
"The worry, among others that I have, is that the ongoing incidents could spark a miscalculation, and an outbreak that no one anticipated," Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at the start of a four-day visit to China.
"We have an enduring presence here, we have an enduring responsibility. We seek to strongly support the peaceful resolution of these differences," he told foreign reporters during a news conference.
Despite unease over China's growing military capabilities and assertiveness in the disputed waters, U.S.-China military relations have thawed in recent months and Mullen's trip to China is seen as a reciprocal visit for the one his Chinese counterpart made to Washington in May.
That visit by People's Liberation Army (PLA) Chief of the General Staff Chen Bingde marked the country's highest-level military-military talks since China severed ties in early 2010, furious about $6.4 billion in U.S. arms sale to Taiwan, which Beijing considers a renegade province.
The United States has pledged its support to the Philippines in the South China Sea, which is believed to harbor rich oil and gas reserves.
But Beijing insists on handling the disputes over the region on a one-on-one basis rather than multilaterally, a strategy some critics have described as "divide and conquer."
China, the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei, Vietnam and Taiwan all claim territory in the South China Sea. China's claim is the largest, forming a vast U-shape over most of the sea's 648,000 square miles (1.7 million square km), including the Spratly and Paracel archipelagos.
China and the U.S. broached the issue at talks in Hawaii in June, and the topic could dominate the agenda at an upcoming Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Foreign Ministers meeting in Indonesia.
The official English-language China Daily newspaper said in an editorial Friday that ASEAN should not tolerate attempts by outside forces to interfere in bilateral disputes, a thinly veiled swipe at the United States.
"Asia's history proves outside forces have never worked whole-heartedly for Asian peace and development," it said.
But Mullen, while emphasizing the United States' desire to see a peaceful resolution to territorial claims in the South China Sea, also said Washington would not quit the region.
"The U.S. is not going away. Our enduring presence in this region has been important to our allies for decades and will continue to be so," he said.
GROWING THREAT?
Chinese and U.S. ships have been involved in stand-offs in the seas off China's coast in the past few years, and Beijing has repeatedly complained about U.S. reconnaissance patrols.
China is also expected to launch its first aircraft carrier soon, which would add to its growing military clout just as other powers in Asia are becoming uneasy about its increasingly strident claims over disputed seas in the region.
Asked about the carrier, Mullen suggested that having the vessel and deploying it effectively are two different things.
"There is great symbolism associated with that and I understand that. Sometimes matching the actual capability versus the symbolism, there can be a gap there," he said.
Speaking to students at China's elite Renmin University on Sunday, Mullen emphasized the two countries' shared roles in security in the region but also pushed for greater openness from China's growing military.
"With greater military power must come greater responsibility, greater cooperation, and just as important, greater transparency. Without these things, the expansion of military power in your region, rather than making it more secure and stable, could have the opposite effect," he said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If ex-President Bill Clinton is correct in stating the ¡°U.S. Lacks Planning Needed for Global Success¡± and his wife is Secretary of State (Ms. Hillary Clinton) and Mr. Barack Obama as Commander In Chief; I have to conclude Mr. Bill Clinton is directing his comments at The White House for its lack of planning needed for global success. Now, imagine you are a Chinese General responding to the above-mentioned U.S. military imperative for a presence in the South China Seas. The Chinese Naval Commanders would strategize how it is the United States can afford a multi-billion dollar naval presence in our backyard, while refusing to pay its debts. Secondly, why is the Chinese government continuing to lend the U.S. billions of dollars to challenge Chinese Naval operations in the South China Seas? Iraq, Afghanistan, Mexico, Colombia, Israel, Somalia, Congo, Libya, and now the China Seas: America is not broke.
Jul 10, 20114:14am EDT--
Secondly, why is the Chinese government continuing to lend the U.S. billions of dollars to challenge Chinese Naval operations in the South China Seas? Iraq, Afghanistan, Mexico, Colombia, Israel, Somalia, Congo, Libya, and now the China Seas: America is not broke. It has something to do with the fact that China has to lend us money in order to equalize the price of the dollar. Their economy depends on this and thus they have to lend us money to keep an advantage.
Jul 10, 20111:01pm EDT--
