Investors stay cautious as H2 starts
2011-06-30 14:39:00.0
(Reuters)- Investors have become a little more upbeat heading into the second half of the year, lifting stock allocations from 2011 lows but remaining cautious with plenty of safe-haven cash and bonds.
They also lifted their exposure to euro zone stocks and bonds in the month, despite the ongoing debt crisis.
Reuters asset allocation polls released on Thursday showed leading investors across the world recovering from May's retrenchment, brought on by fears over a stagnant U.S. economy, potential over-heating in China, and the euro zone debt crisis.
On average, 58 fund firms in the United States, Europe excluding the UK, Japan and Britain held 51.5 percent of a balanced portfolio in equities, up from 50.7 percent in May.
Bond holdings were at 35.1 percent, down slightly from 35.5 percent a month earlier. Cash was at 4.9 percent, down from 5.2 percent.
June's equities allocation, for example, is far closer to what it was last year before the Federal Reserve launched its second asset-buying quantitative easing program (QE2) than it was in the immediate months that followed.
QE2, which ends on Thursday, provided a major sentiment boost for investors.
"The investment environment continues to be highly uncertain," said Yoshinori Nagano, senior strategist at Daiwa Asset Management in Tokyo.
Investors are being battered by the Greek sovereign debt crisis, in which a default could spread into a wide range of other assets through banking losses and contagion into other euro zone countries.
Despite this, the euro zone saw more interest from investors in June, with holdings of both euro zone stocks and bonds rising.
"Ultimately, (Greece) cannot be allowed to fail because this could cause a contagion effect across peripheral Europe," said Neil Michael, executive director of investment strategies at London & Capital.
Fifteen U.S.-based fund management firms held an average of 63.9 percent of assets in equities, up from 61.6 percent a month earlier and 63.3 percent in April.
Japanese fund managers' global bond weighting was near a record high while their stock weighting sunk toward a 12-year low.
The poll of 13 institutions found the average weighting for global bonds was 49.5 percent, close to the 49.6 percent logged in March and May, which was the highest since the survey began in February 1995.
The 13 UK-based management companies polled held 52 percent of their portfolios in stocks, down from 52.0 in May. Bond holdings rose to 23.3 percent from 22.9 percent.
(Additional reporting by Chris Vellacott and Natsuko Waki in London, Jennifer Ablan in New York, Kaori Kaneko in Tokyo and Bangalore Polling Unit; Reporting by Jeremy Gaunt)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Safe haven¡± cash?Cash,Dollars,are nothing more than the common stock of the U.S. govt.That govt is broke.Holding Dollars and thinking they are a safe haven is the thought of a fool.You might as well invest your savings in the stock of a bankrupt company.
Jun 30, 201111:07am EDT--
