Foster's wine spin-off surges on report of Chinese interest
2011-07-03 22:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Shares in Australia's Treasury Wine Estates Ltd (
) surged 11 percent on Monday, valuing the world's second-largest winemaker at $2.6 billion, following a report that China's Bright Food Group was considering a bid for the company.
Treasury Wine, with brands including Penfolds, Rosemount and Beringer, was spun off by Foster's Group FGL.AX in May to its shareholders after the brewer failed with an expansion into wine that resulted in nearly A$3 billion in writedowns.
Following the split-up, both companies were seen as potential takeover targets and Foster's has already rejected a A$9.5 billion takeover offer from brewing giant SABMiller (
"It is a bit hard to see how it would fit into their overall strategy," said Arnhem Investment Management analyst Theo Maas in Sydney.
"Bright have been popping up in lots of bidding wars recently, ranging from sugar to yoghurt."
Privately held Bright Food was trumped in a A$1.7 billion bid for CSR's (
) sugar business last year, and also lost out in a bidding war for French yoghurt maker Yoplait in March.
The Shanghai-based maker of Chinese candy brand "Big White Rabbit" has interests that span farming, food and beverage production and retailing and has said it wants to buy overseas assets.
'BUSINESS AS USUAL'
Treasury Wine, the world's second-largest wine company behind Constellation Brands (
), owns vineyards from the Hunter Valley near Sydney to the Napa Valley in California.
A Treasury Wine spokeswoman declined to comment on the share price move or the report on Bright, saying it was "business as usual" at the company.
In response to a query from the Australian bourse, Treasury Wine said it was not aware of any other information that would explain the price move.
When Foster's still owned the wine business last year, it rejected a surprise takeover approach for the wine business worth up to A$2.5 billion from U.S. private equity firm Cerberus Capital Management CBS.UL as too low.
Treasury Wine shares rose as much as 11.3 percent to A$3.75, valuing the company at A$2.4 billion ($2.6 billion).
The wine business is valued at A$3.1 billion on Foster's books, about half what the company spent on acquisitions in a decade-long expansion at the top of the market.
A rising currency has been a constant headache for the company in recent years, cutting into its U.S. wine earnings at Beringer when translated back into local currency.
Bloomberg News reported on Friday that Bright Food has had internal talks about making a bid, citing two people familiar with the matter.
One of Australia's largest buyout firms, CHAMP, snapped up Constellation's Australian and British wine operations in December for A$230 million, betting on an upturn in the wine cycle.
(Editing by Ed Davies; Editing by Vinu Pilakkott)
