China's Wen signals doubt inflation goal can be met
2011-06-27 13:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao signaled for the first time that China would struggle to meet its 4 percent inflation target this year, underlining expectations that interest rates will rise further even as economic growth slows down.
Wen, who is traveling in Europe, was quoted by Hong Kong media on Monday as saying that while he sees the Chinese economy growing above 8-9 percent this year, it was hard for China to keep inflation under 4 percent in 2011.
"China's financial situation will still be among the best in the world this year, with economic growth kept above 8-9 percent, and CPI controlled under 5 percent," Wen told Hong Kong television media during the England leg of his Europe tour.
Wen's latest comments sounded somewhat less sanguine than his remarks on Friday, when he said China's inflation was firmly under control this year and should cool steadily. However, they may not alter investors' thinking about monetary policy.
Many economists had assumed China would overshoot its 4 percent target given that the inflation rate has stayed well above that mark since January, and is expected to peak at 6 percent in June or July.
Economists polled by Reuters in June predicted China would stay in a tightening mode, raising its benchmark lending rate by one-quarter of a percentage point and its deposit rate by a half-point this year.
Investors are watching carefully to see whether Beijing can ease inflation without stifling growth. A string of disappointing readings on factory activity and exports raised concerns that China's economy may be slowing down more sharply than expected.
China is keen to keep prices in check to preserve social stability. Food and energy prices have been the primary culprits behind the steep inflation rate, and that tends to hit lower-income households the hardest.
Judging by a recent stream of comments from Beijing, the market's bias toward tighter policy in China appears to be in step with that of the Chinese government.
Vice Premier Li Keqiang said on Saturday that fighting inflation was still China's top priority, effectively rebutting arguments among some investors that China could face a hard landing if it over-tightens when growth is already slowing.
Wen also took a stab at worries that China's economy risks a hard landing on Friday when he said China is "fully capable" of keeping its economy growing briskly.
Writing in an opinion piece in the Financial Times, Wen said: "There is concern as to whether China can rein in inflation and sustain its rapid development. My answer is an emphatic yes."
China's central bank has made clear that its focus is squarely on inflation.
It raised banks' required reserve ratio to a record 21.5 percent earlier this month, hours after the May inflation data was released. The higher reserve ratio means banks have less money available for lending, which policymakers hope will help to cool growth and inflation.
(Reporting by Victoria Bi and Donny Kwok in Hong Kong, Koh Gui Qing in Beijing; Writing by Emily Kaiser; Editing by Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 26, 201110:02pm EDT--
I¡¯ve been around long enough now to know that nothing is sustainable not even economic growth. It just can¡¯t keep growing all of the time. There has to be a reset once in a while to get rid of the excess baggage. To me, that¡¯s real growth. Once the reset happens, the economy will grow again only this time a little better and maybe in a different direction. When any government tries to sustain growth in one direction, that¡¯s when problems occur and we get what we¡¯re seeing now. They should just stop trying to control it and just go with it and adapt.
Jun 27, 20117:22am EDT--
