Q+A: Who are China's young rural migrants and what do they want?
2011-06-28 23:19:00.0
(Reuters) - A recent riot in southern China's factory belt exposed the frustrations of young migrant workers who make up a growing share of the country's workforce.
Here is an explanation of who they are and what they want, which draws on recent surveys.
WHO ARE CHINA'S YOUNG RURAL MIGRANTS?
Their numbers are increasingly made up of younger migrants, better educated than their parents' generation, often with little or no experience in farming, and committed to forging new lives in towns and cities.
China now has 153 million migrant workers living outside their hometowns. By 2009, 58.4 percent of them were "new generation" migrants born in 1980 or after, according to a National Bureau of Statistics survey. Using that estimate, about 89 million of China's rural migrants are part of this new, "post-'80" generation. Around 41 percent of them are female.
WHY DO THEY MATTER?
This generational shift is producing changes in factories, cities and the economy as a whole. Younger migrants are increasingly determined to secure a foothold in towns and cities, and they want the wages, housing and residency rights to complete the shift from village to urban life.
A 2009 poll of migrant workers, conducted by the State Council Development Research Center, found among those aged 16 to 25, only 6.4 percent were willing to live in the countryside. A quarter of them had completed senior secondary school or higher levels of education, according to the National Bureau of Statistics.
As China's population ages, the number of younger migrants is shrinking, and that is beginning to give them more leverage over wages and conditions as the labor pool tightens.
They also tend to remit less money to home villagers. The National Bureau of Statistics found that in 2009 young migrants sent back about 37.2 percent of their income, while older migrants sent back 51.1 percent.
WHAT DO THEY WANT?
Higher wages, better living and work conditions and a stronger sense of acceptance in the cities where they work. That can make them more likely to change jobs, go on strike, and occasionally protest.
"The new generation of rural migrant workers lives in cities and their psychological expectations are higher than their predecessors, while the limits of their tolerance are lower," said a study from China's state-run trade union confederation last year.
"Compared with the older generation, they have a stronger egalitarian outlook and awareness of their rights. They are demonstrating a shift in defending their rights from passive entreaties to active resistance," the study said.
It cited a survey that found 52.4 of younger migrant workers said they would be willing to take part in collective action in a labor dispute if their own interests were at stake, which was 11.4 percentage points more than older migrants.
