Chinese meat firm Yurun plunges on Muddy Waters rumors
2011-06-27 00:16:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Jun 27 2011
Mon, Jun 27 2011
Fri, Jun 24 2011
Fri, Jun 24 2011
Tue, Jun 21 2011
Mon  EDT
) shares suffered their biggest-ever fall on Monday on market talk that it would be the next target of widely followed short-seller Muddy Waters, whose reports have decimated shares of Chinese companies traded in North America.
Carson Block, director of research at Muddy Waters, said it is "not in our interest to comment" on its plans, but said a "widespread market rumor would either represent a significant failure on our part, or is false."
Yurun, in a statement to the Hong Kong stock exchange late on Monday, said it was unaware of any reason or event that might have caused the sharp fall in its shares, and that its business was operating normally.
Yurun chairman Zhu Yicai told an analyst conference that the company's auditor PriceWaterhouseCoopers has never expressed any reservation about its financial reports, and that Yurun had not changed auditors since its 2005 listing.
"We are not aware of any reports about the company," Zhu said when asked whether he had heard of any third-party reports to be issued on the company.
U.S. regulators have been investigating accounting issues, and Chinese regulators are also now involved, an official in China said in its first public comments since the scandals emerged.
Many investors have stepped away from Chinese companies regardless of reputation, and the reaction to the Yurun rumors shows how jittery investors have become.
Muddy Waters has been at the forefront of a group of short-sellers that have written reports alleging accounting fraud. Muddy's most notable report was on Canada-based Sino Forest TRE.TO, which has devastated investors as those shares have fallen 80 percent.
The harsh reaction on Monday was in part ignited by a note from Asia-focused brokerage Mirae Asset Securities, which said there have been "talks in the mainland about Muddy Waters trying to issue a report on one mainland company. The market is betting that it will be on Yurun."
Mirae, in its note, cited Muddy Waters' setups in mainland China for channel checks and ground research. "Therefore, the market's speculation on them issuing a Yurun report can be well-grounded," said the note, obtained by Reuters.
So far, however, Muddy Waters has not written a report on a company without a North American listing.
Zhu said Yurun's business operations have remained normal. Revenue increased in the first five months of the year due to rising hog prices, but gross margins were slightly lower. Yurun is considering a move to raise meat product prices as well and is confident of hitting its various targets this year.
"The company has responded quickly to address market concerns," said Renee Tai, Hong Kong-based analyst at Samsung Securities. "But investors will not have full confidence in the company until they see its next financial results."
There have been more than a dozen Chinese issues delisted by U.S. exchanges, many of which came to the U.S. through reverse takeovers. There are about 160 U.S. listed companies from the China region that did so via such mergers.
Corporate misbehavior, unfamiliarity with the U.S. market and some practices involved in overseas listings had all contributed to recent investor distrust of Chinese companies, said Wang Ou, vice head of research at the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC).
"First, we have to admit that some of our companies may have flaws. Second, our (companies') understanding of the U.S. market and the measures to tackle risk there may be inadequate," Wang told a conference in Beijing this weekend.
The plunge in Yurun's shares came as bearish bets on the company have been on the rise, in part due to worries about potential government intervention to slow rising pork prices.
Turnover in Yurun's shares surged on Monday to over 11 times its average 30-day volume. Short-selling was 17 percent of the turnover, making the stock the second-most shorted stock in value for the second successive day, rare for a small-cap.
Singapore state investor Temasek Holdings and China-focused private equity firm Hopu invested in Yurun last year, and J.P. Morgan Asset Management and Fidelity were also shareholders, according to filings.
Hopu and Temasek had bought $247 million worth of shares in Yurun from the company's controlling shareholder Willie Holdings, a source told Reuters in April 2010.
Investors in Nanjing-based Yurun have also included ING Investment Management, according to Thomson Reuters StreetSight. JP Morgan Asset Management (Hong Kong) Ltd held 3.6 percent of Yurun, according to a filing from April 28, 2011. It was not immediately clear what their current holdings were as of Monday.
(Additional reporting by Samuel Shen in Shanghai, Vikram Subhedar, Alison Leung and Lee Chyen Yee in Hong Kong; Writing by David Gaffen; Editing by Anshuman Daga and Michael Flaherty, and Chizu Nomiyama and Dan Grebler)
