U.S. groups urge Congress reject China currency bill
2011-06-24 15:03:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jun 23 2011
Wed, Jun 22 2011
Wed, Jun 15 2011
Tue, Jun 14 2011
Tue, Jun 14 2011
Arrangement of various world currencies including Chinese Yuan, US Dollar and Euro pictured in Warsaw, January 25, 2011 Credit: Reuters/Kacper Pempel
Fri  EDT
"We agree that China needs a yuan exchange rate that responds to trade flows and that China should move steadily toward a market-determined exchange rate," the U.S.-China Business Council and other groups said in a letter to every voting member of Congress.
But passing legislation threatening to slap tariffs on some Chinese goods "would be counterproductive not only to the goals related to China's exchange rate that we all share, but also to our nation's broader goals of addressing the many and growing challenges that we face in China," the groups said.
Those include inadequate protection of intellectual property, restrictions on market access, the need for financial services liberalization, restrictions on the export of commodities such as rare earths, discriminatory indigenous innovation and other industrial policies, the groups said.
The coalition includes leading business organizations such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Business Roundtable and the National Foreign Trade Council, many of whose members have invested heavily in China or export products there.
China's tightly managed exchange rate policies have long been an irritant in bilateral trade relations.
One year ago, China loosened its yuan from a peg to the dollar and it has risen 5.46 percent since then. However, U.S. lawmakers complain the pace of appreciation remains too slow, leaving the currency significantly undervalued.
Last year, the House of Representatives, by a vote of 348-79, passed legislation to treat undervalued currencies as a subsidy under U.S. trade law and allow companies to seek countervailing duties on a case-by-case basis.
The bill died in the Senate, but Democratic Representative Sander Levin has reintroduced it this year in the House and already has 160 co-sponsors.
Senator Charles Schumer, a longtime critic of China's currency policies, has indicated he plans to pursue a currency bill in the Senate.
Many U.S. manufacturers, especially in the textile and steel sectors, which compete directly against imports from China, strongly support currency legislation.
"If Congress wants to cut the ranks of the unemployed, it must stop job-destroying foreign export subsidies like currency manipulation that offshores so many U.S. middle-class jobs to China and elsewhere," the Fair Currency Coalition of manufacturing and labor groups said earlier this week.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China has grown by leaps and bounds in exports by manipulating its exchange rates to maximize the profits of American outsourcers. The fact we have not effectively dealt with this issue shows us that we are a house divided, and we cannot stand. We are divided because plutocrats and financial / corporate elites have chosen to raise profits by outsourcing to low wage / low regulation locales, e.g. China. They do not behave like good Americans because they are bad Americans. They have chosen to strip mine the American middle class by destroying our job base and forcing us to replace good wages with debt. This group has bought Congress and that is why this measure has not even come up for a vote. This issues shows the decline and fall of American democracy better than any other I can think of.
Jun 25, 20111:54am EDT--
US Senators do not understand the unfairness of China government. US companies are down sizing or closing; 14 million unemployed persons still looking for jobs. What congress are doing? Nothing. US economics is ¡°Death by China¡± or death by congress?
Jun 25, 201110:16pm EDT--
Of course they will say this¡­they are outsourcers-importers! The fifth colonne in social economics.
Jun 26, 20113:11pm EDT--
