Huntsman urges more pressure on China currency
2011-06-23 16:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Pressure should be kept on China to allow its currency to rise faster in value though Beijing already recognizes the need for a stronger "market-based" yuan, U.S. Republican presidential candidate Jon Huntsman said on Thursday.
Huntsman, a former Utah governor who stepped down as U.S. ambassador to China in April, spoke of the Chinese currency issue as he kicked off his bid for the White House in the key battleground state of Florida.
The issue dogged U.S.-China relations during his time in Beijing, where Huntsman was known for championing the agenda of U.S. businesses worried about the overvalued yuan, intellectual property rights and unfair competition.
"You've got to keep hammering on the value of the Chinese currency," Huntsman told reporters, after meeting with local business leaders at a restaurant in the heart of the Miami's Cuban exile community.
U.S. critics say China's currency gives it an unfair advantage by reducing the price of its goods sold in the United States and making U.S. exports to China more expensive.
"It (the yuan) must increase more aggressively as it finds a proper market valuation," Huntsman, 51, said.
Many conservatives see his work in the Obama administration as a liability. But Huntsman has a long-standing interest in China and the Far East, and he clearly seemed to play it as a strength in his comments on Thursday.
Asked about U.S. leverage in the currency debate with China, Washington's biggest lender, Huntsman said Beijing already recognized the need for a stronger currency.
"Whether we or Brazil or (the) European Union are talking about it, they've discovered themselves that they have to have a market-based currency," he said.
"The leverage first and foremost is the fact that they recognize that they must do it themselves," he said without elaborating.
He also said the U.S. trade deficit with China would begin to shrink once the yuan was allowed to climb to fair market value. "We're going to have unprecedented export opportunities in China," Huntsman said.
"Like in the case with Korea and Taiwan 20 and 30 years ago, where we ran enormous deficits, you're going to see those numbers begin to turn with more export opportunities for U.S. businesses," he said.
(Reporting by Tom Brown; Editing by Paul Simao)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The worry was about an ¡°undervalued¡± yuan, not ¡°overvalued¡±
Jun 23, 20114:50pm EDT--
Huntsman is just trying to score cheap political points. The man is despised in China for all his meddling and interference, to say nothing of his hypocritical hogwash about how the US wants a peaceful dialogue but can¡¯t seem to bring China to the table. And why does he want the RMB to rise? Because it¡¯s ¡°undervalued¡±; because it¡¯s ¡°unfair¡±? No, because ¡°¡±We¡¯re going to have unprecedented export opportunities in China¡± Right. Let¡¯s try to force a country to revalue their currency so that we can move in and take over their domestic markets. Predatory stupidity on Huntsman¡¯s part because the Chinese are a lot smarter than he is. ¡°Like in the case with Korea and Taiwan 20 and 30 years ago, where we ran enormous deficits¡± Huntsman is so uninformed he doesn¡¯t even realise that the US STILL has deficits with Korea and Taiwan, in spite of the currency changes. The same with Japan; the Yen tripled in value and the US trade deficits still increased. And besides, anybody who spent half of his life convincing the Taiwanese that Joseph Smith really did receive some golden tablets from God, but that an angel unfortunately took them up to heaven before they could be verified ¨C is a bit flaky, no? Why give this man good press space? I¡¯d rather read about John Wayne, or UFOs.
Jun 23, 20118:08pm EDT--
