China Resources says overseas deal possible
2011-06-21 23:08:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Jun 21 2011
Thu, Jun 16 2011
Wed, Jun 8 2011
Mon, Jun 6 2011
Sat, Jun 4 2011
Tue  EDT
), the country's biggest supermarket operator and top beer maker, said it does not rule out overseas acquisition opportunities but is not interested in bidding for Australia's Foster's Group Ltd FGL.AX, and that its main focus is developing the mainland market.
"We are not interested in bidding for Foster's, our focus is in China," Vincent Tse, general manager for Strategic planning and investor relations, told Reuters without elaborating.
Last month, China Resources Enterprise said it was eyeing overseas asset acquisitions, but added that there was nothing in the pipeline. It said it was looking at 6-7 deals in China including breweries, supermarkets and beverage operations and had sufficient financial support for acquisitions.
Market watchers have speculated that cash-rich Chinese companies might be interested in bidding for Foster's assets as they aim to expand overseas. Among Chinese brewers, China Resources Enterprise is seen as having the financial muscle for major acquisitions, analysts said.
), China's best-known beer brand in which Japan's Asahi Breweries (
) owns a stake, said earlier that it had no interest in buying Foster's assets. Company officials were not immediately available for comment on the brewer's latest stance.
) also said it was not looking at Foster's. "It is impossible. Our focus is on the mainland market," General Manager and Director Jiang Guo Qing told Reuters.
) launched a cash bid for the Australian brewer valued at A$9.5 billion ($10.1 billion), excluding debt, which Foster's rejected. Investors predicted Foster's would accept a higher offer.
(Reporting by Donny Kwok; Editing by Chris Lewis)
