China c.bank tightens controls on offshore yuan deals
2011-06-21 07:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China's central bank has tightened controls on offshore yuan deals to curb speculation in the currency, regulations showed on Monday, signaling official worries about risks from the rapidly growing offshore market.
Under the rules, offshore banks that settle trade in the Chinese currency must tighten checks on clients' yuan transactions to ensure any buying or selling of the currency is backed by "real" trade or business needs.
The regulations are dated June 8 but were only published on the website of the central bank's Beijing branch last week. The rules were seen by Reuters on Monday.
The move underscores China's worries that a growing yuan offshore market may weaken its grip on the capital account and offer new ways for investors to bring yuan back into the country to invest in domestic assets, where returns could be higher.
"On the one hand, the government has been trying to increase the use of renminbi offshore, and part of that is giving people outside China an incentive to hold renminbi," said Mark Williams, Capital Economics in London.
"At the same time the government wants to avoid speculative inflows into the economy. The two things are very closely linked, and they are trying to juggle these slightly competing objectives."
The offshore yuan market, originally meant to be an experiment to help internationalize the yuan, has grown at a dizzying pace, with investors hungry for exposure to the strengthening but still non-convertible currency.
Yuan deposits in Hong Kong as of April climbed six-fold to 511 billion yuan ($79 billion) from a year ago, and outstanding renminbi-denominated assets, mostly bonds, have expanded to around 130 billion yuan.
"As China's current account transactions are basically free, offshore yuan eventually could make way back to China," said Andy Ji, economist and currency strategist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia in Singapore.
Lu Zhengwei, a senior economist at Industrial Bank in Shanghai, said the rapidly growing yuan market has created a challenge for policymakers trying keep a tight grip on the capital account.
"The central bank has been cautious on the offshore market. If offshore market develops more rapidly than the onshore market, I don't think it will tolerate that," Lu said.
(Additional reporting by Koh Gui Qing, Editing by Don Durfee)
