Newspaper report disputes Sino-Forest timber claims
2011-06-18 09:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Toronto-listed Sino-Forest, already under pressure from a short-seller's report alleging theft and fraud, appears to have substantially overstated its forestry holdings in China's Yunnan province, Canada's Globe and Mail newspaper said on Saturday.
In a special report on Sino-Forest assets, the Globe said it had uncovered "glaring inconsistencies that raise doubts about the company's public statements regarding the value of the assets that lie at the center of the company's core business of buying and selling Chinese timber rights."
Sino-Forest was not immediately available to comment on the Globe's two-page report, which included details about land holdings listed in company documents and compared them with statements from officials in China.
Sino-Forest stock is down some 80 percent since June 2, when short-seller Muddy Waters accused the company of exaggerating its assets and falsifying its investments. The share slump has wiped $4 billion off its market capitalization.
In its report, the Globe quoted Sino-Forest's partner in China's Yunnan province as well as local officials, who both offered far lower figures on Sino-Forest holdings to those provided by the company.
"The Globe's investigation of the company's dealings and holdings in Yunnan points to inconsistencies in the company's accounting of its timber rights and raises broader questions about its business practices," the newspaper said.
The Globe said Sino-Forest had told it that it owned the trees rather than the land, and this would explain discrepancies between land acreages in Sino-Forest documents those detailed in the Globe report.
(Reporting by Janet Guttsman; Editing by Bill Trott)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I would like to know which specific dates the Globe and Mail spent their ¡°two weeks of on-the-ground reporting¡± as indicated in their report. June 2/11 ¨C Muddy Waters Report Published
I would like to know which specific dates the Globe and Mail spent their ¡°two weeks of on-the-ground reporting¡± as indicated in their report. June 2/11 ¨C Muddy Waters Report Published
June 18/11 ¨C story of two weeks of on-the-ground reporting published in Globe China is about 12 hours ahead of Eastern time. A direct flight from Toronto might take another 13 hours. It would seem difficult for any Toronto based reporter to get to China in time for two weeks on the ground of reporting, if the main reporters were from Toronto. The story does mention it was written with files from a freelance Beijing reporter. If that reporter¡¯s time ¡°on the ground¡± is counted, then when did a Globe editor tell her to launch the investigation? Remember the Globe editor has to reach the Beijing reporter, and if calling from Toronto, there is about a 12 hour time difference. This timeline seems very tight, and the Globe would have had to start investigating in China very quickly after the Muddy Waters report to actually do two weeks of on the ground research. I would like to know more about the actual timeline of their investigation.
Jun 19, 201112:15pm EDT--
Expect many more companies like this to come to the surface this year. Enronesque paper only businesses that have launched IPO¡¯s all over the world but have absolutely no real oversight. While there is some forestry work in Yunnan, Most of China¡¯s forests did not survive the great leap forward (1950¡äs) when Mao declared war on nature. There are still pristine forests in Tibet and most of them are either protected or in sensitive border regions. In reality, the vast majority of China¡¯s paper resources come from SE Asia, usually as part of government development projects. The contract will be along the lines of; ¡°we will build you a few Dams, a freeway and a train line, if you let us cut down every tree within a kilometer of either side of the road and train and you sell most of the dams power back to China at a discount rate.¡± The rest of China¡¯s wood imports are now coming from Canada, and interestingly enough the Canadian government has invested heavily in Sichuan earthquake charities and Chinese national parks in an effort to promote their wood exports.
Jun 19, 201110:22pm EDT--
Sino-Forest Is Sino-Forest The Biggest Theft In History Or Could It Possibly Be The Hedge Fund Companies or maybe¡­.? The Ontario Securities commission is investigating Sino-Forest and it will take a few months. Why is the media making such a sensational story out of this when the truth has yet to come out? If you go to Muddy Waters Research site you will find the Globe & mail has provided some of the latest research on Sino-Forest. Muddy Water is in the business of shorting Chinese companies. The OSC is investigating Sino-Forest not the Globe & mail. The Globe & Mail are only making this uncompassionate greedy man richer. Do you think honest people who have invested money in Sino-Forest are frauds?. Is that why it is OK to take our money. Who is to say we are not all being hoodwinked by something all together different? Let the OSC do their job. Thanks Wayne Caledonia
Jun 22, 201112:32pm EDT--
