Timeline: Tensions increase over South China claims
2011-06-12 07:45:00.0
(Reuters) - China, Vietnam, the Philippines, Taiwan, Malaysia and Brunei claim parts or all of the South China Sea, a territory believed to be sitting on rich deposits of oil, gas and minerals, as well as being a major shipping lane.
In 2002, China and the 10-member Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) signed a non-binding code of conduct to restrain claimant-states from conducting military activities and other provocative actions that could raise tension in the area.
April 13 -- The Philippines protests to the United Nations over China's claim's to disputed areas in the South China Sea, saying Beijing's stance has no basis under international law.
May 27 -- Vietnam says three Chinese patrol boats challenged a Vietnamese ship exploring for oil in the South China Sea, damaging equipment and warning the ship that it was violating Chinese territory.
June 1 -- Manila says Chinese navy boats erected pillars, set a buoy and unloaded materials near Amy Douglas Bank, inside the Philippines exclusive economic zone, and says any construction would be a clear violation of the code of conduct.
June 5 -- China's defense minister tells an Asian defense forum that his country's growing economic and military power was not a threat, saying Beijing is not seeking hegemony and will not threaten any country.
June 8 -- China steps up criticism of the Philippines in a fresh exchange of invective over disputed waters, calling on Manila to stop infringing its sovereignty with irresponsible claims over the South China Sea.
June 12 -- Vietnamese authorities tolerate a second day of anti-China protests in the capital, as more than 100 people demonstrate against what they see as bullying behavior by Beijing.
(Compiled by John Mair; Editing by Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Dummies¡¯ guide to South China Sea sovereignty: Who discovered Spratly and Paracel Islands a thousand years ago? China
Dummies¡¯ guide to South China Sea sovereignty: Who discovered Spratly and Paracel Islands a thousand years ago? China
The human remains of which country are found on South China Sea islands? China
The artifacts of which country are found on South China Sea islands? China
Which country has claimed South China Sea islands throughout dynasties? China
Vietnam Premier Pham Van Dong admitted which country owns South China Sea? China This issue is crystal clear. China has sovereignty over South China Sea for a thousand years.
Jun 12, 201112:19am EDT--
Two recent incidents where Chinese ships cut cables and harassed Vietnamese seismic survey ships took place well within Vietnam¡¯s EEZ, not far from Vietnam¡¯s coastline (200 miles) from Spratly and Paracel archipelagos. These regions are not disputed ones. Vietnam has all legal rights to conduct economic activities in these regions inside its EEZ. China as a country which has signed and ratified UNCLOS must respect Vietnam¡¯s sovereignty.
Jun 14, 20119:43am EDT--
If China thinks they have all evidences to prove that Paracel and Spratly belong to China, then bring this dispute to international courts. Why China does not go for that? Because their so-called evidence is not truly evidence at all. China can say that Tibet and Inner Mongolia belonged to China a thousand years ago, but who can trust China?
Jun 14, 20119:49am EDT--
