Factbox: Republican White House contenders in 2012
2011-06-14 17:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Former Utah governor Jon Huntsman said on Tuesday he will announce his bid for the White House on June 21, bringing a moderate Republican and expert on China into the race to challenge President Barack Obama in 2012.
Romney, 64, who lost the nomination to John McCain in 2008, leads many polls of potential Republican candidates. He declared his 2012 candidacy in June after spending months creating a network of supporters and wealthy donors, particularly in early voting states including New Hampshire.
Romney has pushed his business experience as a way to attack Obama's stewardship of the U.S. economy. Romney has a personal fortune estimated in 2008 at $190 million to $250 million. Critics say he cut jobs as a corporate raider.
As a former moderate, Romney's more recently adopted conservative positions are regarded with suspicion by some Republicans, who accuse him of flip-flopping.
The Achilles' heel of his candidacy could be a healthcare plan he helped develop for Massachusetts, which bears striking parallels with the Obama healthcare overhaul that conservatives want repealed.
Romney has also broken with Republican orthodoxy by saying global warming is real and that greenhouse gas emissions need to be reduced, which prompted some conservative pundits to question his electability.
A Mormon, Romney might also struggle to win support from evangelical Christians.
He has since traveled campaign-style through New Hampshire, garnering approving media coverage, although a recent look by the University of New Hampshire's survey center showed Huntsman favored by only 1 percent of voters in the state, which has a February primary that can help a candidate build momentum.
Seventy-one percent of those surveyed had never heard of Huntsman, despite his campaigning in the state.
Like Romney, the 51-year-old Huntsman has roots in Utah and is a Mormon. A former governor of Utah, Huntsman is a moderate Republican, which may make it difficult for him to win over conservatives who play a large role in the nominating process, despite his being one of the few Republican hopefuls who worries Obama's re-election team.
Although Huntsman's name recognition across the United States is low, his biggest immediate hurdle is his service to the Obama administration, which the White House has tried to exploit by describing him as a supporter of Obama's policies.
Huntsman was absent from the first major Republican debate on Monday, where Romney was judged to have done well.
The 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee has major star power in the party and has made herself a millionaire with two books, the TV show "Sarah Palin's Alaska" and many speaking engagements.
A leading voice in the fiscally conservative Tea Party movement, the 47-year-old Palin enhanced her influence by campaigning for its candidates across the country in last year's congressional elections.
She remains vulnerable to public gaffes, most recently saying the legendary American patriot Paul Revere "warned the British" not to mess with the colonists. Revere's famous ride was to warn colonial militias that the British were coming.
