China warns outside nations to stay out of sea dispute
2011-06-15 05:32:00.0
(Reuters) - China opposes external powers weighing in on territorial disputes in the South China Sea, it said on Tuesday after Vietnam said other countries, including the United States, could help defuse tensions over the potentially resource-rich region
Vietnam outlined the terms of a possible military draft, a move that experts called a signal meant to show the country was prepared to defend its interests, but Beijing's warning appeared aimed at Washington, which urged a collective solution to the sea tensions last year.
"We hope that countries that are not parties to the South China Sea dispute truly respect the efforts of the countries concerned to resolve their disputes through consultation," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said.
China's main military newspaper was blunter.
"China resolutely opposes any country unrelated to the South China Sea issue meddling in disputes, and it opposes the internationalization of the South China Sea issue," said a commentary in the Liberation Army Daily.
China's statements coincided with naval exercises by Vietnam's military along its central coast, and followed a weekend statement by Hanoi welcoming efforts by the international community, including the United States, to help resolve the maritime disputes.
"The recent developments in the South China Sea were the result of unilateral actions by some countries that damaged China's sovereignty and maritime rights," spokesman Hong said.
Accusations of unlawful intrusions in the South China Sea are not uncommon between China, Vietnam and the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan, but this bout of tension has run longer than usual.
"Vietnam is speaking to two audiences," Carlyle Thayer, a Vietnam expert at the Australian Defence Force Academy, told Reuters. "It's speaking to a domestic audience where it is under pressure to be shown to be taking steps to deal with China. The other is to China."
China's latest comments were in response to those from a key U.S. Democratic lawmaker on Asia policy, Senator Jim Webb, who said on Monday he would introduce a resolution urging China to enter into multilateral talks on maritime territorial disputes with its neighbors.
Tension between China and the United States intensified last year after the Obama administration became embroiled in the South China Sea dispute by stressing Washington's support for a collective solution.
This year, Sino-U.S. relations have steadied, and Washington has so far been more muted about the issue. Beijing insists on handling the disputes on a one-on-one basis rather than multilaterally, a strategy some critics have described as "divide and conquer."
A Vietnamese military source confirmed the live-fire drills were under way. Vietnam's military newspaper accused China at the weekend of creating disputes "through provocative actions (and) hostilities aimed at its neighbors."
(Additional reporting by John Ruwitch in Hanoi; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Who the heck China thinks it is? Chinese navy is decades behind our U.S. Navy and now China is ¡°warning¡± us? China is claiming the whole South China Sea and if we let that happen, what¡¯s next? China is acting not too differently from the Somalian pirates nowaday. China must be contained!
Jun 15, 20116:37am EDT--
More similarities between CHINA and US than differences. Extreme thoughts. How about someone successfully playing the CHINA card against US, eliminating two birds with one throw? Everyone knows US-CHINA fight has only one winner in US. Everyone also knows that post US-CHINA fight, a direct one-to-one, is the surest way to US decline. Maybe Americans long figured this out long ago but did the Chinese? Proxies? Maximum damage can only be achieved by direct confrontation with no third parties in between. CHINA is bound to lose hence it is common sense to hope for CHINA to hit US as hard before she succumbs. Is CHINA willing to sacrifice her hard earn wealth? She can be blinded or swayed by her internal problems, US suffocation and her anxiety over her territorial integrity. The notion that US stands to lose more than CHINA may appeal and encourage. Its better to see US and CHINA working together than fighting one another. As the old saying goes better to deal with a familiar devil than an unknown one. Hope for peace!
Jun 15, 20118:03am EDT--
The US can¡¯t even win a war with Afghan and Iraq, where did you all get the confidence that China will be losing the fight? Because the US has superior arms and a warmonger attitude? Beliving yourself to be superior than others won¡¯t win you the war, it will only push you to the edge of self-destruction. These naive thoughts of better weaponary wins everything is simply striking in 21st Century.
Jun 15, 20118:37am EDT--
