Oil rises on lift from U.S., China data
2011-06-14 17:29:00.0
Oil rises on lift from U.S., China data | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Oil rises on lift from U.S., China data
Tue, Jun 14 2011
Mon, Jun 13 2011
A gasoline pump is seen hanging at a petrol station in central Seoul April 6, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Lee Jae-Won
Tue  EDT
China's industrial output in May beat market expectations with a 13.3 percent jump from a year earlier, though it slipped slightly from April. Inflation hit a 34-month high of 5.5 percent, but investors shrugged off another bank reserve hike by China's central bank.
While U.S. retail sales fell in May for the first time in 11 months, the slip was less than expected. Producer prices rose less than expected, braking sharply from April.
Brent outpaced its U.S. counterpart in early trading and pushed the discount to Brent to a record above $22 a barrel, before reversing. Sweet crude supply disruptions in Libya and Nigeria and tight North Sea cargo availabilities have helped keep Brent elevated.
Brent crude for July delivery rose $1.06 to settle at $120.16 a barrel, its highest close since May 4, the day before it sank more than $10 in an unprecedented correction.
U.S. July crude gained $2.07 to settle at $99.37 a barrel, rebounding from an early $96.51 low.
"There's a feeling that U.S. economic data will start to get better next month, and if you look at the retail sales data, if you take (out) autos, which were hit by the earthquake in Japan, they were actually up 0.3 percent," said Amrita Sen, oil analyst at Barclays Capital.
Adding to the positive sentiment in oil markets, the economic reports helped lift U.S. stocks more than 1 percent, drawing investors into an equities market that has had six straight weekly declines.
"Today's sharp price advance appeared heavily influenced by financial drivers that included a further weakening in the dollar and pop of almost 1-1/2 percent in the (Dow Industrials)," Jim Ritterbusch, president at Ritterbusch & Associates in Galena, Illinois, said in a note.
Lower retail gasoline prices attracted buyers in the United States, pushing demand up last week compared to the previous week and the year-ago period, according to a report from MasterCard.
CHINA'S OIL DEMAND
China's implied oil demand in May topped the 9 million barrel-per-day mark for the seventh consecutive month, taken as another signal that a tap on the economic brake by authorities had not hurt demand for petroleum.
But Reuters calculations based on preliminary government data did show that while May oil demand was up versus the year-ago period, the growth rate slowed to its lowest since October and demand slipped slightly from April.
Crude stocks were expected to have fallen 1.5 million barrels last week on reduced imports and more refinery use encouraged by healthy crack spreads, or profit margins, according to a Reuters survey of analysts.
A report from the industry group American Petroleum Institute is due at 4:30 p.m. EDT (2030 GMT), with the government's report to follow on Wednesday morning.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos in New York and Simon Falush and Barbara Lewis in London and Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; Editing by Dale Hudson, David Gregorio and Sofina Mirza-Reid)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°China, the world¡¯s second biggest energy consumer¡±??? Please spend some time reading BP¡¯s ¡°Statistical Review of World Energy 2011¡å before you proclaim such unsupported and unsupportable information about China, the world¡¯s biggest energy consumer.
Jun 14, 20117:40am EDT--
OH, LOOK, an $0.89 cent increase in oil price per barrel. Looks like gas will go up a BUCK OR TWO per gallon. Lord knows that 89 cents per 55 gallons (this amounts to a >1.5% increase in per barrel cost) will mean a 25% increase in retail price. Can¡¯t let those oil company execs miss their bonus checks. They might have to lay off the silver polisher or a chambermaid or two if they only make $40 million this year.
Jun 14, 201111:19am EDT--
When will our government take action against the speculators of a commodity whose pricing is vital to the economic well being of our country. When 70% of the oil trades at the CBOT are by speculators true supply and demand is out of the equation. A hand full of rich Wall Streeters are manipulating the price of oil for their own personal greed and at everyone else¡¯s expense. You want to create jobs in this country¡­get the speculators out of the market and let the price of oil and gasoline fall to where they really should be. With the extra money in hand all American¡¯s will have more to spend on goods and services. That¡¯s how jobs are created. Putting money in everyone¡¯s hand and not just the elite.
Jun 14, 201110:02pm EDT--
