China accuses Vietnam in escalating sea tensions
2011-06-09 23:15:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Wed, Jun 8 2011
Mon, Jun 6 2011
Sun, Jun 5 2011
Thu  EDT
The Chinese Foreign Ministry issued the condemnation of Vietnam late on Thursday after Hanoi accused China of harassing a ship doing seismic surveys in the South China Sea, contested by several nations.
China has quarreled with both Vietnam and the Philippines in recent weeks over festering maritime disputes and, though a military clash seems unlikely, the tensions could trouble regional diplomacy and possibly draw in the United States, which took up the South China Sea dispute last year.
Those tensions have been magnified by region-wide nervousness about China's naval modernization.
"The Vietnamese ship put the lives and safety of the Chinese fishermen in serious danger," Hong said in a statement on the ministry website (www.mfa.gov.cn).
He accused Vietnam of violating China's claim on the Spratly archipelago and nearby seas, which Vietnam also deems its own. China calls the islands the Nansha group.
"It must be pointed out that by conducting unlawful oil and gas surveys in seas around the Wan'an Bank of the Spratly archipelago and by driving out a Chinese fishing vessel, Vietnam has gravely violated China's sovereignty and maritime rights," said Hong.
"China demands that Vietnam cease all violations," he said, adding that Vietnam should "not take actions that would complicate and expand the dispute."
China, the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan all claim territory in the South China Sea, parts of which could hold deposits of oil and gas.
China's claim is by far the largest, forming a vast U-shape over most of the sea's 648,000 square miles (1.7 million square km), including the Spratly and Paracel archipelagos.
Beijing said on Thursday that it would hold naval drills in late June in the western Pacific Ocean, and the Chinese navy has done little to disguise plans to launch its first aircraft carrier, the first step toward building an operating carrier group.
"Putting it plainly, some people want to contain China's rise and are trying to turn the Chinese dragon into the Chinese bug," Major General Luo Yuan, who often publishes rousing comments on China's military plans, wrote in the Global Times.
RIVAL CLAIMS, RIVAL ACCOUNTS
The United States, the dominant military power in the Pacific, became embroiled in the sea tensions with China last year after the Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stressed Washington's support for a collective regional solution to the mosaic of territorial disputes in the South China Sea.
Beijing favors dealing with each dispute separately with the other countries making territorial claims, and is wary of Washington becoming involved in the issue.
On Thursday, Vietnam said China had harassed its survey ship in the second such incident in two weeks, and it gave a very different account of the latest incident.
A Chinese fishing boat used a "cable cutting device" which became trapped in underwater cables used by a ship hired by Vietnam, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry said. The ship was operating over Vietnam's continental shelf and within its exclusive economic zone off the southern coast, it said.
Two Chinese ships then came to help the Chinese fishing vessel, she said, calling the incident part of a campaign of systematic and intentional violations by China.
Manila has accused China of intrusions into its territory, citing six instances, including one in March when two Chinese patrol boats tried to ram a survey ship.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China should stop its bullying actions against its neighbors, especially against Vietnam. Of all the countries in the world, Vietnam is the one that would not sit still to watch its sovereignty violated. The Vietnamese people will never forget the battles their forefathers fought against Chinese aggression throughout Vietnam¡¯s history.
China should stop its bullying actions against its neighbors, especially against Vietnam. Of all the countries in the world, Vietnam is the one that would not sit still to watch its sovereignty violated. The Vietnamese people will never forget the battles their forefathers fought against Chinese aggression throughout Vietnam¡¯s history.
Stay out of Vietnamese waters, China! You are WARNED!
Jun 09, 20118:40pm EDT--
I am also a reporter. When I read this report, I felt Reuters¡¯s reporters are little bit biased because they put too much emphasis on Chinese side. I think maybe the news authors didn¡¯t really understand what is happening now in South China Sea, and then they just reported what people said without critical thinking.
I am also a reporter. When I read this report, I felt Reuters¡¯s reporters are little bit biased because they put too much emphasis on Chinese side. I think maybe the news authors didn¡¯t really understand what is happening now in South China Sea, and then they just reported what people said without critical thinking.
Indeed, if one carefully looks at the Vietnamese sea map, he/she will definitely know that the Viking II and Binh Minh II were operating in Vietnamese territories only. Therefore should we believe that the Vietnamese violated Chinese sovereignty when the two ships never came to Chinese territories? So, I suggest Reuters¡¯ reporters should be more critical. Don¡¯t be too na?ve!
Jun 10, 20116:32am EDT--
