Russia, China snub U.N. council talks on Syria: envoys
2011-06-11 18:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia and China snubbed U.N. Security Council talks on Saturday convened to discuss a draft resolution that would condemn Syria's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy protesters, U.N. diplomats said.
"Russia and China didn't think it necessary to show up," a council diplomat told Reuters on condition of anonymity. "It's a pretty clear message," another diplomat said.
The European drafters of the resolution convened Saturday's talks in the hope they could break their deadlock on a draft resolution that would not impose sanctions on Syria but would condemn it for the crackdown and suggest Syrian security forces might be guilty of crimes against humanity.
Diplomats said the latest meeting produced no changes among the 13 Security Council members that attended. Currently, nine members, including the draft's sponsors, Britain, France, Germany and Portugal, plan to vote for it.
Russia and China dislike the idea of any council discussion of Syria and have suggested they might use their veto power to kill the resolution. Lebanon, India, Brazil and South Africa have also said they have problems with the text.
"The Syrians are firing into the crowds and they (Russia and China) don't care," a Western diplomat told Reuters, requesting anonymity.
Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moualem told Ban and the Security Council in a letter obtained by Reuters on Friday that if the council approved the European draft resolution, it would only embolden "extremists and terrorists.
Envoys said the latest draft, submitted to the council on Wednesday by Britain, France, Germany and Portugal, could be put to a vote next week.
Western envoys said they were especially frustrated with the positions of Brazil, India and South Africa, which are considering abstaining from the vote.
"We're trying to explain to them that abstaining on this issue means siding with Russia and China -- and Syria," one diplomat said.
The diplomat added that if Brazil, India and South Africa voted for the resolution, the Russians and Chinese might consider abstaining instead of vetoing the resolution.
Given Lebanon's complicated ties to its neighbor Syria, diplomats said they expected it to vote against the draft.
Resolutions need nine votes in favor and no vetoes from the five permanent council members -- Britain, China, France, Russia and the United States -- in order to pass.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Help Turkey carve a safe haven for fleeing Syrians in Syria¡¯s north (Turkey is already talking about this), and make it a basis for Syria¡¯s democratic opposition to form an interim government and organize themselves to fight to liberate their country from the regime. The interim government could draw support (political, financial, and military) from sympathetic Arab countries like Qatar, Egypt, Jordan, and soon Libya. No need for NATO to intervene, the weak Syrian army is very divided and Turkey alone will be enough to keep it in check. Liberated, Syria will be modeled along the Turkish example, possibly conservative, but liberal and democratic, pro-Western and anti-Iranian. A democratically representative government is the only guarantee for stability and peace in the region.
Jun 11, 20117:48pm EDT--
I can see why China would be an abstain vote (since they like to fire into crowds themselves), but why Russia? I thought they were actually trying to clean up their image and boost their ties to the West¡­ Russia is fighting Muslims all over their southern frontier; to ignore having a voice in ending govts that sponsor extremism is beyond me.
Jun 11, 20117:58pm EDT--
The reason china doesn¡¯t want to talk about the mass killings of innocent (and unarmed) protesters, is because china is guilty of the exact same thing. Birds of a feather flock together!!!
Jun 11, 201111:02pm EDT--
