Speed bumps ahead for BYD's China share sale
2011-06-14 12:40:00.0
Speed bumps ahead for BYD's China share sale | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Speed bumps ahead for BYD's China share sale
Mon, Jun 13 2011
Sun, Jun 12 2011
Fri, Jun 10 2011
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Tue, Jun 7 2011
BYD Motors, Inc. General Manager Fred Ni talks about the BYD e6 all-electric vehicle at the North American International Auto Show in Cobo Center in Detroit, Michigan January 12, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Rebecca Cook
Tue  EDT
) faces stiff headwinds raising the $330 million it seeks from its China share sale, with weakened markets and the battery and electric vehicle company's recent poor performance scaring off investors.
Some nine fund managers and industry analysts surveyed by Reuters said they would want to see BYD's Shenzhen share offer priced at a discount to its Hong Kong-listed shares before they would considering subscribing.
"It's going to be very difficult for them to get the price they want," said Pan Jiang, a Shanghai-based fund manager at Franklin Templeton Sealand Fund Management.
"Stock market sentiment is very weak right now, and we're not looking at this share because we are not too positive on industries such as electric vehicles."
China's benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
is hovering around its lowest levels this year, battered by fears of a possible economic slowdown in the latter part of 2011 as bank lending slows.
In line with Chinese IPO practice, the company and its underwriter UBS Securities, the Swiss bank's joint venture in China, have not set a price range for the Shenzhen share sale and are currently on the road seeking feedback on a price investors are willing to pay.
Some institutional investors have balked at the asking price, pointing to the firm's sluggish sales in recent months and the potential downside risk in BYD's foray into electric vehicles and car batteries.
"Earnings from electric cars and buses will take some time to realize," said Victoria Mio, who manages about 600 million euros at the Robeco Chinese Equities Fund. "The automobile sector is especially weak now, and there is still some downside risk."
BYD plans to use the stock proceeds to fund its lithium ion project, add to research and development and expand its product range.
The company has seen its auto sales fallen steadily since the second half of 2010. Its May sales slid 9 percent to about 41,000 cars.
Its shares have also been in downward spiral, with its Hong Kong-listed stock tumbling more than 60 percent in the past year, compared with a more than 8 percent gain in the benchmark Hang Seng Index
BYD's performance is also weaker than other Chinese carmakers listed in Hong Kong. For example, Great Wall Motor (
BYD last traded at HK$23.20 on Tuesday, up 3.1 percent on the day.
BYD's Hong Kong-listed shares, which were trading at over 17 times historical earnings on Monday, are still priced at a significant premium to its peers on the mainland which typically trade at below 10 times earnings.
For example, top Chinese automaker SAIC Motor Corp (
) closed at about 9.5 times earnings on Monday, while Great Wall Motor closed at about 8.5 times earnings on the same day.
"The Chinese auto market is very different now from 2009 or 2010 when sales kept hitting new records," said Liu Lixi, an analyst with Northeast Securities.
), one of the country's top auto dealers, plunged 23 percent on its Shanghai debut in late April on concerns of slowing auto sales and stock market volatility.
To avoid falling below its IPO price on its opening day like Pangda Auto, BYD should set its price at between 15-25 yuan, many of those polled said, pointing to total proceeds of 1.2-2 billion yuan.
"It's obviously not a good time to go public now unless a company needs money urgently, and BYD seems to fit into that category," said Liu at Northeast Securities.
Despite all the seeming pessimism, BYD, which stands for "Build Your Dreams," still has its Buffett trump card that has said it is ready to stand by one of its most prolific Chinese investments.
Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (
) is happy with its investment in BYD and still considers the company a good investment despite the company's recent problems.
It owns about 10 percent of the Chinese carmaker, which it bought in September 2008 for $230 million, or about HK$8 per share.
"I'm quite encouraged by what's going on, and I expect delays and glitches," Berkshire's Vice Chairman Charlie Munger said in late April, adding that such growing pains were natural given BYD's aggressive growth plans.
