Clinton warns against new colonialism in Africa
2011-06-11 13:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Africa must beware of "new colonialism" as China expands ties there and focus instead on partners able to help build productive capacity on the continent, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said.
Clinton, asked in a television interview in Zambia on Saturday about China's rising influence on the continent, said Africans should be wary of friends who only deal with elites.
"We don't want to see a new colonialism in Africa," Clinton said in a television interview in Lusaka, the first stop on a five-day Africa tour.
"When people come to Africa to make investments, we want them to do well but also want them to do good," she said. "We don't want them to undermine good governance in Africa."
Clinton, appearing on the "Africa 360" program, called for long term "sustainable" investment that would benefit Africa.
"We saw that during colonial times it is easy to come in, take out natural resources, pay off leaders and leave," she said.
"The United States is investing in the people of Zambia, not just the elites, and we are investing for the long run."
African states, she said, could learn much from Asia on how governments can help support economic growth but said she did not see Beijing as a political role model.
"We are beginning to see a lot of problems" in China that will intensify over the next 10 years, she said, pointing to friction over Chinese efforts to control the Internet as one example. "There are more lessons to learn from the United States and democracies," Clinton said.
Her trip, which also takes her to Tanzania and Ethiopia, is meant to highlight the Obama administration's drive to help African countries meet challenges ranging from HIV/AIDS to food security and speed up often impressive economic growth.
(Reporting by Andrew Quinn; editing by Mark Heinrich)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Oh! The Irony! what about the colonialism that is still in place?
Oh! The Irony! what about the colonialism that is still in place?
such as the French? look at all the French-like flags in Africa its sickening. oh and there is African you should be aware of USA¡¯s Africom a strange organisation, Google it¡­ No doubt China want to do trade in Africa and who shoudnt its in the best interest for africans to have competition to their resources so that they can have some breathing space ¡­ its not as if the west only 100 years was anything to be remembered unless in a negative way.
Jun 11, 20117:16am EDT--
¡°We don¡¯t want them to undermine good governance in Africa.¡±
¡°We don¡¯t want them to undermine good governance in Africa.¡±
Jun 11, 20117:21am EDT--
Mrs Clinton speaks a lot but the US does nothing to help the African countries in their development. China, on the other hand, does not speak as much but has constructed a number of roads, railways, buildings that contribute to the development of the African countries. It has increased trade with Africa and contribute to the economic growth of the African countries. China is not taking the resources of the African countries for free but is paying for them. The only thing that the US has done to the African continent over the last year is to bomb Libya and destroy its infrastructures.
Jun 11, 20118:12am EDT--
