Six powers push defiant Iran to address nuclear fears
2011-06-09 15:06:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad checks his notes during a news conference in Tehran June 7, 2011. No offer from world powers could persuade Iran to stop enriching uranium, President Ahmadinejad said on Tuesday. Credit: Reuters/Caren Firouz
Thu  EDT
The United States, Germany, France, Britain, Russia and China issued the statement a day after Iran said it would triple production of high-grade uranium and shift it to an underground bunker which would be protected from possible U.S. or Israeli air strikes.
"We call on Iran to cooperate fully with the agency," said a joint statement by the six powers at a closed-door session of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna.
"Outstanding issues need to be resolved in order to exclude the existence of possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear program." It did not mention Iran's plan to expand enrichment.
Washington's envoy said separately that Iran's plan to speed up enrichment with a more advanced model of centrifuge machines in a mountain bunker showed its "brazen" and deepening defiance of international demands to curb the activity.
Iran's refusal to halt enrichment has led to four rounds of U.N. sanctions on the major oil producer, as well tighter U.S. and European Union restrictions on top.
World powers have also offered Tehran trade incentives to give up enrichment, but President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said on Tuesday no inducement could persuade Iran to stop. U.S. President Barack Obama said further sanctions were likely.
Iran's IAEA representative hit back at a tense board meeting of the U.N. nuclear watchdog, vowing to resist Western pressure.
The Japanese IAEA chief has taken a blunter approach to Iran than his predecessor Mohamed ElBaradei, saying in his first report on the country early last year that he feared it may be working to develop a nuclear-armed missile.
"He is not doing his job. Instead, with his reports, he is paving the way for more confrontation between member states," Soltanieh told reporters.
But the six powers united to throw their weight behind Amano, who last month asked Tehran to provide access to sites and officials to help answer the agency's queries.
The United States and Israel, Iran's arch-adversaries, have not ruled out military action to knock out Iranian nuclear assets if diplomacy fails to resolve the eight-year-old dispute.
(Additional reporting by Zahra Hosseinian; Editing by Jon Hemming)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
President obama, please teach these brazen iranians a lesson and bomb¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­¡­libya
Jun 09, 20119:23am EDT--
I¡¯m convinced most Iranians don¡¯t support their dictators! Time for change people-the majority should rule! When the minority rules, it almost always gets ugly-real ugly! See history if ya doubt!Live in a vacum if you like, but no fair attacking others because it¡¯s part of your essential doctrine/religion!
Jun 09, 201111:58am EDT--
