China warns U.S. debt-default idea is playing with fire
2011-06-08 14:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Republican lawmakers are "playing with fire" by contemplating even a brief debt default as a means to force deeper government spending cuts, an adviser to China's central bank said on Wednesday.
The idea of a technical default -- essentially delaying interest payments for a few days -- has gained backing from a growing number of mainstream Republicans who see it as a price worth paying if it forces the White House to slash spending, Reuters reported on Tuesday.
But any form of default could destabilize the global economy and sour already tense relations with big U.S. creditors such as China, government officials and investors warn.
Li Daokui, an adviser to the People's Bank of China, said a default could undermine the U.S. dollar, and Beijing needed to dissuade Washington from pursuing this course of action.
"I think there is a risk that the U.S. debt default may happen," Li told reporters on the sidelines of a forum in Beijing. "The result will be very serious and I really hope that they would stop playing with fire."
China is the largest foreign creditor to the United States, holding more than $1 trillion in Treasury debt as of March, U.S. data shows, so its concerns carry considerable weight in Washington.
"I really worry about the risks of a U.S. debt default, which I think may lead to a decline in the dollar's value," Li said.
If the United States cannot make interest payments on its debt, the Obama administration has warned of "catastrophic" consequences that could push the still-fragile economy back into recession.
"It has dire implications for the economy at a time when the macro data is softening," said Ben Westmore, a commodities economist at National Australia Bank.
"It's just a horrible idea," he said.
U.S. Treasury prices were firm in Europe on Wednesday, supported by a flight to their perceived safety on the back of the Greek debt crisis and worries about a slowdown in U.S. economic growth.
Marc Ostwald, a strategist with Monument Securities in London, said markets were working on the assumption that the U.S. debt story "will go away." But nervousness would grow if a resolution was not reached in the next five to six weeks.
'WOULDN'T HAPPEN'
The Republicans' theory is that bondholders would accept a brief delay in interest payments if it meant Washington finally addressed its long-term fiscal problems, putting the country in a stronger position to meet its debt obligations later on.
"How can the U.S. be allowed to default?" said an official at India's central bank. "We don't think this is a possibility because this could then create huge panic globally."
Indian officials say they have little choice but to buy U.S. Treasury debt because it is still among the world's safest and most liquid investments. It held $39.8 billion in U.S. Treasuries as of March, U.S. data shows.
"Our economies are substantially tied up with the U.S. financial developments," said a senior central bank official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"It just wouldn't happen," said Barry Evans, who oversees $83 billion in fixed income assets at Manulife Asset Management. "They would pay their Treasury bills first instead of other bills. It's as simple as that."
Monument's Ostwald called the default scenario "frightening" and said bondholders' patience would wear thin if lawmakers persisted in pitching this strategy in the coming weeks.
"This isn't a debate, this is like a Mexican standoff and that is where the problem lies," he said.
Yuan Gangming, a researcher with the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a government think tank, smelled some political wrangling behind the U.S. debt debate as the 2012 presidential election draws nearer and said Republicans "want to make things difficult for Obama."
But with time running short before the U.S. Treasury exhausts its borrowing room, Yuan said default was a real risk.
"The possibility is quite high to see a default of the U.S. debt, which would harm many countries in the world, and China in particular," he said.
(Reporting by Kevin Lim and Jong Woo Cheon in Singapore, Suvashree Dey Choudhury in Mumbai, Aileen Wang and Kevin Yao in Beijing, Abhijit Neogy in Delhi, Marius Zaharia in London and Umesh Desai in Hong Kong; Editing by Dean Yates and Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Defaulting could be more than catastrophic for America; it could be the end of the nation¡¯s financial power. If the dollar becomes burdened with a credit default, other nations may start using other currencies as the default trade currency; the Euro is already well poised to take over that role. With no trade strength to it, and nothing of real value to back it up (thanks to Nixon for ending the Gold Standard, and putting the US in the position for this disaster), Americans can find that their money is considered no good for paying the interest on its debt, and the crisis quickly snowballs. Soon, America¡¯s creditor nations, like China, are carving up pieces of America itself to pay the US¡¯s debt to them. So, Teabaggers; do you fancy getting paid a pittance in Yuan and Fen for your 14 hour-a-day jobs? If not, then stop this Default nonsense. You¡¯re playing risky, childish games with your country¡¯s future. Obama has only increased spending by 16%; that¡¯s nothing compared to the 115% that Bush increased the spending. Now is not the time to worry about debt. Now is the time to take care of the people who are out of work, and securing the things that matter, like infrastructure and healthcare.
Jun 08, 20114:47am EDT--
A sovereign default never happened in past U.S. presidencies. A bank default even if brief would cause a bank run. Americans got used to suffer from domestic default, but certainly not China or Japan holding the lion¡¯s share of U.S. debt.
Jun 08, 20115:20am EDT--
Back in a recession? Lmfao! Wheres the transparancy Obama? We are in a depression and the gov can continue to bolster the numbers behind the scenes but there is no stopping this revelation to all in short time (no matter how many media outlets spit your crafted propoganda). It requires 290,000 new jobs a month to keep up with the current pace of new job market entries to keep employment rates from moving in any direction. 291,000 is 1,000 new jobs, 90,000 is -200,000 job loss. The unemployment rate published by the White House also neglects to count all workable unemployed who have exhausted their unemployment benefits and are no longer elgible. So as the depression continues, those exhausting their benefits are reported as a decrease in unemployment rolls and those numbers are then swept under the table in overall actual unemployed counts. Taken into account, CA has a 20% unemployment rate and a 10% unemployment benefits claims rate; National unemployment is rate is 17% with a 9.8% unemployment benefits claim rate. And now is not the time to mull over health care, seriously. Living in this country has awarded everyone here the opportunity to get a job with health care. Discrimination, overcrowed urban schools, language barrier, slavery, etc¡­ all excuses for laziness. The US needs to get back to basics and take responsibility for its debt. This is childlike behavior, not that of the greatest nation in the history of the world. Sadly, a forced default may be the pinch or ear grab needed to get our attention and shape up. The US dollar will remain the monetary peg so long as we have the most advanced weapons and most powerful military on Earth. What else do you think is actually backing the US dollar? Gold? Future GNP of lazy Americans? Hah!
Jun 08, 20116:16am EDT--
