Clinton, in Africa, highlights U.S. partnership
2011-06-10 11:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Secretary of State Hillary Clinton promoted the benefits of U.S. economic partnership for Africa on Friday, hoping to press the U.S. message on a continent where China is building strong aid and investment ties.
Clinton arrived in Zambia to begin a five-day Africa trip that will also take her to Tanzania and Ethiopia to highlight the Obama administration's drive to help African countries meet challenges ranging from HIV/AIDS to food security and accelerate often impressive economic growth.
"Today, Africa is in a strong position to build on this progress," Clinton said in a speech in Lusaka, noting that Africa is now "the home of 'emerging' emerging markets."
But she said both Africa and the United States must work to broaden and deepen economic ties that were still dominated by Africa's oil wealth and failing to benefit the poorest.
"The most common export of all is a still a barrel of oil," Clinton said.
Clinton's trip has been overshadowed by news that she has been in discussions with the White House about moving on next year to become the first female head of the World Bank, which could cast her as a lame duck at a time of huge diplomatic challenges for the United States.
Both the White House and the State Department have denied the news, which was reported exclusively by Reuters on Thursday citing three sources familiar with the discussions. Told of the official denials, the sources said the story remained accurate.
In Lusaka, Clinton grooved with an ululating chorus of African businesswomen who have benefited from U.S. help at a meeting on AGOA, the U.S. program signed into law by her husband, former President Bill Clinton, in 2000 to give trade preferences for some 37 eligible African countries.
U.S. PARTNERSHIP - OR CHINESE AID?
Clinton's second visit to Africa as the top U.S. diplomat is aimed at selling the benefits of American partnership for a continent where China is a ravenous customer for raw materials and a source of aid unencumbered by Western demands for democracy or transparency.
With the United States, Clinton said, African countries get partnership, not patronage.
"The most successful development program is one that will someday make itself unnecessary," Clinton said, describing a range of U.S. programs aimed at strengthening governance and accountability and supporting grassroots economic growth.
Other countries, Clinton said, may successfully sign a deal or construct a building, but do not "leave anything sustainable behind other than perhaps a physical structure."
"Africa does not lack in physical structures," Clinton said. "Africa lacks in connections between countries."
To get there, she said Africa's leaders still needed to deliver on promises to cut local trade barriers, streamline regulation and expand opportunities, particularly for women.
U.S. officials want Congress to extend AGOA when it expires in 2015, but say it is time to take a hard look at ways to address nagging bureaucratic and infrastructure problems, widespread corruption and often lopsided trade.
More than 10 years into AGOA, U.S. trade with sub-Saharan Africa remains small, accounting for just over 1 percent of total U.S. exports and about only 3 percent of U.S. imports.
Oil from countries such as Nigeria and Angola accounted for 91 percent of the $44 billion in U.S. imports from AGOA countries in 2010, raising questions about how U.S. trade benefits can be used to encourage more diversification.
