No property bubble in China, but hotels at risk: U.S. developer
2011-06-07 04:47:00.0
(Reuters) - China's exuberant property market will not collapse as prices are supported by brisk economic growth although there could be a bubble in the hotel sector, a U.S. property developer said.
Ambrish Baisiwala, chief executive of Portman Holdings, said he is bullish on China's commercial and residential properties
even though some investors believe there is a real estate bubble in the world's second-largest economy.
Baisiwala, who helped develop more than $30 billion worth of properties at struggling Abu Dhabi developer Aldar Properties ALDR.AD before joining Portman in 2006, said the U.S. firm would like to expand in China.
"Overall, we don't see a bubble in China. But there are of course pockets of assets across specific cities where there may be an oversupply," he said. "We very much intend to quicken our pace in China."
The company is now looking at China's top cities such as Beijing and Shanghai as well as secondary cities including Xi'an, Wuhan and Nanjing.
He did not say if Portman would expand in China organically or through acquisitions, and declined to give further details.
Portman's China ambitions underline the difficulties Beijing faces in cooling the red-hot property market, where months of official clampdown has not dampened the mood among investors and developers, as seen at a real estate conference last week.
Baisiwala said there appears to be a bubble in China's hotel industry because authorities were exacerbating an oversupply in the sector by encouraging developers to build even more. That has caused investment returns to drop, he said.
Beijing built hundreds of hotels in the run-up to the 2008 Olympics. Other cities such as Shenzhen and Guangzhou, which hosted the Asian Games last year, have also made a big push in their hospitality industries.
The overall fast growth in the property market has generated some waste, Baisiwala said. Some new residential and commercial buildings have to be re-designed, re-renovated, or sold at discounted prices due to poor planning or shoddy construction.
Portman, which has been in China since 1978, designs, constructs and manages an array of buildings including residential and commercial blocks and hotels.
It has only invested in two projects with its own money: the Shanghai Center which opened in 1989 and the Portman House, a historical redevelopment of Shanghai's old French quarter, which will be completed in a few months.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
No bubble? hahahahahahahah! and were does this person get their economic data? hahahahahahahahahahahah! want to expand in Beijing and Shanghai? are you kidding? Property is at least 300% over valued in Beijing and Shanghai! The only people who can afford to buy houses there are the same creep developers! In Beijing and Shanghai you either own at least 20 apartments or you rent! Secondary markets like Xian are a little bit better off, the average owner has 3 or 4 apartments. Just try walking around any of these cities during dinner time on your average Monday evening. I¡¯ve done this in all of them. You will be lucky if a property development built after 2000 has lights on in more than 10% of the apartments, which is a good indicator that the homes are investments and are not and never have been used!!!!!!!!!! We are talking about hundreds of millions of apartments that are empty!!!!!!!!!!!! And I¡¯m sure this Ambrish Baisiwala person thinks there is still room to develop housing for nonexistent people in Dubai too!!!!!!!!!!1 hahahahaahahah
Jun 07, 20119:36pm EDT--
