China should set up fund to intervene on yuan: central banker
2011-06-12 22:13:00.0
(Reuters) - China should set up a new fund to carry out currency intervention for the central bank to keep the yuan stable while limiting the inflationary effect of dollar-buying, a senior central bank official said in remarks published on Monday.
Xu Nuojin, the deputy head of People's Bank of China Guangzhou branch, told the official Financial News that China should speed up yuan reforms to "eliminate appreciation expectations" and rein in hot money inflows.
"When there are big changes in market demand and supply that lead to big swings in the yuan exchange rate, the central bank can use the fund to buy and sell to adjust demand and supply so that the exchange rate can move in a targeted range," he said.
That will cut the link between the rise in foreign exchange reserves and yuan issuance by the central bank -- the source of excessive liquidity in the economy, Xu said without elaborating.
To keep the yuan exchange rate largely stable, the central bank China has to buy almost all foreign currency inflows from commercial banks, injecting huge amounts of yuan into the banking system.
To counter the inflationary effect of such money inflows, the central bank then soaks up the excess yuan in the system via open-market operations and higher bank reserve requirements.
Xu said China invests part of its $3 trillion foreign exchange reserves in strategic resources, including energy and minerals, to help diversity the holdings away from the dollar.
"China should use part of its foreign exchange reserves to buy energy and important mineral resources that have strategic importance," he said.
The strategic resources could help ease the bottleneck facing China's long-term economic development, Xu added.
China's foreign exchange reserves surged to $3.05 trillion at the end of March, heightening worries about how China can effectively manage the holdings and not become overly exposed to the U.S. dollar.
Analysts estimate that at least 70 percent of the reserves is invested in U.S. government debt and other dollar assets, although the exact composition is a state secret.
Xu warned that China's inflation could become entrenched as price rises are still driven by too much cash in the economy, driven by capital inflows.
"The current inflation level is achieved through the forceful policy intervention by the government, an all-around rebound is very likely to occur once such administrative measures are relaxed," he said.
China's annual inflation is expected to have edged up to 5.4 percent in May from 5.3 percent in April and match a 32-month high seen in March.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Kevin Yao; Editing by Ken Wills)
