Vietnam allows second anti-China protest in Hanoi
2011-06-12 13:50:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, Jun 12 2011
Sat, Jun 11 2011
Sat, Jun 11 2011
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Thu, Jun 9 2011
Sun, Jun 12 2011
Art director Do Minh Tuan (L), writer Pham Xuan Nguyen (2nd R) march with anti-China protesters during a demonstration in Hanoi June 12, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Kham
Sun  EDT
In a park in front of the Chinese Embassy the demonstrators waved flags, sang patriotic songs and chanted "Down with China!" and "The Spratlys and Paracels belong to Vietnam," referring to archipelagos in the South China Sea.
Police told them to leave after about 20 minutes but let them march around Hoan Kiem Lake in the heart of town, where some onlookers voiced support and a handful joined the protest.
China and Vietnam have tussled in recent weeks over long-standing maritime disputes in the South China Sea and, though a military clash seems unlikely, the tensions could trouble regional diplomacy and possibly draw in the United States, which took up the South China Sea dispute last year.
Last Sunday rare street demonstrations took place in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City after the government lodged a protest with China when it said Chinese vessels damaged equipment in use by a Vietnamese survey ship within Vietnam's 200 nautical mile exclusive maritime economic zone.
The Vietnamese government said a similar incident at sea took place on Thursday, blaming China for violating its sovereignty. China has lobbed similar propaganda salvos at Vietnam since the end of May, accusing Hanoi for raising tensions in the region.
The South China Sea is crossed by key shipping lanes and believed to hold potentially large oil and gas reserves. The Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan also have claims to parts of the sea's 648,000 square miles (1.7 million sq km).
"We Vietnamese are willing to sacrifice everything and do anything within our power to protect our sacred territorial water and land. We urge China to stop slandering us," said Hanoian Pham Viet Cuong.
"We were here last week, we're here this week and we'll be here for many weeks to come if they continue violating our country," said Nguyen Quang Thach, who was wearing a red shirt with the yellow star of a Vietnamese flag.
Whether or not the authorities will allow the demonstrations to continue has yet to be seen, but the government is unlikely to allow them to snowball, barring perhaps a particularly egregious act by China.
(Additional reporting by Reuters TV; Editing by Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China should stop expansionism, obey international law, respect sovereignty of other states. China and its citizens must respect exclusive economic zones of other states (within 200 miles from the baseline). China is a big country, but if China wants to earn respect from the world, it should behave as a civilized nation. China says peace, but at the same time it uses all means to violate sovereignty of other states. They have used the jungle laws to expand its territory. Tibet, Inner Mongolia are now theirs. The world should unite to stop China¡¯s expansionism.
Jun 13, 20112:04pm EDT--
