Analysis: China funds knock on foreign doors in search of growth
2011-06-03 06:01:00.0
(Reuters) - China's money managers are stepping up overseas forays to win a piece of the business now dominated by giants such as Fidelity Investments and BlackRock (
E Fund Management Co last month became China's first mutual fund house to launch a global emerging market fund, while China Southern Fund Management Co launched an offshore yuan bond fund in March that it hoped will outperform products from rivals such as UBS (
), BNP Paribas (
"We want to be truly international. We want to fight and compete with the global powerhouses," said Charles Wang, CEO of E Fund's Hong Kong unit. "Asia is growing, China is growing, I think the sky is the limit."
Forty new products were launched during the first quarter in China, underscoring intensified competition as fund managers wooed investors amid a sluggish stock market. Despite the new launches, the local fund industry's assets shrank by nearly 100 billion yuan during the period.
And the nation's 12-year-old mutual fund industry is far from being international. Only a dozen of the 60-plus fund houses have set up overseas shops -- nearly all of them in neighboring Hong Kong -- and the oldest subsidiary has an operating history of less than three years.
Currently, there are 184 Greater China funds collectively managing about $30 billion, according to Thomson Reuters Lipper data, but nearly all of them are managed by foreign financial firms such as Fidelity, UBS and BNP Paribas.
Even in Asia, only a few, such as Japan's Nomura Asset and South Korea's Mirae Asset, have managed to build a sizeable presence outside their home turfs to give some measure of competition to western giants, most of whom come from the $12.8 trillion funds industry in the United States.
GROWING THROUGH POACHING, BUYING
But with the mainland's global clout rising following the financial crisis, Chinese fund managers are more confident of venturing overseas and are initially targeting foreign money seeking China exposure. Within the Greater China asset class, the market share of mainland managers is expected to rise to 35-40 percent by 2020 from 3-5 percent now, said Min Tha Gyaw, director of Shanghai-based fund consultancy Z-Ben Advisors. "This would certainly put them neck-to-neck with the biggest names in investment management," he said.
To quickly build branding and performance track records in a bid to compete with products from fund gurus such as Franklin Templeton's Mark Mobius or Fidelity's Anthony Bolton, some deep-pocketed Chinese asset managers are poaching global talents or building investment capability through acquisitions.
For example, Wang was hired by E Fund, China's No.3 fund house, to spearhead its global expansion, after running one of the world's best-performing global emerging market funds between 2000 and 2009 at Boston-based Acadian Asset Management Co. Wang's six-member team in Hong Kong includes Peng Fei, former portfolio manager at Boston-based SSgA, Joana Gratale, former fund manager at Nikko Asset Management, and Joseph Zhang, vice president at PIMCO. "What does it takes to be a global player? ... You need to have talent, you need to have first-tier talent," said Wang, who managed $12 billion at Acadian. "I used to do well in the emerging markets ... that's the credibility we bring on over here to Hong Kong, to China."
Rival Harvest Fund Management, China's No.2 fund house, has taken a different tack toward global expansion. In 2009, the firm acquired the Hong Kong operations of its foreign partner Deutsche Asset management.
COUNTING ON YUAN PRODUCTS In contrast, some China fund managers have chosen to play to their own strengths in the Chinese-currency space, avoiding head-to-head competition with foreign rivals in hard-currency products. Doris Lian, CEO of Da Cheng Asset's Hong Kong unit, said that Beijing's drive to build Hong Kong into an offshore yuan center, and the planned mini-QFII scheme that would allow Chinese asset managers to raise offshore yuan for domestic investment, represent the most realistic opportunity. "In the international market, Chinese asset managers face tough challenges including little brand recognition, a different set of game rules and limited sales networks," Lian said. "But when it comes to the offshore yuan products, Chinese asset managers are in a more advantageous position," she said, hoping that the mini-QFII program, if launched, would help boost Da Cheng's overseas business ten-fold to $1.3 billion in five years. China Southern is also counting on yuan products to beat foreign peers, having launched in Hong Kong a yuan-denominated bond fund in that invests in high-yield debt. "In running yuan funds, I think we have an advantage over foreign players," said Wang Jin, managing director of CSOP Asset Management, the Hong Kong venture of China Southern Fund Management. "At least we're more familiar with those Chinese bond issuers." Perhaps the least aggressive -- but nevertheless effective -- overseas expansion strategy is the one adopted by China AMC, the country's biggest asset manager. Instead of competing with foreign asset managers, China AMC provides sub-advisory services to institutions such as Citigroup (
), helping them to invest in Chinese stocks under the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) scheme. "Chinese firms are positioned differently and their goals are different too. I would say ... a few of them will eventually emerge as true winners globally," said E Fund's Wang. "We have no illusions: this is a long march, this is a marathon. Since this is a marathon, the first 10 minutes doesn't really matter," Wang added.
