Yuan is for trade, not for speculation: banker
2011-06-02 02:52:00.0
(Reuters) - China will let the offshore yuan market in Hong Kong to flourish as long as the Chinese currency is used for trade purposes but won't allow any speculative activity, a senior banker said on Thursday.
Since last July, the offshore yuan market has grown rapidly after authorities allowed companies and financial institutions to open trading accounts in the former British colony and expanded the trade settlement scheme in yuan.
But as yuan deposits in the territory mushroomed to 510 billion yuan ($78.7 billion) by April and trade settlement grew, some bankers voiced concerns that Beijing may want to rein in the pace of the growth of this market.
Lawrence Lam, chairman of the Treasury Markets Association's market practices committee and head of Greater China operations for Royal Bank of Scotland Group Plc (
), told Reuters in an interview that while policymakers wants to promote the yuan as a trade settlement currency, "one thing the government doesn't want to see is disguising capital movement as trade flow,"
The Treasury Markets Association is a professional body that assists authorities in promoting the territory as an international yuan center. It counts Norman Chan, the head of the territory's de-facto central bank, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority among its members.
"They want to see the internationalization of the Chinese renminbito develop at a healthy and controlled pace, not a big bang approach," he said on his return from the eastern city of Wuxi.
Trade settled in yuan risen at a healthy clip while yuan deposits in the territory has grown to 510 billion yuan ($78.4 billion) at the end of April, a six-fold increase from a year earlier.
Hong Kong has been the biggest beneficiary of China's drive to promote the yuan's international usage, with 80 percent of all trade settled in yuan passing through the territory's gates in the March quarter compared to 70 percent in all of last year.
Still, the growth of the offshore primary yuan market is in sharp contrast to the secondary market where there are no well-accepted benchmarks and investors generally adopt a buy and hold strategy toward yuan products rather than trade them actively.
But the launch of the much awaited fixing for the offshore yuan market will change all that, Lam said.
"I don't think the derivative market will explode after this is introduced but it will be a very useful tool to provide the market in development of the CNH."
The fixing should be a reality soon as all technical requirements in terms of calculating agent and contributing banks have been completed, he said.
(Reporting by Saikat Chatterjee; Editing by Kim Coghill)
