China said behind massive foreign buying in Japanese bonds
2011-05-29 19:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China is stepping up buying in Japanese government bonds, particularly notes with less than one year to maturity, market players say, in what looks like a fresh drive to diversify its ballooning foreign reserves after U.S. government bill yields fell.
Foreign investors have flocked to Japanese government bonds in the past five weeks, finance ministry data shows and market sources say China was among the main buyers, although a large part of buying was made through banks in London.
This means the ministry's breakdown of investors by country, which will be available next month, is likely to understate China's purchases.
There is a strong sense of deja-vu as China, which had more than $3 trillion in foreign reserves at the end of March, dabbled in the short-term yen market early last year.
Market players say, however, that like last time, China may not stay long in the market. If China was seeking to increase its yen weighting in its foreign reserves on a permanent basis, that could boost the yen but short-term trades are unlikely to have much effect.
Foreigners bought a net 4.696 trillion yen ($57.7 billion) of Japanese bonds in the five weeks to May 20, a record amount of purchases for any five consecutive weeks since data began to be compiled in its current form in 2005.
But other sources said foreign investors, including China, were buying long-dated bonds with less than one year left to maturity, effectively the same as buying short-term bills.
In the finance ministry data, however, such buying is counted as investment in long-term bonds.
The foreign binge on Japanese government bonds started in the week of April 18-22, shortly after a squeeze in U.S. bills pushed U.S. bill yields lower.
A new deposit insurance rule sparked a torrent of buying in government bills, pushing the U.S. three-month T-bill yield as low as 0.01 percent in early May and below Japanese government bill yields.
Then came a sharp fall in the euro, which may have also prompted investors to move funds to the yen.
"As the euro started to suffer from debt problems again, some reserve managers could have shifted some of their euro-denominated to assets to the yen," said Makoto Noji, senior strategist at SMBC Nikko Securities.
This was similar to last year when China's foray in the short-term yen market coincided with worries about Greece's ability to pay back debt.
But China quickly moved out of that position, selling a large amount of yen bills in August to take profits after the yen rose. Market players said at that the time China was unlikely to keep a large amount of funds in the yen because yields were low.
(Takahiro Okamoto is a senior IFR analyst; Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
