IEA sees record CO2 emissions in 2010
2011-05-30 15:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Global emissions of carbon dioxide hit their highest level ever in 2010, with the growth driven mainly by booming coal-reliant emerging economies, the International Energy Agency's chief economist said on Monday.
CO2 emissions rose by 5.9 percent to 30.6 billion tonnes in 2010, Birol said, citing IEA estimates,
"It's a very strong rebound in CO2 emissions, driven mainly by the non-OECD countries," Birol told Reuters in an interview, adding three quarters of the growth came from emerging economies such as China or India.
"It's the highest ever growth in history," he said.
Christiania Figueres, head of the United Nation's Climate Change Secretariat, called the figures a "stark warning to governments to make rapid climate progress," starting with a meeting of government negotiators in Bonn from June 6-17.
Governments "need to push the world further down the right track to avoid dangerous climate change," she said in a statement. "I won't hear that this is impossible."
The Paris-based IEA, which advises its members on energy policy, has also carried out an analysis on the world's power plants showing 80 percent of the electricity generation related emissions for 2020 are already locked in.
"The room for maneuver is only of 20 percent," he added.
Scientists say rising levels of CO2, the main greenhouse gas from burning fossil fuels and deforestation, is warming the planet.
"Every year we don't have a (climate change) agreement, every year we don't give a clear signal to pave the way for renewable energies and other clean energy technologies, the room for maneuver to get to the 2020 target shrinks," he said.
There was also concern that after the Fukushima nuclear disaster in March, many countries, such as Germany, were opting out of nuclear energy, which emits virtually no CO2, Birol said.
"The less nuclear growth means higher CO2 emissions compared to what people thought a couple of months ago," he said.
The growth in CO2 emission was mainly led by coal, natural gas and oil, Briol added.
(Reporting by Muriel Boselli; Editing by Leslie Gevirtz)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
There is a new energy production technology: the E-Cat. Roughly: Nickle plus Hydrogen (heated under pressure) = Copper plus a whole lot of heat. LENR (low energy nuclear reaction). Of course you don¡¯t believe me, but try this link of articles on the subject: http://peswiki.com/index.php/News:Rossi_Cold_Fusion Clean (except for some gamma radiation that is easily shielded, cheap (less than one cent per kilowatt hour ¨C as opposed to 5 cents from it¡¯s nearest competitor dirty coal), and abundant (3% of the Earth¡¯s mass is nickle, and the globe is 70% covered by H2O a ready source of hydrogen). Still don¡¯t believe me? There is a factory in FL that is expected to produce 300,000 E-Cats next year. They are now producing enough to power both of Rossi¡¯s business, so at least by October he will publicly show his three kilowatt 2x2x3 meter power plants to the world. You can forget about carbon: this blows all energy produced by fossil fuels right out of the water.
May 30, 20114:00pm EDT--
