EU draft U.N. resolution on Syria could hurt stability: China
2011-05-31 06:57:00.0
(Reuters) - China warned on Tuesday that a European draft resolution asking the U.N. Security Council to condemn Syria would not defuse tension in the region, suggesting Beijing could block it if it is submitted for a vote.
Britain, France, Germany and Portugal circulated the draft resolution, which is supported by the United States, to the 15-nation council last week.
Veto powers Russia and China and four other non-permanent members have voiced concern about the draft, which rebukes Syria for its bloody crackdown against anti-government protesters.
"The stability of Syria has a bearing on the stability of the whole region," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu told a regular news briefing.
"The Chinese government supports Syria's efforts to protect its sovereignty and stability and we hope that stability and order in Syria will be restored as soon as possible," she added.
"In the current circumstances, we believe that the adoption of the U.N. Security Council resolution would do no good for the easing of tensions and stability in Syria."
China has said that the outside world should not interfere in Syria's internal affairs.
Apart from criticizing the Western air campaign against the forces of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi's government, China has kept a relatively low profile in the tumult across the Middle East and north Africa.
Analysts have said that China will carefully foster ties and trade with new governments across the region, while being sure to present itself as a steadfast friend, and oil customer, of governments that ride out the unrest.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee and Sabrina Mao; Editing by Ben Blanchard and Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
1. I wouldn¡¯t exactly call Syria ¡°stable.¡± 2. If China doesn¡¯t believe anyone should interfere with any governmemnt for any reason ¨C including torturing and murdering of its own citizens for having the gall to demand self-determination and basic human rights, of which China is most certainly guilty ¨C China should butt out of Syria¡¯s business. 3. China is more unstable than it¡¯s willing to admit. The revolution is already in the hearts and minds of its citizens, and it¡¯s only a matter of time until they have collectively had enough of living in constant fear and oppression. Be very careful how you take hope away from people; they become very unpredictable and determined. One of these days, China will truly be the people¡¯s republic ¨C not that of a privileged few who live off the rest like parasites.
May 31, 20117:51am EDT--
