Citi to form China securities venture with Orient: sources
2011-06-01 07:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, May 26 2011
Wed, May 25 2011
Wed, May 25 2011
Tue, May 24 2011
Wed, May 18 2011
A Citibank sign on a bank branch in midtown Manhattan, New York, November 17, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Mike Segar
Wed  EDT
) and China's Orient Securities have reached a basic agreement to form an investment banking venture, two sources with direct knowledge of the matter said, as the Wall Street bank joins rivals to tap China's booming capital markets.
Earlier this week, Royal Bank of Scotland Group Plc (
) launched its China securities venture and in January, rivals JPMorgan Chase & Co (
Citi will hold one-third of the venture, the maximum allowed by regulators, and the official announcement is expected soon, one source said. Citi's head of global banking, Farhan Faruqui, and other top executives are in New York this week to thrash out the final details, the source added.
The two sides will formally sign an agreement this month, the Securities Times reported on Wednesday.
"We are committed to continued investment in China and as we have said previously, obtaining an A-share license is one of our priorities," Citi's China spokesman, Stephen Thomas, said. He declined to comment on the venture plan.
Establishing a securities venture would enable Citi, which already has a commercial banking business in China, to underwrite stocks and bonds in the world's second-largest economy.
China was the world's top initial public offering market last year with a record $70 billion in IPO proceeds compared with just $9.5 billion in 2008, according to Thomson Reuters data. China's IPO market, which last year accounted for about 27 percent of global volumes, is currently dominated by local securities firms such as Citic Securities (
The country's bond market has grown three-fold from 2008 to 2010 when it stood at $449 billion.
), Goldman Sachs (
) have already established securities ventures in China, while more are expected to follow.
Citi and Orient Securities had been in negotiations the past six months after venture talks with Central China Securities collapsed, local media reported in February. Top executives from Orient and Citi made management presentations over the past few weeks in the run-up to the formal agreement being signed, one of the sources said.
Citi owns a locally incorporated bank in China, holds a 3.78 percent stake in Shanghai Pudong Development Bank (
) and a 20 percent stake in Guangdong Development Bank, according to its website. Citi, which has also established investment banking offices in Beijing and Shanghai to provide consulting services, employs about 5,000 people in China.
Shanghai-based Orient Securities, a medium-sized brokerage indirectly controlled by the local government, is planning a domestic IPO next year.
), for instance, is planning to treble its research team to more than 100 people by mid-2012 to step up its presence in the IPO market, a senior company official told Reuters in January.
RBS on Monday launched an investment banking venture with Guolian Securities in China's eastern city of Wuxi. Morgan Stanley has received regulatory approval to form a venture with Huaxin Securities, after exiting from China International Capital Corp late last year.
(Additional reporting by Kazunori Takada; Editing by David Chance, Jonathan Hopfner and Matt Driskill)
