World Chefs: Ex-Nobu chef takes Asian fusion to Prague
2011-05-31 06:08:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, May 24 2011
Tue, May 24 2011
Tue, May 24 2011
Thu, May 19 2011
Mon, May 16 2011
Tue  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - Paul Day got his start working as butcher in London's Chinatown before rising to sous chef at the city's Michelin-starred Nobu restaurant.
Now he's taken his Asian-influenced cooking to Prague, where a number of young chefs are remaking the city's culinary landscape which has long been associated with Central European stodgy fare rather than cutting-edge cuisine.
The 42-year-old Day, who worked at two Michelin-starred restaurants in London and does all his own butchering, opened Sansho three months ago and has been cooking for full houses ever since.
Day talked to Reuters about how he got his start, his approach to cooking and Prague's changing restaurant scene.
Q: Why the move from London to Prague?
A: The use and abuse of circumstance has a lot to do with it. I really love Prague. I used to be a butcher and I am interested and hoping to reinstate the lost art of butchering in the Czech Republic, which was completely wiped out during Communism.
Q: How difficult is it to find the right ingredients here?
A: I am blessed with a huge Vietnamese population here. There is a plane that comes in straight from Hanoi City twice a week so I get really fresh herbs and spices and all kinds of things. I just sourced a really good fish from Vietnam, which I could never get in London's Chinatown. It makes a big difference in the fresh dressings that we use.
Q: Where did you get your love of cooking and your start as a chef?
A: I started in the food industry at age 13 in a butcher's shop while still at school. Then I got interested in cooking -- probably more interested than in school! I worked in a butcher's shop after leaving school and then had my own. I was always cooking at home and cooking curries for my friends. I sold my butcher's shop to move to London to become a chef. I took a job in Chinatown working as a Chinese butcher and I worked there for a few years. That is where I learned to cook. I also amassed a massive southeast Asian product knowledge. That is why Asian is what I've always been interested in.
Q: Are the critics here as demanding?
Q: How would you describe your style of cooking?
A: It is honest, fun. It is what I always tell the guys in the kitchen: food has to be fun. If you are not having fun there is no point. It has to be fresh. We like to encourage people to use their fingers as much as possible. Big flavors, big textures and we use lots of southeast Asian cooking techniques.
A: I've seen it so many times before where chefs are so set on their concept. I think you have to have a little bit of fluidity and creativity to the space you have. This space and our food concept really suits communal dining. In the old Czech pubs it was the same. I thought it would be quite nice to have communal dining here. We serve everything family style in the evening so it's all to share.
Brine the pork belly overnight in the fridge with 50/50 salt and sugar, just rub onto the skin and flesh. Next day wash it and bring to the boil in fresh water. As soon as it boils, take it out and rinse in cold water. Put back into a pan of fresh cold water and bring to a simmer with the five spice powder. You can also add spring onion tops, or any ginger peel you may have lying around and maybe some garlic.
Now let this simmer slowly for 3.5-4.5 hours. Once cooked, very, very tender and the fat at its wobbly best, lift it out of the pan very carefully and chill quickly. Once it is chilled, cut into big chunks and set aside. Next make the dressing by mixing all the ingredients together, It should taste sweet, salty and sour.
Add the watermelon and fresh-picked herbs to a bowl. Now add the warm pork belly and dressing and toss everything together (you could also add chopped birds eye chili if you like a kick!). Serve on a large plate.
(Reporting by Michael Kahn, Editing by Steve Addison)
