China says not ready to reveal secrets of painful past
2011-05-31 05:48:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Tuesday cracked opened the door to its secretive national archives, but kept the lid on some of the most painful parts of its history like the Cultural Revolution and Tiananmen crackdown to protect "privacy and reputations."
The State Archives Administration, hidden down an alley in central Beijing, holds more than 100 million pages of documents, including the ceasefire agreement to end the Korean War and personal letters from Mao Zedong.
However, more than half of them are considered secret, including those on the violent crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators around Beijing's Tiananmen Square in 1989.
"According to the law ... files of important interest on national security, defense and foreign affairs are not suitable to be opened up," the administration's head, Yang Dongquan, told reporters on a government-organized visit.
Other areas off-limits were the files on "various disputes, including ones of ethnicity, religion and property," he said.
"It does not matter if it's the Cultural Revolution, the Anti-Rightist Movement or the Great Leap Forward, if it impinges upon those areas I have mentioned, especially on an individual's privacy or reputation, its opening up will be delayed."
About 500,000 liberal intellectuals were banished to toil in the countryside in the 1957 Anti-Rightist Movement. The 1958 Great Leap Forward campaign to catapult China to prosperity ended in a three-year famine in which an estimated 30 million people starved to death.
During the chaos of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, children turned on parents and students on teachers in the fervor to create a perfect Communist society loyal to paramount leader Mao.
As for the files from the 1989 crackdown, a movement Beijing once called a "counter revolutionary" plot but has more recently referred to as a "political disturbance," Yang said they were in a "waiting period."
"We've not yet reached the time to open them up," Yang added. "The rules state 30 years, at least. It can still be delayed even after 30 years, if the archive authorities decide it. It's the same rule for every country."
Yet accounts of that time by senior leaders have been published, albeit outside of mainland China.
The memoirs of Li Peng, who was premier in 1989, appeared in Hong Kong last year.
In 2009, the secret memoirs of Zhao Ziyang, who was purged as Communist Party general secretary with Li's help for being too soft on pro-democracy student protesters, were also published in Hong Kong.
"I have not read those books, so I cannot answer that question," he said.
