Coca-Cola says considers listing in Shanghai
2011-06-01 02:32:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, May 30 2011
Fri, May 27 2011
Thu, May 26 2011
Wed, May 25 2011
Mon, May 23 2011
Bottles of Coca-Cola, which will be delivered to stores, are seen in a warehouse at the Swire Coca-Cola facility in Draper, Utah March 9, 2011. Credit: Reuters/George Frey
Wed  EDT
), the world's largest soft-drink company, said on Wednesday it may explore a possible listing in Shanghai, joining other global firms in testing the waters for a China listing, along with its increasing presence there.
"We are interested in exploring the opportunity of listing our stock on the Shanghai Stock Exchange," Geoff Walsh, public affairs and communications director for Asia Pacific of Coca-Cola, said in an email reply to Reuters.
"Obviously, we need to better understand the regulatory framework and listing requirements," Walsh said. "We continue to have positive discussions with Chinese government officials as we look at this opportunity."
Walsh's comments follow a report in the Hong Kong Economic Journal, saying Coca-Cola was studying a possible listing on the proposed international board on the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
), Unilever (
) have said they want to list on the international board, which was originally slated to be launched in 2010.
The New York Stock Exchange is working with China to launch the country's international board that will allow foreign firms to list on the mainland, in a move seen as a crucial step in developing its capital markets.
(Reporting by Xavier Ng and Donny Kwok; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Ken Wills)
