Rio Tinto, Chinalco set up China exploration joint venture
2011-06-01 07:49:00.0
Rio Tinto, Chinalco set up China exploration joint venture | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Rio Tinto, Chinalco set up China exploration joint venture
Wed, Jun 1 2011
Thu, May 26 2011
Wed, Jun 1 2011
Mon, May 30 2011
Wed, May 25 2011
Wed  EDT
) and state-owned Chinese aluminum producer Chinalco ALUMI.UL have established a joint venture to explore for new mineral deposits in China, they said on Wednesday.
The new joint venture, the Chinalco Rio Tinto Exploration Co. Ltd (CRTX), will be 51 percent owned by the Chinese firm and will concentrate on copper exploration as its "immediate priority", with coal and potash to be considered at a later stage, Rio Tinto said.
The joint venture will explore "prospective areas proposed by the Ministry of Land and Resources", Rio Tinto's chief executive Tom Albanese said in a statement.
"The joint venture will be focusing on the tier one opportunities that will bring the greatest benefit to China, and we know that such discoveries are rare but our chances are greatly improved by selecting the right areas to explore and combining the complementary skills of Rio Tinto and Chinalco," he said.
Chinalco has sought to diversify its business away from aluminum, and its listed unit Chalco (
) has already agreed to invest $1.35 billion in the Simandou iron ore deposit in Guinea, another joint project with Rio Tinto.
Chinalco remains Rio Tinto's largest shareholder, with a 9 percent stake.
Under the joint venture agreement, which is subject to Chinese regulatory approval, Chinalco will nominate three directors to CRTX, including the chairman and chief financial officer, while Rio will appoint two directors, including a general manager responsible for day-to-day operations.
(Reporting by David Stanway and Jenny Su, editing by Tom Miles)
