India offers $5 billion to Africa, keen to boost ties
2011-05-24 08:58:00.0
India offers $5 billion to Africa, keen to boost ties | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
India offers $5 billion to Africa, keen to boost ties
Thu, May 19 2011
Mon, May 23 2011
Sat, May 21 2011
Fri, May 20 2011
Tue, May 17 2011
Tue  EDT
At an address to an India-Africa summit in Addis Ababa on Tuesday, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh trumpeted his country's historical ties with Africa in his attempt to catch up with Beijing's growing influence on the continent.
Rival emerging economies India and China are scouring the globe to secure energy resources, minerals and food. Both are keen to stress to African nations that they are more than just trade partners and want to help the continent develop.
"There is a new economic growth story emerging from Africa. Africa possesses all the prerequisites to become a major growth pole of the world," Singh told a gathering of African Union leaders in a speech in Ethiopia's capital Addis Ababa.
"The India-Africa partnership is unique and owes its origins to history and our common struggle against colonialism, apartheid, poverty, disease, illiteracy and hunger."
Singh, who is on a six-day trip to Africa that began on Monday, is pledging development support in exchange for trade agreements to fuel growth in India's resource-intensive economy, and boost the presence of Asia's third-largest economy which lags China in the world's poorest continent.
"We will offer $5 billion dollars for the next three years under lines of credit to help Africa achieve its development goals," Singh said.
In January 2010, India said it would increase credit lines to Africa to $5.4 billion until 2012 from $2.15 billion.
At the gathering, Singh said his country would boost support for infrastructure projects, regional integration, skills training and human resource development.
Delhi, whose merchant ships have been ravaged by Somali pirates on the Indian Ocean, also offered $2 million to the African Union's mission in the lawless Horn of Africa nation, where they are fighting Islamist insurgents battling to overthrow an internationally recognized government.
Chinese companies are busy building roads across the continent, investing in the energy sector and are active in areas such as telecoms technology.
India is trying to increase it presence on the continent as well as get African support for its bid for a permanent place on the U.N. Security Council, as the body is reformed to include emerging powers and developing nations.
Total bilateral trade between India and African countries stood at $46 billion last year, a huge increase on $3 billion in 2000-1. Volumes are estimated to reach $70 billion by 2015, India's Trade Minister Anand Sharma said on Saturday.
China's bilateral trade with Africa already stood at $107 billion back in 2008.
India's state-run oil firms are beginning to invest in countries including Nigeria and Kenya, while China has pumped billions of dollars into Sudanese oil, mineral-rich Zimbabwe, and Zambia's mining sector, among other countries.
Singh will travel on Thursday to Tanzania, where Delhi has also invested heavily during the past few years.
Singh appealed to the African leaders, saying India will work with Africa to realize the continent's potential. The first India-Africa summit was held in Dehli in 2008.
"It is the first time that the leaders of India and Africa are meeting on such a scale on African soil," he said.
We believe that a new vision is required for Africa's development and participation in global affairs. We do not have all the answers, but we have some experience in nation building which we are happy to share with our African brothers ..."
