China considering Iranian invitation to nuclear facilities
2011-05-24 06:22:00.0
(Reuters) - China said on Tuesday it will consider Iran's invitation to send experts to see its disputed nuclear facilities, made during talks with Iran's foreign minister that a Chinese spokeswoman said covered strengthening bilateral ties.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu's comments underscored differences between Beijing and Western governments on how to deal with Iran and its nuclear program, which drew fresh sanctions from the European Union on Monday.
"We will conscientiously study Iran's invitation to send Chinese experts to visit Iran nuclear facilities," Jiang told a regular press conference.
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi revealed the invitation in Beijing on Monday, following talks with China's Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi.
The Iranian foreign minister's visit has come as Western governments continue to press his country over its disputed nuclear ambitions, highlighting China's importance as an economic and diplomatic buffer for Tehran.
China is a big purchaser of oil from Iran, shunned by Western powers which say Tehran is seeking to develop the means to make nuclear weapons and has spurned requests from the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations' nuclear watchdog. Iran says its nuclear program is peaceful.
Salehi and Yang "discussed deepening bilateral relations, the Iranian nuclear issue, and they exchanged views on regional and international issues," said the Chinese spokeswoman Jiang.
"We believe that dialogue and negotiations are the correct pathway to finding a comprehensive, lasting and appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear issue," she told reporters.
Salehi appeared to renew something like the offer that Iran made in January to open its nuclear sites to envoys from Russia, China, the European Union and other governments. China did not take up Tehran's offer then.
None of the four Western powers seeking to resolve the long-running Iran nuclear dispute -- the United States, Britain, Germany and France -- received invitations that time.
But in Beijing, Salehi said all members of the "P5 plus 1" negotiating group -- China, Russia, the United States, France, Britain and Germany -- could take up this latest offer.
Jiang, the spokeswoman, said those powers should renew negotiations with Iran.
"We hope that Iran and the P5 plus one powers will launch a new round of dialogue as soon as possible," she said. "We also encourage Iran to enhance cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency."
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Alex Richardson)
