Rosneft, China to discuss oil pricing in mid-June
2011-05-25 08:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia's top crude producer, Rosneft (
) and China will discuss pricing of Russian oil deliveries at an economic conference on June 16-18, a Rosneft spokesman told Reuters on Wednesday.
The deal, worth $220 billion under current oil prices, is in danger after the Russian oil pipeline monopoly claimed that Beijing underpaid for supplies, citing differences over tariffs.
The Rosneft spokesman also said that the company may sign a memorandum with Japan to explore and develop vast eastern Siberia hydrocarbon deposits previously thought to be jointly tapped with China National Petroleum Corp. (CNPC), in a sign of growing pressure from the Russian company.
"China didn't cancel it completely. They are aiming for talks at the St Petersburg economic forum (on June 16-18)," the Rosneft spokesman said.
Russia's Transneft, which started oil supplies to China via the first stage of the Pacific pipeline in January, has claimed that CNPC underpaid for the crude supplies.
On Wednesday, China's Foreign Ministry tried to offer an olive branch saying that energy cooperation with Russia was proceeding smoothly.
The ministry said in a statement faxed to Reuters that China hoped both countries' companies would be able to resolve the crude oil pricing issues through "friendly consultations."
Last week, Russia's top energy official Igor Sechin said that the oil talks with Beijing will facilitate Russia's top natural gas producer Gazprom's (
Gazprom plans to start delivering 30 billion cubic metres of gas a year to China from 2015 and seeks a pricing agreement this summer. In a sign that the talks may be successfully concluded, Chinese President Hu Jintao is scheduled to visit the economic forum in Russia.
The Rosneft spokesman also said that the company will sign the exploration and development memorandum with Japan, smarting from nuclear crisis.
"We have had four meetings with the Japanese side already. It's not clear which companies will be involved as Japan is acting via its government," the spokesman told Reuters.
A source in the company said that Rosneft and Japanese corporations may jointly tap offshore deposits in the Okhotsk Sea near the city of Magadan, an area of cooperation previously discussed with China National Petroleum Corp.
(Reporting by Vladimir Soldatkin; additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in Beijing; editing by Jason Neely)
