Yuan hits record high after central bank's guidance
2011-05-26 05:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The yuan hit a record against the dollar on Thursday as the People's Bank of China set the mid-point at a new peak after the dollar index's pullback, which could give the central bank a chance to raise the yuan further.
But dealers said further appreciation in the yuan was to be expected, not only because of a weaker dollar, but as China has domestic concerns it needs to tackle such as inflation.
"The key role for yuan appreciation is to fight against high inflation for now," said a dealer at an European bank in Shanghai.
Indeed, the fixing's previous record high was 6.4948 set on May 11 when the dollar index was at 74.6. But the dollar had risen around 1.8 percent by the time the PBOC set Thursday's record high fixing of 6.4921.
Spot yuan finished off the day's highs at 6.4915 versus the dollar compared with Wednesday's 6.4934. The Chinese currency has now appreciated 5.16 percent since it was depegged from the dollar in June 2010, and 1.50 percent since the start of this year.
Dealers said that while the market widely expects the yuan to rise further as the dollar weakens, the euro-zone debt crisis could restrain gains.
Offshore, one-year non-deliverable forwards (NDFs) were little changed, even though the Chinese central bank set a record high mid-point.
The market was unwilling to add fresh NDF positions due to growing risk aversion in the last few days triggered by the European debt crisis, dealers said.
"One thing we are seeing is a lot of unwinding of sell-USD/CNH-buy-USD/CNY NDF-trades put on earlier which might check any sharp spike in USD/CNY NDFs," said a dealer at a Chinese bank in Hongkong." That trade unwinding seems to have some more room to run and we might see a further uptick in USD/CNH forwards."
One-year NDFs were bid at 6.3760, little changed from 6.3790 at Wednesday's close. Their implied yuan appreciation in a year's time was 1.82 percent versus 1.77 percent previously.
(Reporting by Chen Yixin and Jacqueline Wong;; Additional reporting by Saikat Chatterjee)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Yet, contrary to predictions by economists that a rising yuan would relieve America¡¯s trade deficit with China, the trade deficit continues at record levels. The fact is that currency valuations have virtually no effect on trade imbalances. Trade imbalances are caused by disparities in population density, resulting in disparities in per capita consumption. Population density is a consistent predictor of trade imbalances. If the nations of the world are divided evenly around the median population density, in 2009 the U.S. enjoyed a surplus of trade in manufactured goods of $102 billion with those nations below the median population density. With the half of nations above the median population density, the U.S. had a trade deficit of $422 billion. Same number of nations ¨C starkly different results. A tariff structure on manufactured imports that is indexed to population density is the only remedy for America¡¯s trade deficit. Pete Murphy
Yet, contrary to predictions by economists that a rising yuan would relieve America¡¯s trade deficit with China, the trade deficit continues at record levels. The fact is that currency valuations have virtually no effect on trade imbalances. Trade imbalances are caused by disparities in population density, resulting in disparities in per capita consumption. Population density is a consistent predictor of trade imbalances. If the nations of the world are divided evenly around the median population density, in 2009 the U.S. enjoyed a surplus of trade in manufactured goods of $102 billion with those nations below the median population density. With the half of nations above the median population density, the U.S. had a trade deficit of $422 billion. Same number of nations ¨C starkly different results. A tariff structure on manufactured imports that is indexed to population density is the only remedy for America¡¯s trade deficit. Pete Murphy
Author, ¡°Five Short Blasts¡±
May 26, 20116:46am EDT--
