Apple investors brush off China blast impact
2011-05-23 19:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, May 22 2011
Sat, May 21 2011
Wed, May 18 2011
Wed, May 18 2011
Tue, May 17 2011
Sun, May 22 2011
Mon  EDT
Production at the plant in the southwestern city of Chengdu was suspended by Foxconn Technology Group, Apple's biggest manufacturing partner, after three workers died in a Friday blast blamed on combustible dust in a duct.
But the impact should be minimal because of Foxconn's ability to rapidly shift output elsewhere in its sprawling network, coupled with Apple's relying mainly on other locations, investors and analysts said.
Shares in the world's largest technology company by market value closed down 0.24 percent at $334.40, after slipping as much as 1.7 percent in morning trading.
"This seems to be a manageable situation," said Channing Smith, Managing Director at Capital Advisors Growth Fund, which owns Apple shares.
Foxconn's plant in Shenzhen, which is seen as the main assembly plant for the iPad 2, may not be able to make up for the production loss at Chengdu, iSuppli said, which expects 7.4 million iPad 2s to be shipped in the second quarter.
The Shenzhen plant has the capacity to produce 7.5 million units during the quarter and so tablet shipments could fall short of expected levels -- which are slightly higher than forecast to account for damages and higher demand -- by between 300,000 and 600,000 units, the research firm said.
Apple sold 4.69 million iPads last quarter and is scrambling to meet staggering demand, coping with what company executives have called "the mother of all backlogs." Some analysts predict more than 6 million could ship this quarter.
Stern Agee analyst Shaw Wu played down the impact on Apple. saying even at the Chengdu location itself, production was spread out among assembly lines in several unaffected buildings.
"This is definitely a setback," Wu said. "At the same time, it's not that big a deal."
While the impact on Apple is deemed minimal, investors in Hon Hai were worried about the fallout of the blast on the electronics supplier.
The incident marked the latest worker deaths at Foxconn, which last year grappled with a barrage of criticism after a spate of suicides tore the lid off what some called dismal conditions for its mostly migrant labor population.
A potential loss of orders from Apple could amp up the pressure on Hon Hai, which is already facing rising costs.
Shares of Hon Hai in Taipei closed nearly 3 percent lower on fears Apple may shift orders to its rivals. They had dived as much as 5.2 percent following the news of the blast, to their lowest since late August.
"Foxconn Group makes 70-80 percent of Apple's parts, and Apple may reconsider concentrating production with one contract maker," said Hua Nan Securities Chairman David Chu. "This could hurt Hon Hai in the long run."
But the brokerage said the explosion happened in a machinery room for cutting metal and, given that no assembly line or inventory was involved, the blast was unlikely to cause any meaningful production disruption.
Hon Hai said Monday the company was assessing the damage and local authorities were investigating the explosion. The plant would resume operation once the investigation finished, it added in a stock exchange filing.
"A majority of iPad2 production is still done in Shenzhen, and that even if the whole Chengdu iPad2 production line is damaged, the impact should be less than 20 percent of iPad total production," UBS said in a research report.
Many manufacturers, including PC contract maker Quanta Computer Inc and Compal Electronics Inc, have also been moving operations in China away from coastal regions such as Guangdong and Fujian to inland areas.
(Additional reporting by Faith Hung and Argin Chang; Editing by Edwin Chan, Lincoln Feast, Bernard Orr and Sofina Mirza-Reid)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
No big deal. A thousand Chinese peasants could die from fires or ¡°suicides¡± and it wouldn¡¯t impact Apples profit margin.
May 23, 20119:02pm EDT--
