Chinese IPO valuations seen declining in near future: UBS banker
2011-05-20 07:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Valuations of initial public offerings in China are likely to decline in coming months because of decreased demand and cases where share prices fell below their issue levels, according to a senior executive of Swiss investment bank UBS (
With shares of some newly listed companies dipping below their initial offer price once they are publicly traded for the first time, IPOs are no longer sure bets for Chinese investors who have learned they can lose money, Li Kefei, UBS managing director for global capital markets, said in an interview with Reuters.
"As a result, I would expect IPO valuations to come down in the next few months," Li said.
"Actually we are seeing this happening in quite a few deals recently which, in turn, will improve the returns for IPO investors. That is, we should not see as many IPOs breaking issue price shortly after the listing," Li said in the interview on Thursday.
"This is a healthy adjustment in the IPO market," he said. "We have seen this again and again in the international markets and could see it happening in China."
The Shanghai stock exchange has been doing a booming business in IPOs as more and more Chinese companies rush to go public on the coattails of China's robust economic growth.
Hong Kong's stock exchange, seen as a proxy for investing in China's strong economic growth, has also played host to a long list of IPOs of Chinese companies. The Hong Kong bourse has been the world's biggest IPO market for the past two years.
Li said he expects a variety of sectors to be fertile ground for IPOs in the near future including technology, consumer/retail, healthcare, industrials and construction.
"It really depends upon which sector is doing better in the future, having more profitable and qualified IPO candidates," he said.
Last year there were some 350 IPOs in Shanghai and Shenzhen combined, and Li said he expects even more this year. "I think this will stay for the next three to five years," he said.
Chinese officials, who originally planned to establish an international board last year, have not given details on how the board would function.
For a Shanghai international board to launch, proper regulations must be in place, Li said.
"Given the significant difference between Chinese regulations and the home country regulation for those multi-national companies seeking listings in Shanghai, we need to do a thorough job to ensure that we provide the necessary flexibility for those issuers and fully protect the interests of Chinese investors at the same time," he said.
Many international companies, including HSBC Holdings Plc (
), Bank of East Asia Ltd (
