China plays down U.N. report on North Korea, Iran proliferation
2011-05-17 05:14:00.0
China plays down U.N. report on North Korea, Iran proliferation | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China plays down U.N. report on North Korea, Iran proliferation
Tue, May 17 2011
Tue, May 17 2011
U.S. special envoy on North Korea, Stephen Bosworth answers a reporter's question after his meeting with South Korea's chief nuclear negotiator Wi Sung-lac at Foreign Ministry in Seoul May 17, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Jo Yong-Hak
Tue  EDT
The report, obtained by Reuters over the weekend, said North Korea appeared to have been exchanging ballistic missile technology and expertise with Iran in violation of Security Council sanctions.
The report did not identify China, but said North Korean-Iranian missile trade went via a country neighboring North Korea, which diplomats at the U.N. told Reuters was indeed China.
"This does not represent the position of the Security Council, and nor does it represent the position of the relevant Security Council sanctions committee," Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu said in a faxed statement.
Statements that China was the trans-shipment site for banned cargo were anonymous accusations, said Jiang.
"I am not willing to make any comment about such claims from anonymous sources," she said. "But I can tell you that China is conscientious and responsible in enforcing Security Council resolutions."
Beijing is North Korea's only major ally, and its economic and diplomatic support has been important in shoring up its otherwise isolated neighbor. China also buys large amounts of oil from Iran, which is largely shunned by the West.
But China has also pressed North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions, and has supported Security Council resolutions that condemned North Korea for its nuclear tests and authorized sanctions.
The report was submitted to the Security Council last week by a U.N. Panel of Experts, a group that monitors compliance with U.N. sanctions imposed on Pyongyang after it conducted nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009.
The U.N. sanctions included a ban on trade in nuclear and missile technology with North Korea, as well as an arms embargo. They also ban trade with designated North Korean firms and demand asset freezes and travel bans on some North Koreans.
A U.S.-based think-tank, the Institute for Science and International Security, had said North Korea used China as a trans-shipment point for technology for a uranium enrichment facility shown to a visiting U.S. scientist.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Ok world¡­.let¡¯s see china in its true colors. china undermines UN sanctions by promoting and even facilitating missile technology transfer between rogue nations¡­specifically banned by the UN body and international community. It is obvious that china cannot be trusted to be a responsible leader. It is time for china to start ACTING like a responsible power, rather than just SAYING they are. It¡¯s becoming more and more clear that china is morally bankrupt.
May 16, 201112:21am EDT--
