Corn jumps to 1-month top, wheat up on supply worries
2011-05-23 03:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Chicago corn rose 1.2 percent on Monday to its highest in nearly a month, while wheat rose almost 1 percent, adding to last week's spectacular rally as harsh weather from the U.S. to Europe and China threatened to squeeze grain supplies.
U.S. farmers face a crucial decision in the coming days to abandon corn planting plans and switch to soybeans amid the smallest supply of corn in the world's top exporter in 15 years.
Last week, July corn climbed more than 11 percent, its biggest weekly rise since October, while July wheat rose over 10 percent.
"It is highly likely that the farmer will not be able to finish corn plantings, so it's going to be very bullish for corn prices," said Ker Chung Yang, an investment analyst at Phillip Futures in Singapore. "The weather is a key factor and the market is looking forward to USDA's crop progress report."
Chicago Board of Trade July corn rose 1.2 percent to $7.68- a bushel by 10:51 p.m. EDT, after touching a high of $7.75 a bushel, the highest since late April.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture will release later on Monday its updated weekly plantings report. Last week, USDA said corn plantings stood at 63 percent complete, below the 75 percent five-year average seeding pace.
Rains and floods in the eastern and southern U.S. Midwest have kept farmers out of the fields, leading to outlooks for a cut in corn acreage and yields because of late seedings.
The wheat market, which has gained 65 percent since the start of May last year, has been supported by renewed concerns over supplies as a result of dry weather in Europe and China.
"Wheat is catching the attention of investors as production and harvest is going to be hit by dry weather not only in the U.S. but also in Europe and China," Chung Yang said.
In the United States, a drought in the Plains has reduced hard red winter wheat production, while wet weather in the Midwest was threatening to harm the soft red winter wheat crop.
"Wet weather this week will continue to cause significant delays to corn and soybean planting in Indiana and Ohio where some corn acreage will likely not get planted," said Mike Palmerino of Telvent DTN weather service.
Showers in Argentina's farming areas caused some delays in the country's 2010/11 soy harvest, the government said in its weekly report on Friday, although most of the crop has already been brought in.
