China denies it is conduit for North Korea-Iran weapons trade
2011-05-18 03:52:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, May 18 2011
North Korean soldiers look at the southern side as U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke and a group of members of the U.S. House of Representatives visit the border village of Panmunjom that separates the two Koreas, north of Seoul, April 29, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Ahn Young-joon/Pool
Wed  EDT
U.N. diplomats said in the report, obtained by Reuters over the weekend, that North Korea appeared to have been exchanging ballistic missile technology and expertise with Iran in violation of Security Council sanctions.
The report did not identify China, but said North Korean-Iranian missile trade went via a country neighboring North Korea, which diplomats at the United Nations told Reuters was China.
"I completely deny such a view," Assistant Chinese Foreign Minister Hu Zhengyue told reporters at a briefing. He did not elaborate.
Hu's response was stronger than those of Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu Tuesday. In a faxed statement, she did not outright deny the report by a U.N. panel.
China blocked Tuesday the publication of the U.N. expert panel's report that suggests North Korea and Iran have been sharing ballistic missile technology in violation of U.N. sanctions, diplomats said.
"On the issue of denuclearisation on the Korean peninsula, the Chinese position is crystal clear," Hu said. "We have nothing to hide."
Jiang said the U.N. report "does not represent the position of the Security Council, and nor does it represent the position of the relevant Security Council sanctions committee."
Statements that China was the trans-shipment site for banned cargo were anonymous accusations, said Jiang.
"I am not willing to make any comment about such claims from anonymous sources," she said. "But I can tell you that China is conscientious and responsible in enforcing Security Council resolutions."
If the U.N. report is true, it could underscore U.S. concerns that China is not applying enough resources to detect and stop North Korea's illicit nuclear trade.
China is North Korea's only major ally, and its economic and diplomatic support has been important in shoring up its otherwise isolated neighbor. China also buys large amounts of oil from Iran, which is largely shunned by the West.
But China has also pressed North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions, and has supported Security Council resolutions that condemned North Korea for its nuclear tests and authorized sanctions.
The report was submitted to the Security Council last week by a U.N. Panel of Experts, a group that monitors compliance with U.N. sanctions imposed on North Korea after it conducted nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009.
The U.N. sanctions included a ban on trade in nuclear and missile technology with North Korea, as well as an arms embargo. They also ban trade with designated North Korean firms and demand asset freezes and travel bans on some North Koreans.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ken Wills and Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
WOW really, really! the culture is to save face ¨C not tell the truth.
May 18, 20112:06am EDT--
