Pakistan says wants China to build naval base
2011-05-21 14:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Pakistan said on Saturday it wanted China to build it a naval base, in the latest sign of moves to strengthen ties with Beijing as relations with Washington falter.
The announcement from Pakistan's defense minister came a day after Pakistan's Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani returned from a four-day visit to China, Islamabad's biggest arms supplier.
"We would be ... grateful to the Chinese government if a naval base is ... constructed at the site of Gwadar for Pakistan," Defense Minister Ahmad Mukhtar said is a statement, referring to a deep-water port in Pakistan's southwest.
China invested $200 million in the first phase of the construction of the port, which was inaugurated in 2007.
The development, 70 km (45 miles) east of the Iranian border and on the doorstep of Gulf shipping lanes, was designed to handle transhipment traffic for the Gulf.
Mukhtar said the Chinese government had agreed to take operational control of Gwadar port once a contract with Singapore's PSA International Ltd expired in around 35 years' time.
During Gilani's visit, Mukhtar said China had agreed to speed up the delivery of 50 multi-role combat JF-17 "Thunder" aircraft, each worth up to $25 million.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China has no concept of Foreign Aid and gives nothing away. The $1.25 billion payment for the 50 or so planes would have to come from diverted US aid to the Pakistan military¡­ no tickee no washee..no money, no planes¡­ and if the aid is cut off ..no washee.. It remains to be seen if the Chinese will step in to ¡°Gwadar¡± in Baluchistan, a prized city for Balochi rebels and eyed warily by Iran, just a stone¡¯s throw away..
May 22, 20115:14pm EDT--
I wonder what the Somali pirates will do when the Chinese navy starts patrolling through their waters. I suspect the Chinese won¡¯t be as tolerant as western nations are of pirates.
May 22, 20118:19pm EDT--
Racism is slive and well in America but we usually hide it better these days. ¡°no tickee¡­ no washee¡± Can we make it a little less obvious please??? ¡ª¡ª
Racism is slive and well in America but we usually hide it better these days. ¡°no tickee¡­ no washee¡± Can we make it a little less obvious please??? ¡ª¡ª
Bludde wrote: China has no concept of Foreign Aid and gives nothing away. The $1.25 billion payment for the 50 or so planes would have to come from diverted US aid to the Pakistan military¡­ no tickee no washee..no money, no planes¡­ and if the aid is cut off ..no washee.. It remains to be seen if the Chinese will step in to ¡°Gwadar¡± in Baluchistan, a prized city for Balochi rebels and eyed warily by Iran, just a stone¡¯s throw away..
May 22, 201110:00pm EDT--
