Apple probes blast at Chinese plant linked to iPad
2011-05-21 06:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Apple Inc is investigating an explosion that killed two people, injured 16 and forced a production halt at a Foxconn International Holdings Ltd factory in China said to produce the popular iPad 2.
Foxconn, part of Taiwan's Hon Hai Precision Industries group and Apple's main manufacturing partner, said in a statement the explosion happened at about 7 pm local time (7 a.m. ET) on May 20.
"Production has been suspended at the site of the explosion until the completion of the investigation," Foxconn said in a statement.
It did not name the affected plant or say what it made, but China's official Xinhua News Agency said it was the Hongfujin Precision Electronics plant in a high-tech industrial zone west of Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province.
Apple shares closed down 1.56 percent at $335.22 on the Nasdaq, which saw a broad sell-off on euro-zone debt worries.
"We are deeply saddened by the tragedy at the Foxconn plant in Chengdu and our hearts go out to the victims and their families," he said. "We are working closely with Foxconn to understand what caused this terrible event."
Apple's iPad 2 commands 80 percent of the burgeoning tablet market in which Motorola Inc and Samsung Electronics Co Ltd also compete.
Apple sold 4.69 million iPads last quarter and is scrambling to meet staggering demand for the mobile device, but is heavily backlogged. Executives had expected production to ramp up during the present quarter to meet demand.
The plant explosion is the latest setback for Foxconn, the world's largest contract manufacturer.
The company made headlines last year after reports emerged about poor working conditions at factories in southern China, which critics say may have helped drive several employees to suicide.
Facing higher wages in the southern China manufacturing belt, the scene of labor disputes last year, some Taiwanese manufacturers have opted to shift some operations to the country's interior, where costs are lower.
Foxconn also has plants in North America and Mexico, as well as in European countries, including Slovakia and Poland.
(Additional reporting by Clare Jim in Taipei; Editing by Edwin Chan, Lisa Von Ahn, Richard Chang and Andre Grenon; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I¡¯ve decided to take the time to address one particular bit of stupidity this weekend. The lazy journalists who have no idea about the validity of claims about suicides at FoxConn. I haven¡¯t seen anyone verify more than a half-dozen suicides in one of Foxconn¡¯s city-factory complexes; but, even if they were double that number ¨C a reporter worth reading might have looked at numbers in other societies, other situations worth comparing. I live in a state in the US where the suicide rate is roughly triple that of the Foxconn reported deaths. And I don¡¯t think we can do much along the guilt by association with Apple demagoguery since we only have one Apple store in the state and no manufacturing of iPads, iPhones or any other of their products. Absurd.
May 21, 20112:31pm EDT--
