Analysis: China's worries swing from inflation to growth
2011-05-12 09:15:00.0
Analysis: China's worries swing from inflation to growth | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Analysis: China's worries swing from inflation to growth
Wed, May 11 2011
Tue, May 10 2011
Tue, May 10 2011
Mon, May 9 2011
Thu, May 5 2011
A view shows China World Trade Center Tower III (R) and other business buildings in Beijing's Central Business District, May 11, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
Thu  EDT
As is so often the case in China, the truth is likely to be much more evenly poised. Growth is slowing, but it is hardly falling off a cliff. And that slowdown was, after all, the desired outcome of official actions to tame inflation.
What's more, waning inflation will soon give the government leeway to take its foot off the policy-tightening brake and prevent the world's second-largest economy from decelerating too suddenly.
China reported on Wednesday that industrial output increased 13.4 percent in April year on year, more than 1 percentage point lower than both the previous month's pace and the consensus forecast of economists polled by Reuters.
With markets still reeling from last week's sharp drop in commodity prices, the Chinese data was seized on by jittery investors. For two straight days, oil prices, equities and other risky assets have come under heavy selling pressure.
Jim O'Neill, chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management, captured the mood on Thursday.
"It is my judgment that the Chinese economy is slowing down more than people realize," he said. "The data we saw this week is confirmation in my opinion that China is slowing down.
Growth will slow to 8 percent, down from 10.3 percent last year, while inflation will also fade, he said.
Just a month ago, investors were fixated on Chinese inflation, which appeared to be trending higher despite a battery of interest rate increases and lending restrictions.
The rapid swing of the pendulum of fear from inflation to growth exposes one fundamental truth about China. Official data is patchy and of dubious quality, regularly generating more heat than light about the state of the economy. And given the importance of China in driving global growth, that lack of clarity makes for volatile markets.
The difficulty in reading China's latest data was underscored by the varying reactions of analysts to consumer price inflation, which edged down to 5.3 percent in the year to April from 5.4 percent in March.
"Historical experience tells us it is not easy to quickly cool inflation from a level above 5 percent. It may rebound in some months and remain a challenge for the government," said Qiao Yongyuan, an economist at CEBM in Beijing.
Expecting two more interest rate rises by the middle of the year, Tao Wang and Harrison Hu from UBS in Beijing said in a research note: "We do not think we are at a policy inflection point."
But others instead focused on the drop in money growth. The broad M2 measure of money supply fell to 15.3 percent in April year on year, the lowest in 29 months, alleviating inflationary pressures.
"Inflation has basically peaked, and will start to fall in the third quarter. That means China's interest rate rise is approaching its end," said Li Xunlei, chief economist of Guotai Junan Securities in Shanghai.
Dong Xian'an, chief economist of Peking First Advisory, said: "With price rises easing and the economic growth slowing, China will loosen its tightening to help achieve a soft-landing."
Representing an extreme view, Wang Jian, a researcher with the National Development and Reform Commission, China's top economic planner, predicted that Beijing would actually cut interest rates in the second half.
Given the uncertainty about China's near-term momentum, a middle path seems most likely: the government will neither intensify tightening nor relax its stance.
"I think policy tightening is approaching its end. Policy-makers may take a wait-and-see approach," said Zhu Baoliang, chief economist at State Information Center, a top government think-tank.
That means the central bank will be wary of raising interest rates after four increases since October, though most economists still expect at least one further increase in the coming months.
With required reserve ratios already at a record high of 20.5 percent for big banks, the scope for further RRR increases is also narrowing.
Instead, the central bank seems determined to go about its business of controlling inflation more quietly.
A sign of that came this week when the central bank resumed issuance of three-year bills, which had been suspended since November because of weak demand.
"That makes further RRR rises unnecessary," Li of Guotai Junan said.
(Additional reporting by Kevin Yao and Michael Flaherty in Hong Kong; Editing by Simon Rabinovitch)
