Yum plans to buy out Little Sheep for $586 million
2011-05-13 08:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, May 12 2011
Thu, May 12 2011
Wed, May 11 2011
Wed, May 11 2011
Wed, May 11 2011
A view shows Yum Brands Inc's corporate headquarters in Louisville, Kentucky January 18, 2011. Credit: Reuters/John Sommers II
Fri  EDT
), parent of the KFC, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut fast-food chains, has offered to buy out China's Little Sheep 0968.HK for $586 million, paying a premium to introduce the popular hot pot chain to a global audience and sending the Chinese restaurant shares to a record.
Analysts said the deal was positive for both Yum Brands as it expands in China and for Little Sheep, which has more than 300 hot-pot restaurants, primarily in China, as it would help save costs.
Little Sheep said China's highly fragmented restaurant industry had seen competition intensify in recent years, and going private would reduce its exposure to market volatility and give it quicker access to growth capital.
"The deal is a positive for both parties," said Ample Capital analyst William Lo.
"It has synergy for both Yum and Little Sheep as they can share and save costs on logistics. (Little Sheep) can share costs with Yum's other operations such as Pizza Hut in China."
Yum offered to buy out most of the shares of Little Sheep that it does not already own at HK$6.50 each in cash for up to HK$4.56 billion, taking its stake to 93.2 percent from 27.2 percent. The price represents a 30 percent premium over the previous close.
"It is positive to Little Sheep with a premium of 30 percent, while Yum can increase product diversity," said Pacific Epoch retail analyst Marie Jiang.
Little Sheep is seen differently in terms of brand-name effect and the deal with Yum is expected to have a higher chance of receiving regulatory approval, Jiang said.
"The (offer) price is fair and is not expensive as it represents about 30 times P/E, which is similar to other restaurant operators such as Ajisen (China) Holdings Ltd (
)," said Lo from Ample Capital.
Analysts said the deal also reflected a strategy by global food operators, such as McDonald's Corp (
), in tapping the China market by localizing their products to suit local tastes.
Based in China's Inner Mongolia province, the Little Sheep chain is known for its fresh mutton and beef, colorful restaurants. It is also known for its environmentalist consciousness in using paper less offices, energy-saving electrical appliances and discouraging the use of disposable utensils.
"China is an important market for Yum Brands," said Sam Su, chairman and chief executive of Yum's China Division.
"In the long term, with its global business network and successful brand-building experience, Yum will work with Little Sheep to explore effective ways of introducing the hot pot concept and the Little Sheep brand to a wider global audience," Su said, without giving a timetable.
Chinese hot pot is meat and vegetables cooked in a variety of broths at one's table. Popular with families and groups, diners order raw chicken, fish, other meats and vegetables they cook themselves in a central pot or individual pots at each seat.
Little Sheep would stick to its plan of opening 40 outlets this year in China, Chairman Zhang Gang told a news conference.
The China division of Yum Brands opened more than 500 new restaurants in 2010. KFC continues to be the number one fast-food brand in the mainland with more than 3,200 outlets in more than 700 cities. It also has 520 Pizza Hut restaurants in more than 130 cities.
(Additional reporting by Terril Jones in Beijing; Editing by Chris Lewis and Dhara Ranasinghe)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sell hot pot abroad? hahahahhaha. I live in Sichuan and I love hot pot but there is no way, outside of maybe New Mexico,that foreigners will want to eat so much spicy oil. If this shows up in your neighborhood, unlikely, you should give it a chance. Hot pot is delicious, but to spicy for most people. Funny how I¡¯ve lived in the home town of hot pot for so many years and never heard of this hot pot brand name. Must be some Shanghai scum brand.
May 14, 20118:01am EDT--
