U.S. adopts harsher tone toward China on human rights
2011-05-11 20:16:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States is taking a harsher tone toward China on human rights, saying its record is "deplorable" and calling it a "fool's errand" to try to halt the march of freedom.
In an interview with the Atlantic Magazine published on Tuesday, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton took the Chinese to task in some of her most vivid language to date.
"We don't walk away from dealing with China because we think they have a deplorable human rights record," she said in the April 7 interview, which focused largely on political upheaval in the Middle East.
"They're worried, and they are trying to stop history, which is a fool's errand," she added. "They cannot do it. But they're going to hold it off as long as possible."
In keeping with its normal practice, the State Department released a transcript of the interview after the magazine published its story, which fell on the final day of the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue.
Both Clinton and Vice President Joe Biden also raised human rights at the start of that annual U.S.-China meeting on Monday, a high-profile setting that left no doubt that U.S. officials want to be more public in their criticism.
China watchers attributed the more robust U.S. rhetoric to Beijing's crackdown itself and to a White House desire to show the American public it takes the issue seriously, particularly in light of the anti-authoritarian protests in the Arab world.
CHINA 'MORE AGGRESSIVE'
"Partly it's that the Chinese government has been considerably more aggressive itself in limiting human rights," said Sophie Richardson, China director for Human Rights Watch, a U.S.-based advocacy group.
"The administration has had to make itself somewhat more consistent -- at least rhetorically -- with what they have said and done on the Middle East," she added.
China has jailed, detained or placed in secretive informal custody dozens of dissidents, human rights lawyers and protesters it fears will challenge Communist Party rule.
A party leadership succession in late 2012 is encouraging China to keep a hard grip on dissent, as is anxiety that anti-authoritarian uprisings in the Arab world might inspire similar movements on the Chinese mainland.
Kenneth Lieberthal of the Brookings Institution think tank in Washington said the Obama administration initially decided to pull its punches in public, partly out of a belief that such criticism was unlikely to work with the Chinese.
"There clearly has been a decision to say publicly what they have been saying privately to the Chinese from the beginning of the administration," he said.
"Having said that, I would be surprised if there is a strong belief at the highest levels of the U.S. government that going public will make this more effective ... in moving the Chinese forward."
"The statements are good, are strong, but it has no meaning because it's not being tied to any U.S. policy to improve human rights in China," Kumar said. "We need the rhetoric but without any action to follow it up, it becomes meaningless."
