China says emerging powers should help lead IMF
2011-05-19 08:43:00.0
(Reuters) - The International Monetary Fund's future leadership should reflect the growing clout of emerging economies, China's central bank governor said on Thursday, joining other developing nations in pressing for greater influence on the world stage.
In its most detailed remarks to date on the crisis faced by International Monetary Fund (IMF) after its head resigned over charges of sexual assault, China said top ranks within the IMF should reflect changing trends in the global economy.
"The composition of senior management should better reflect changes in global economic patterns and represent emerging markets," said Zhou Xiaochuan, the head of the People's Bank of China.
Zhou's remarks came amid intensifying political jockeying over who should lead the fund, an overseer of the world's monetary system.
European politicians have said that a European should lead the IMF, while emerging economies have suggested that one of their own should be elected.
No Chinese officials figure in the list of possible candidates to lead the IMF, although some analysts and media commentators in China have suggested that Zhu Min, a special adviser at the fund, could take the helm.
Zhou, whose remarks were published in a statement on the central bank's website, said the IMF should pick future leaders based on their "ability, morality and diligence."
"We need the support of a strong and vigorous IMF to surmount the current hardships in Europe and ensure that the world economy continues developing in the direction of vigor, sustainability and balance," Zhou said.
It is in China's interests to be represented in the IMF leadership as it has been pressing for the yuan to be included in the IMF's Special Drawing Rights.
China wants its currency to be incorporated in the SDR in part to boost its global economic influence, and to cut its dependence on a weak dollar.
As such, China's foreign ministry said on Thursday that it was "paying close attention" to developments at the IMF, and called for the fund to reform its structure and governance.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley and Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I guess china was offered the seat to UNSC by India, but now China is making hard for others to join to club who have more legitimate credentials..
China has known to offer nuke techonology to every rouge country, besides being signatory of NPT; while we Aussie still sell stacks of Uranium to them ¨C now compare that with India.
China has used hegemony approach to rise, its records on Human rights, crushing Tibetans in 14 day brutal and bloody war leving millions of civilian dead in just 14 days, constantly black mailing small nations in South of China sea, supplying arms to Zimbabwe and Darfur¡­. While India has left Indian Ocean open to trade and always treated small nations like SLanka with respect.
How does it fair that China is sitting on top of the UNSC table for its own benifit?
May 19, 201112:14pm EDT--
not to mention that China is a currency pegging mercantilist. Like the head of the IMF would ever be from such a power that distorts global economies to suit itself. The goal of the IMF is to stabilize global exchange, not beggar thy neighbor.
May 19, 20117:15pm EDT--
Furthermore, china is already known to steal confidential IMF bidding information in order to out-bid other nations and companies on international development projects. Do you think that china will act responsibly with one of their own as the head of the IMF? No Way!!! Instead, china would be given unbridled access to all the sensitive IMF documents, in order for the CCP to further manipulate international trade and development.
May 20, 201110:30am EDT--
