Financial crisis in developing economies inevitable: report
2011-05-14 05:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China will be able to avoid a financial crisis that is due to hit other developing countries over the next five to 10 years, a central bank adviser was quoted as saying on Saturday.
Li Daokui told a forum that emerging economies such as Brazil and India face fiscal and current account deficits and a crisis was "inevitable," Caijing Magazine reported on its website www.caijing.com.cn.
"China will play an very important role during the financial consolidation. But there will be no such crisis in China because it is quite different from most other developing and developed countries," he said.
The U.S. dollar, euro, and the yen are expected to face downward pressure over the medium and long term, he added.
In February, the Indian government raised "serious concern" about a trade deficit that could more than double to $278.5 billion in three years and may cause an unquestionable current account deficit.
Brazil's current account deficit ballooned to a record for the month of March as foreign companies in Brazil sent more profits home and Brazilians spent more on travel and goods overseas.
In January, the International Monetary Fund warned fiscal balances in Brazil, China and India were weaker than the IMF earlier projected, noting a deterioration in Brazil's fiscal accounts was "particularly pronounced.
Rousseff's administration has since announced budget cuts, a move which Moody's Investors Service said was a positive signal but the country still need to do more to earn an upgrade on its sovereign debt rating.
Brazil's debt-to-GDP ratio held steady at 39.9 percent in March.
(Reporting by Kazunori Takada; Editing by DAniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Hahahahahahha.. So a CHINESE educated/ Party mouthpiece told a CHINESE Magazine that every emerging country but CHINA will be impacted by future financial trouble except for CHINA. Funny that this was reported by a Japanese reporter, they are usually a little more objective, but then again, Reuters is not! It would be nice to get real Analysis every once in a while.
May 14, 20117:37am EDT--
