Analysis: China trade deal follow-up critical
2011-05-11 18:45:00.0
(Reuters) - The "promising shifts" in China's economic policy hailed by Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner this week will require holding Beijing's feet to the fire -- if the past record is any guide.
"We are seeing very promising shifts in the direction of Chinese economic policy," Geithner declared as the two days of talks ended.
Engage China, a coalition of financial services trade associations including bankers and insurers, applauded the talks results but with a strong caveat that "truly meaningful progress" awaited major changes in regulatory policies that discriminate against non-Chinese firms.
The guarded responses, experts say, are born of experience with promised reforms by China that never materialize, or that go on the books in Beijing but are ignored in the provinces.
"The commitments always sound good on paper, but the question is going to be what it always is: Are they going to actually implement them in the real world?" said William Reinsch, a member of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Commission, which advises the U.S. Congress.
"The record is one of pretty consistent promises, followed by not doing anything," he said.
"INDIGENOUS INNOVATION" NOT DEAD?
The centerpiece result of this year's talks, from the U.S. standpoint, was China's pledge to separate government procurement from its so-called "indigenous innovation" policy that seeks to advance Chinese technological progress.
U.S. officials and businesses complain the policy either shuts foreigners out of markets for computers, machinery, telecommunications gear and other goods worth tens of billions of dollars a year or forces them to transfer technology to local competitors as the price of market entry.
China's pledge to cut the procurement-technology link, first made by President Hu Jintao in January and clarified on Tuesday by senior officials, leaves questions unanswered.
"They've taken out the most egregious bits, but the general thrust of the policy is still there," said a former U.S. trade negotiator now working for a private consultancy.
"Much government procurement is done at provincial and local levels," he said. "They can still give preference to local companies in many ways."
A U.S. business source, who like the trade consultant spoke on condition of anonymity, said the procurement pledge did not contain a time line for implementation or a plan to revise Chinese law to eliminate discriminatory product lists.
"It's not clear if -- without clear, transparent and open guidance from the Chinese government to the provincial authorities that these lists are null and void -- the local authorities will stop using them," he said.
Reinsch, a former trade negotiator, said the issue cuts to a struggle in Beijing between proponents of a more open economy and those committed to a status quo of state control.
"It's not bad faith. These people are not lying to us," he said of China's negotiators. "But they must go back and answer to people in Beijing, some of whom have very different views."
When it comes to trade talks, "the Chinese are going to shut down," said Derek Scissors of the Heritage Foundation. "They are going to tell us to stuff it on every single issue through 2012 -- if not 2013."
The remaining months of this year are seen as critical to lock in China's pledges, because the start of campaigning for the 2012 presidential elections could bring a harsh focus on Chinese trade policies.
Vice President Joe Biden will visit Beijing as a guest of China's heir-apparent Xi Jinping this summer, while President Barack Obama will host an economic summit in Hawaii and Xi will visit the United States toward the end of the year. Working-level trade talks are slated for late 2011.
"Our hope is that subsequent dialogues, including the forthcoming exchange of visits by the U.S. and Chinese vice presidents, will lead to additional market access in China for American firms," said Myron Brilliant, a senior vice president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
(Additional reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Leslie Adler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The penetration of American firms in china is far greater than chinese firms in the US. Of course you will never hear this because greed has no limits; our corporate execs will NEVER say that a foreign market is open enough, is friendly enough, etc. The sad thing is the populace believes this and then scapegoats and politicians run with this misconception too. How many chinese companies can you name in the US? It¡¯s laughable. Yet, for example, foreign car brands are 70% of the chinese market!! We cry when foreign automakers approach 30%. ¡°Holding Bejing¡¯s feet to the fire¡± is a very condescending way to view things. They probably have their own huge domestic squabbles and find changing policies difficult. We should view things comparatively. Do you see our politicians making promises and not keep them? And how about the complete hypocrisy of our subsidized financial firms asking for more fair market access? These subsidies (TARP, etc.) totaling hundreds if not thousands of billions of dollars are by far and away the largest in the history of the world. It doesn¡¯t stop there of course. We can infuse tens of billions of dollars into GM which has the largest market share in china of foreign AND domestic producers there, and continue to gripe about access. Amazing¡­
May 11, 20117:36pm EDT--
