Analysis: Volvo China union bearing fruit after rocky honeymoon
2011-05-12 12:37:00.0
(Reuters) - When Geely Auto snapped up Swedish car maker Volvo last year in what was to be China's largest auto acquisition, the uneasy marriage might have best been described by the Chinese saying: "Same bed, different dreams".
Nine months later, the strategy differences which marked the early stage of the partnership appear to have been smoothed over and Volvo is beginning to make inroads in the world's largest auto market.
Its new S60 model has been launched to critical acclaim, while plans for a new factory in south-western China are well underway. And Volvo's sleek new Universe concept car, unveiled at the Shanghai auto show last month, has taken a step toward shedding its image as a maker of safe but boring cars.
There had been "huge mismatch" between the Geely leadership and the Volvo leadership regarding issues such as product strategies and plant selections, according to one source with direct knowledge of the early Volvo internal meetings.
"I've never in my whole career seen such as huge gap between the management of an acquirer and the acquired company," said the source, who could not be identified because he is not authorized to talk to the media.
For Li Shufu, the architect of the Volvo-Geely deal and now chairman of both, selling big, luxurious cars was the only way the Swedish brand could make up for lost time in the Chinese market.
Li, a farmer's son who built Geely into one of China's largest non-state automaker in less than two decades, had made his fortune building cheap cars for the masses. He wanted Volvo to tap the growing number of China's wealthy and knew what he wanted from the brand.
"When it comes to luxury cars in China, the fancier the better. Few have an eye for Volvo's Scandinavian no-frills style, to be honest," Li said ahead of announcing Volvo's five year development plan in Beijing in late February.
But that wasn't the way Volvo's management team in Goteborg, led by Stefan Jacoby, saw things at least initially.
"Let's ditch this talk about premium," Jacoby told Britain's Autocar in November, two months after replacing Briton Stephen Odell at the helm of Volvo.
"It sounds like a pricing strategy and it's got an expensive ring to it. We need to focus on elegant Scandinavian simplicity, our own unique identity, and not copy our competitors."
By all accounts, Geely and Volvo -- a Chinese peasant boy and a European princess, as Li likes to say -- are unlikely partners, and the marriage is far from one made in heaven.
"If you bring the Chinese and Europeans together, they will disagree. They have different views of the world and different views on how to move forward," said Klaus Paur, managing director of Greater China at industry consultancy Synovate Motoresearch.
But both Geely and Volvo see China as a rare opportunity for the Swedish brand, which had languished under the care of Ford Motor (
Even in 2010, its best year ever, Volvo delivered slightly more than 30,000 cars in China, equivalent to 13 percent of front runner Audi (
) and less than a fifth of sales by BMW, which raised its annual target three times but still surpassed even that higher target by year-end.
In the end, the sheer scope of China's premier car market might bring the two sides more closer together.
Now, having lagged behind other top automakers in China, Volvo faces an "all or nothing" opportunity, industry observers say. It's starting to get some traction, having managed to make its first profit in five years in 2010.
"They are not getting the growth in America, they might get some growth in Europe because of Eastern Europe and Russia. But China will decide the fate of Volvo," said Michael Dunne, president of industry consultancy Dunne & Company.
Volvo says it has already worked out the China strategy, including meticulous product schemes and annual sales target for each year running up to 2015.
What happens inside the corporate boardroom is unclear, but at least in public, the top executives are making nice.
On Feb 25, Jacoby and Li formed a united front in Beijing to announce Volvo's up to $11 billion five-year development plan, including its first China plant.
The former Volkswagen north America chief executive denied any disagreement within Volvo, describing his Chinese boss as "a very challenging entrepreneur, a visionary and a listener".
"We want to be more luxury, we want to be more upscale, but of course we will contribute to the environmental requirements and objectives as well," said the 52-year old Jacoby, treading the middle ground and toning down his remarks from three months ago.
"In the future, I imagine, we will have cars you just mentioned for China only," he said, in response to queries on Volvo's plan to take on the likes of Mercedes-Benz S-class.
For his part, Li is also reaching out to help bridge the cultural gap after his many trips to Sweden.
"The Swedes care about the essence of a matter rather than how it looks. There are hardly any fancy hotels in Sweden, but the comfort, the coziness and the functionality in these hotels are many many times more than any luxury facilities in China," he told reporters.
"It's the same approach for Volvo. They are not just dress it up today, sell it tomorrow and collect the money the day after. They care about quality, safety and the environment as well."
The toned-down rhetoric may help patch up differences over strategic visions, but the real test is whether a reconciliation will come in time to grab a piece of the booming luxury market that is being gobbled up by competitors.
Volvo has made a promising start. When the brand-new S60 rolled into Chinese showrooms in March, the reception was enthusiastic for a brand that has long been a distant rival to the top German brands.
"It's is dynamic and sporty, very different from Volvo cars that I have seen before. And it feels a bit like a BMW when it's on the road," said Roger Zhang, a 34-year lawyer who had put a 10,000 yuan down payment at a Beijing dealer.
The S60, described by designer Orjan Sterner as a four door coupe, will give the BMW 3 series a run for its money, said Britain's biggest car buyer's guide, What Car?
The positive vibes are also spreading through Volvo's factory floors in Goteborg and to the union which had at one point resisted a Chinese takeover.
"There has been quite a big change in a positive sense compared to the last few years," Glenn Bergstrom, IF Metall Union representative at Volvo Cars, told Reuters.
There was no will to go forward or invest, nor any long-term plan or will from Ford, he said, recalling the days when the heavily-indebted U.S. automaker was struggling to avoid the fate of its cross-town rival, General Motors (
"You really feel an expansive wind blowing through the company and through the board. There is a lot on the agenda, lots of plans and aspirations and that feels very exciting."
Li also noticed the change in his Swedish employees: "They are all motivated and full of fight, like tigers set free."
At the other side of the continent, Volvo's Chinese management team, made up of English speaking executives plucked from multinationals such as Fiat (
) and Ford, are equally spirited, working day and night and at weekends during and after the acquisition.
But Bergstrom, reading a management book recommended by Li, still has some reservations on Volvo going more upscale.
Li and his team also still face an uphill battle to shed Volvo's image as maker of safe but boring cars and convince Chinese consumers that the 84-year old leopard is still capable of changing its spots.
Many industry observers are confident Geely and Volvo, now ready to build its first China plant in the southwest, will make it.
"I wouldn't bet against Li Shufu. Everything he has done in his life has turned out good," said Synovate's Paur.
"Even if they end up selling a little bit less than the target in 2015, it will still be a considerable success."
(Additional reporting by Ken Wills in BEIJING; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
