China's fund sales reform won't challenge local banks' dominance
2011-05-11 05:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Beijing's pledge to open its domestic fund sales and custodian businesses to foreign lenders, while potentially giving a long-term boost to overseas financial firms in China's $400 billion mutual funds industry, is seen doing little to shake the current domination by China's top banks.
), Bank of China (
Around two-thirds of mutual funds sold in China are through banks, with ICBC, Bank of China and China Construction Bank holding a dominant market share, according to Shanghai-based fund consultancy Z-Ben Advisors.
"Their limited sales networks and yuan deposit base mean foreign banks won't steal a big slice of the market share from their Chinese peers," said Zhang Haochuan, analyst at Z-Ben.
During the Sino-U.S. Strategic and Economic Dialogue, China promised on Tuesday to allow foreign banks incorporated in the country to offer mutual funds and act as fund custodians, although it did not give a timetable.
The Big Four banks, which also includes Agricultural Bank of China (
), operate tens of thousands of outlets across China and boast hundreds of millions of retail customers.
By comparison, HSBC Holdings Plc (
), the biggest foreign bank in China in terms of sales networks, has 108 outlets, while Citigroup (
"If you look at the size of foreign banks' networks or client base in China, I don't think they will make a big impact in terms of mutual fund sales," said Li Datao, a marketing official at ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co, the fund venture of ICBC.
More than 30 foreign financial firms, including HSBC, Morgan Stanley (
Fund houses in Chinacan also raise money locally for overseas investment under the so-called Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor (QDII) scheme. That scheme has not changed, and Chinese retail demand for such products has been lukewarm since the recent global financial crisis.
The custodian business, in which securities are held in trust for others, may be a potential positive for international asset managers. But even in that, local banks have a virtual lock as they have historically bundled distribution with custody, said Keith Pogosn, a managing partner at Ernst & Young.
Citigroup welcomed Beijing's latest move.
"Citi has significant global expertise in mutual funds and as we continue to invest in all aspects of our business in China, we welcome the ability to conduct mutual fund business in China, subject to regulatory approval," Steven Thomas, spokesman for the U.S. bank, said.
And while domestic banks are calling the shots now, the picture may be different in the longer term, which is what many foreign financial firms are eyeing, given the growth possibilities. China's mutual funds industry is expected to jump 150 percent by 2015 to $1 trillion in assets, according to consultancy Z-Ben.
"Rome was not built in a day," said Pogosn of Ernst & Young.
(Additional reporting by Kazunori Takada in Shanghai and Nishant Kumar in Hong Kong; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
