China eases trade rules, allows U.S. fund sales
2011-05-11 06:11:00.0
China eases trade rules, allows U.S. fund sales | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China eases trade rules, allows U.S. fund sales
Tue, May 10 2011
Wed, May 11 2011
Tue, May 10 2011
Tue, May 10 2011
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner (3rd L) and China's Vice Premier Wang Qishan shake hands after participating in a signing ceremony for a ''U.S.-China Comprehensive Framework for Promoting Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth and Economic Cooperation'', during the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue at the Treasury Department in Washington, May 10, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Jason Reed
Wed  EDT
The pledges were made in two days of talks between the world's two biggest economies which ended with both sides hailing progress in their often tense relationship.
The difficulties in relations, particularly in human rights issues, were underscored by U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who described Beijing's rights decord as "deplorable" in a magazine interview. China's current crackdown on dissent, she said, amounted to "a fool's errand".
But on economic matters, officials were upbeat after talks.
"We are seeing very promising shifts in the direction of Chinese economic policy," U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said.
The annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue yielded more results on economic issues than some analysts had expected, although many remained skeptical China's market-opening vows would translate into concrete benefits for U.S. business.
While some advances were made on the economic track, there was scant movement on thorny diplomatic issues.
"The outcome of this round of meetings shows a clear understanding on both sides that the two countries have shared long-term economic interests and there is scope for a mutually beneficial bargain," said Eswar Prasad of the Brookings Institution in Washington.
"The real flashpoints are on political and security issues, including human rights," he added.
Clinton, in an interview conducted last month with The Atlantic magazine and released just as the talks ended, said disputes over human rights would not stop U.S. engagement with China.
"We don't walk away from dealing with China because we think they have a deplorable human rights record," Clinton said, according to a transcript released by the State Department.
China, she told the magazine, was anxious about the uprisings jolting the Middle East and North Africa.
"They're worried, and they are trying to stop history, which is a fool's errand. They cannot do it. But they're going to hold it off as long as possible."
Both sides repeated their stances on North Korea, where China has resisted U.S. pressure to act more forcefully to persuade Pyongyang to back down from confrontation and resume nuclear disarmament talks.
They reiterated their positions on Iran but made no new announcements. China has reluctantly backed U.N. sanctions aimed at curbing Tehran's nuclear ambitions, but U.S. officials say that some Chinese entities are not complying with them and have urged Beijing to tighten up.
Even so, a senior Chinese finance official said the talks were a "win-win" for both countries. China claimed Washington gave ground by easing restrictions on high-tech exports though U.S. officials said only they would weigh Beijing's concerns.
On the key issue of exchange rates, Geithner said China needed to allow a faster rise in the value of the yuan, a comment brushed back by China's Vice Finance Minister Zhu Guangyao, who said Beijing will move at its own speed.
The yuan has appreciated 5.14 percent since being loosened from a two-year peg to the dollar last June, well below what many U.S. lawmakers believe is needed to allow for a level playing field for U.S. producers in global markets.
China on Tuesday reported a hefty trade surplus and record exports in April, ammunition for its overseas critics.
Surprisingly, according to a U.S. official, China -- the United States' biggest creditor -- raised no concerns about U.S. budget deficits, which could top out at $1.4 trillion this year.
In a potentially big step forward for U.S. firms seeking more access to China's financial services market, China agreed to let U.S. and other foreign banks sell mutual funds in China and provide custodial services.
However, some U.S. commentators said China's past behavior suggested U.S. companies might see little benefit.
"They let you in the market under conditions where you cannot be a real competitor," Derek Scissors of the conservative Heritage Foundation said. "That's what they've done every single time, so that's what I expect will happen with mutual funds."
U.S. officials indicated Beijing would also consider letting foreign insurance companies sell auto insurance for the first time in China, which is becoming the world's largest car market.
As part of efforts to spur innovation, Beijing had sought to ensure government purchases came from firms using Chinese-owned technology.
However, in January, China pledged that government purchases would be delinked from its "indigenous innovation" policies.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley and Andrew Quinn in Washington and Ross Kerber in Boston; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
With the massive debt and currency manipulation being in total control of everything, why would anyone think that America is going to benefit? Talk is cheap, been here, done that. Next year at this time they will still be eating our lunch and we will still be wiping their behind! When will the stupidity of the American politician end?
May 11, 201111:43am EDT--
now the sovereignty of China will be in the control of the same international conglomerates that govts all over the world have turned over their monies to with no internal audit control, and immunity from prosecutions. Even murder is immune. Congress did this here and one nation after another has turned over all human rights to these faceless entities which care nothing for civil rights, constitutions and judges orders and terms of their contracts are violated. in the USA they won¡¯t even pay their taxes and IRS is ¡® helpless¡¯ against them.
May 11, 201112:06am EDT--
