China hails death of bin Laden, defends partner Pakistan
2011-05-03 05:07:00.0
China hails death of bin Laden, defends partner Pakistan | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China hails death of bin Laden, defends partner Pakistan
Figurines of U.S. President Barrack Obama (R) and al Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden are displayed for sale at a souvenir shop in Shanghai May 2, 2011. Bin Laden was killed in a U.S. special forces assault on a Pakistani compound, then quickly buried at sea, in a dramatic end to the long manhunt for the al Qaeda leader who had been the guiding star of global terrorism. The Chinese characters in the foreground read, ''Do not touch''. Picture taken May 2, 2011. Credit: Reuters/China Daily
Tue, May 3 2011
Tue, May 3 2011
Mon, May 2 2011
Mon, May 2 2011
Mon, May 2 2011
Tue  EDT
Beijing and Washington have gone through bouts of friction over Taiwan and Tibet, regional security and most recently China's clampdown on dissent and human rights activists.
China showed no appetite, however, for turning the U.S. raid that killed bin Laden on Pakistani soil into a point of dispute.
"We have noted the announcement and believe that this is a major event and a positive development in the international struggle against terrorism," Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu said about the White House's announcement that bin Laden, the al Qaeda leader who orchestrated the September 11 attacks, was killed in a U.S. raid, Chinese newspapers reported on Tuesday.
Next week, officials from China and the United States meet in Washington for a Strategic and Economic Dialogue, annual talks to help manage disagreements over trade, currency issues and foreign policy.
But the Chinese spokeswoman, Jiang, made a point of standing by Pakistan, Beijing's closest partner in south Asia, which has faced criticism from U.S. lawmakers and others that the discovery of bin Laden hiding so close to Islamabad showed Pakistan had done too little to fight terror threats.
"Pakistan stands at the forefront of the international struggle against terrorism," Jiang told a regular news conference, after her initial statement on bin Laden had appeared.
"The Pakistani government's determination to fight terrorism is staunch and its actions have been vigorous. Pakistan has made important contributions to the international struggle against terror," she said.
Critics of Beijing's policies in Xinjiang, which shares a border with Pakistan, have said it has exaggerated those links to justify political and religious controls on the restive Muslim Uighur minority.
China and Pakistan call each other "all-weather friends" and their close ties have been underpinned by longstanding wariness of their common neighbor, India, and a desire to hedge against U.S. influence in the region.
China is building nuclear reactors in Pakistan despite grave misgivings from other countries, which fear proliferation and safety risks.
Bin Laden's death and any rift between the United States and Pakistan will not affect Beijing's policies toward Islamabad, said Guo Xian'gang, vice president of the China Institute of International Studies, a government think tank.
"China's role in Pakistan won't change because of this. In the eyes of the Chinese government and people, bin Laden was a terrorist ringleader," said Guo. "But I do think we have to understand that his death does not mean the death of al Qaeda -- there's still the real risk of counter-attacks."
"China has always opposed all forms of terrorism," said Jiang. "China advocates that the international community enhance international anti-terror cooperation and adopt comprehensive steps to treat both the symptoms and the root causes of terrorism."
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let¡¯s be clear about China. ¡°Terrorism¡± to China is what the US is trying to do to bring democracy to that country, and ¡°terrorism¡± to the US is what China is trying to do to the US to support rogue nations like Pakistan, North Korea, Burma, Iran, Zimbabwe, etc. This is the classic case of good guys versus bad guys. The government of China and its cronies are the bad guys. Caught in the middle of all this are the good Chinese people who are oblivious to how evil their government is. To a large extent, China¡¯s top leaders are among the most evil in the world, and if anyone can be called terrorists, it is certainly the Chinese Communist Party¡¯s Poliburo which is composed of 9 idealogues all past their primes.
May 03, 20115:31am EDT--
Yes, Marisa, yes ma¡¯m, whatever you say.
May 03, 201111:46am EDT--
Marisa, when the CIA arms and trains al-Queda and other religious extremists to attack a country, what do you call that? Freedom?
May 04, 20114:45am EDT--
