U.S. complaints about China yuan unfounded: Chen
2011-05-09 14:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China's commerce minister, Chen Deming, on Monday said U.S. complaints about China's currency practices were "unfounded," as the two sides held the first of two days of high-level economic talks.
"From the perspective of trade, the West's fears and worries about China's renminbi exchange rate are unfounded because over the past three years China's trade surplus has continuously dropped," Chen told reporters covering the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue meeting.
Chen noted that in the first quarter of 2011 China actually had a trade deficit, instead of a surplus.
"So from the perspective of trade balances, China's renminbi exchange rate mechanism reform has been proceeding in a very healthy manner," he said.
U.S. manufacturers complain that China's practices on managing the renminbi, also known as the yuan, give its producers an unfair trade advantage.
Senator Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat, said on Monday in a statement he believed Congress should pass legislation to pressure China to move more quickly to a market-oriented exchange rate policy.
"China's unfair currency manipulation has gone on for far too long, and it's clear that legislation is needed to level the playing field," Brown said.
"The Chinese government has taken small steps to allow the yuan to appreciate, but it is not enough. Actions speak louder than words, and we've heard a lot of words over the years," he added.
China loosened its currency from a nearly two-year peg to the dollar in June, and this year the People's Bank of China has guided the yuan to record highs. It has now appreciated about 5 percent since June and 1.5 percent since the start of this year.
On Monday, before the talks in Washington began, China's central bank fixed the yuan's daily mid-point versus the dollar at a record high in what many traders said appeared to be a goodwill gesture to Washington.
China's big trade surplus with the United States is a cause of trade friction between Beijing and Washington.
Many U.S. lawmakers believe the trade gap reflects Beijing's yuan currency policies, which they say make Chinese goods artificially cheap, boosting Chinese exports and undercutting U.S. competitiveness.
Despite a pledge by both countries to work together on overcoming global imbalances, the U.S. trade deficit with China in 2010 rose to $273.1 billion, a 20.4 percent rise in the shortfall in 2009.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley, Paul Eckert and Doug Palmer; Editing by Leslie Adler)
