Factbox: The future of nuclear fusion
2011-05-03 03:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China is one of a number of countries pursuing technologies that could provide the ultimate solution to the world's energy needs -- nuclear fusion.
Experts say cheap and plentiful supplies of power can be created by fusing the hydrogen isotopes of deuterium and radioactive tritium, a principle already demonstrated in the explosion of the world's first hydrogen bomb in 1952.
Essentially, two nuclei are fused together to create a new nucleus that weighs less than the sum of its parts. The excess mass is released in the form of energy, in accordance with Einstein's famous equation, e=mc2.
While researchers across the globe have struggled to turn theory into practice in the last half-century, breakthroughs have been made, and some predict that working fusion reactors could be part of the world's energy mix by 2060.
Beijing has signed up to ITER, the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor, a project launched in France in 2009 and calling on the expertise of Russia, the United States, Japan, South Korea and the European Union.
It also has a number of domestic laboratories working on fusion reactors, including EAST and the Southwest Institute of Physics in Chengdu.
* 1952 - The United States tests its first "H-Bomb," in which a conventional nuclear explosion is used to generate the temperatures required to fuse hydrogen isotopes and create an even greater explosive power.
* 1964 - General Electric's exhibit at the World's Fair in New York includes "the wonders of atomic energy" and includes an experimental fusion reactor. The company says fusion could eventually supply a billion years worth of electricity.
* 1978 - International Atomic Energy Authority launches international initiative for fusion research. Scientists from Europe, the Soviet Union, Japan and the United States set up INTOR workshop to share research on fusion technologies.
* 2009 - The construction of ITER formally begins in Cadarache in southern France, with costs expected to reach 10 billion euros.
(Reporting by David Stanway; editing by Bill Tarrant)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
May 03, 20114:34pm EDT--
Good project. As long as the US Dept of Energy isn¡¯t running it it can be made to work. I don¡¯t thing our DOE could ever get through the paper work.
May 03, 20118:13pm EDT--
JEYF, I don¡¯t think you understand what nuclear fusion is all about. The reaction isn¡¯t a matter of adding a neutron to a tritium atom. It¡¯s a matter of fusing two hydrogen atoms together to yield a helium atom. Deuterium and Tritium, or ¡°heavy water,¡± which contain hydrogen atoms with extra neutrons, are the usual sources of the hydrogen. It¡¯s a far more difficult reaction to initiate than fission. Fission is easy. Just bring uranium atoms into close proximity and the reaction starts. Fusion, on the other hand, requires incredible energy to heat the hydrogen sufficiently. For example, it takes so much energy to set off a hydrogen bomb that it requires atom bombs to compress the hydrogen sufficiently.
May 05, 20115:50am EDT--
