Sen. Schumer revives threat of action on China yuan
2011-04-28 15:23:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Apr 27 2011
Tue, Apr 26 2011
Fri, Apr 22 2011
Wed, Apr 20 2011
Wed, Apr 20 2011
Senator Charles Schumer (D-NY) celebrates his re-election victory at a rally in New York November 2, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Shannon Stapleton
Thu  EDT
"Despite its rampant inflation problem, China's government does not seem prepared to let the value of the yuan rise much higher above its present level," Senator Charles Schumer said in a statement following a recent trip to Beijing.
"In our meeting last week, (China's Central Bank) Governor Zhou repeatedly sought to portray the yuan's recent gains against the dollar as adequate even though more aggressive appreciation is clearly needed," he said. "I made clear to him that this would leave the U.S. Congress with no choice but to respond."
China's exchange rate policies have been a sore spot in U.S.-China relations for years with Washington accusing Beijing of deliberately undervaluing its currency to give Chinese companies an unfair trade advantage.
Schumer's threat comes just a few weeks before top Chinese officials will be in Washington for high-level talks with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner.
Last year, Congress came the closest ever to passing legislation to deal with the issue. However, a bill approved by the House of Representatives died in the Senate. The House bill clarified the Commerce Department could treat undervalued currencies as a subsidy under U.S. trade law, opening the door for companies to seek countervailing duties on Chinese imports.
"I am more convinced than ever that legislation is needed to force countries like China that manipulate their currencies to play by the rules and let their currencies freely float. Confronting this issue is an economic imperative," said Schumer, the No. 3 Democrat in the Senate and a longtime critic of China's exchange rate policies.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Bill Trott)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sure Mr. Schumer,our country is in the tank because you politicians threw away all our tax dollars to buy votes, so nopw you want to start a trade war with china ¨C blame our troubles on them and cover up your own misdeeds.
Apr 28, 20113:02pm EDT--
¡°A Top Senator¡± Yea The Big Top. Charlie surely is a Top Clown in a town full of clowns. He just might make China laugh all the way to the bank and finish off the dollar along with it. China will do what¡¯s good for China not what¡¯s good for the Feds Big Top Circus/Magic Act. Go ahead a wave that magic wand Mr. Schumer and see what happens.
Apr 28, 20114:18pm EDT--
I say go for it guys¡­you ever looked at where the products made at the ¡°Dollar Store¡± and WalMart come from. I think we can do without that junk! Let American¡¯s fill the void.
Apr 28, 20115:18pm EDT--
