China reassures U.S. on government contracts
2011-05-10 14:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, May 10 2011
Mon, May 9 2011
Mon, May 9 2011
Mon, May 9 2011
Fri, May 6 2011
U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner (L) and China's Vice Premier Wang Qishan shake hands after participating in a signing ceremony for a ''U.S.-China Comprehensive Framework for Promoting Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth and Economic Cooperation'', during the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue at the Treasury Department in Washington, May 10, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Jason Reed
Tue  EDT
U.S. and European companies have complained that China's policy of giving preferential access to its government procurement market to products with locally created intellectual property is aimed at helping Chinese firms.
In a policy speech on May 4, U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke cited as a key China market challenge "indigenous innovation policies that shut foreign companies entirely out of industries or make unacceptable technology transfer provisions a condition of operating in China."
A senior Chinese official said on Tuesday a pledge made by China earlier this year to separate government procurement from the country's so-called indigenous innovation policy applies to local governments as well as the central government.
"I think this commitment applies not only to the central government but also will apply to local governments," Zhang Xiaoqing, the director of China's Reform and Development Commission, told a news conference.
Zhang's remarks hours before the end of the annual U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Washington appeared to amplify on a key promise that Chinese President Hu Jintao made during a January visit to Washington.
Foreign companies have worried that China's use of government procurement preferences to encourage indigenous innovation would force them to transfer technology in order to compete in the country's vast public works market.
U.S. business groups welcomed Zhang's clarification but said they wanted to see it enshrined in agreements to be unveiled by the two countries later on Tuesday.
"A public acknowledgment that this applies to local governments is great. What really is going to be telling is if this shows up in whatever the final documents that the U.S. and the Chinese put out," said Erin Ennis, vice president at the U.S.-China Business Council.
Ennis said products on the central government's procurement catalog that had faced indigenous innovation restrictions included computer devices, phones and other communication products, copiers, fax machines, laser printers, digital cameras, software, and clean energy equipment.
U.S. officials and business leaders said Hu's pledge nonetheless required vigilance to ensure China actually keeps its promise not to use government purchasing at the central, provincial and municipal level to favor Chinese companies that use home-grown technologies at the expense of U.S. and other foreign firms.
"What is China doing given that this was a commitment by President Hu? It's just not clear. I think people are looking for that clarity," said the official.
(Reporting by Paul Eckert; Editing by Andrea Ricci, Andrew Hay and Leslie Adler)
