Exclusive: EU to warn China it may levy duties against Huawei - sources
2013-05-14 00:26:00.0
(Reuters) - The European Commission plans to send a formal warning to China that it is ready to levy sanctions against telecoms equipment makers Huawei and ZTE Corp over illegal subsidies, people close to the matter said.
EU trade chief Karel De Gucht is set to win support from the bloc's executive on Wednesday to send the warning letter and show China's new president, Xi Jinping, that Brussels is serious about countering what it says is state support.
"We want to send a warning to the Chinese, a letter of intent that if they don't change their practices, there will be duties," said one person involved, adding that De Gucht had the full backing of European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso.
The decision will mark an intensification of the European Union's efforts to guard against what Brussels says is dumping by China, the EU's second-largest trading partner. From June, the Commission will also levy duties on billions of dollars of solar panels from China, EU officials have told Reuters.
Huawei was a little known telecoms firm less than a decade ago but today, along with its smaller rival ZTE, it holds almost a quarter of the European market.
That poses a security risk, the Commission says, because European industries ranging from healthcare to water utilities are becoming reliant on cheaper Chinese wireless technology.
A Huawei spokeswoman in Brussels declined to comment on the move, but the company denies receiving unfair subsidies. It says its advantages are due to low-cost manufacturing and that its products are secure. There was no comment ZTE on Tuesday, but it also denies allegations of illegal subsidies.
De Gucht told Reuters in February there were serious concerns about China's growing presence in mobile telecoms networks, noting that the United States and Australia had effectively shut Huawei out of their markets.
Last year, Germany excluded Huawei from supplying the infrastructure for a national academic research network.
But European manufacturers Ericsson, Alcatel-Lucent and Nokia Siemens Networks fear retaliation in China if they push to launch an anti-subsidy case, so the Commission has been collecting evidence on Huawei and ZTE with a view to launching a case on its own initiative.
Division between EU countries over the telecoms issue meant De Gucht has trodden cautiously. Britain and the Netherlands have embraced Huawei as a major job provider, while France and Italy have been backing De Gucht on going ahead with sanctions.
"This is a political decision tomorrow," said another person briefed on the Commission's thinking. "It's basically saying, we have all the evidence we need, we don't need to launch an investigation," the person said.
"We are open to talking with stakeholders. Because there are allegations, there are misunderstandings and misperceptions, that's why we are always keen to discuss with all the stakeholders," Tina Tsai said.
(Additional reporting by Robin Emmott and Luke Baker; Editing by Alison Williams)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Now that Chinese electronics are taking over the world, it¡¯s time to demand from them EXACTLY what they demand from the US and EU companies that operate in China. Make them divulge ALL Intellectual Property Information involved in their products. Full schematics! EVERYTHING! THAT would be THE answer to security concerns! China CAN¡¯T complain. That¡¯s what THEY demand of OUR products! If they don¡¯t comply, ban the sale of all Chinese communication equipment immediately. Worried about a trade war? THERE¡¯S a laugh¡­ THEY would lose! THEY are the seller. They would go out of business. The BUYER doesn¡¯t go broke by not buying, they just take their business elsewhere to another seller¡­
May 14, 20131:34pm EDT--
May 14, 20131:56pm EDT--
dropbox: I agree it would not be simple but it is logistically doable if a plan is set in motion. I have both lived in and done business in and with China for a good portion of the last 14 years. I have no doubt about illegal practices in China because I have seen it repeatedly firsthand. There are some Taiwan and other electronics manufacturers that have started to move operations to other low cost countries such as Vietnam, etc. recently, as well as many US companies re-shoring operations back to the US. While their numbers are still small compared to the current operations in China, it is a very necessary start¡­
May 14, 20132:13pm EDT--
