Yum plans to buy China's Little Sheep chain
2011-04-26 17:32:00.0
Yum plans to buy China's Little Sheep chain | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Yum plans to buy China's "Little Sheep" chain
Tue, Apr 26 2011
Tue, Apr 26 2011
Thu, Apr 21 2011
Tue, Apr 5 2011
Mon, Apr 4 2011
Tue  EDT
), parent of the KFC, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut fast-food chains, said it made a preliminary offer to buy most of the shares of China's Little Sheep 0968.HK restaurants that it does not already own.
Yum, which owns 27.2 percent of Little Sheep's stock, said it would wait for approval from regulators before making a formal offer for the remaining shares in the chain, which owns and operates Mongolian hot pot restaurants, primarily in China.
Yum said Little Sheep's chairman and other shareholders would keep a minority interest.
"Should any proposed transaction close at a reasonable price, we would view it as a positive for Yum, as it would further solidify Yum's position as the leading restaurant company in fast-growing China," Janney Capital Markets Mark Kalinowski said in a client note.
Kalinowski disclosed that he owns shares of Little Sheep, which has a market value of about $555 million. Yum's market capitalization is about $24.8 billion, he said.
Little Sheep has more than 300 hot-pot restaurants, primarily in China. Other markets include Japan, the United States -- specifically California and Texas -- and Canada.
Shares in Yum, which gets more of its profit from China than any other market, closed down 1.9 percent at $52.18.
(Reporting by Lisa Baertlein in Los Angeles and Phil Wahba in New York; Editing by Lisa Von Ahn, Gary Hill)
