Crisis-hit Saab finds funds, hopes to start output
2011-05-02 00:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Ailing car maker Saab has lined up almost 60 million euros ($88.9 million) in funds to get production started again after a month of stoppage, its Dutch owner Spyker said on Monday.
But a shortfall in 2010 sales meant Saab hit a cash crunch, running up bills to suppliers, who eventually stopped shipments and caused the production halt in early April.
Saab's sales target were 80,000 vehicles for this year and 120,000 for the following year, but last week the Swedish company said it would fail to meet those goals.
"Saab Automobile aims to restart production within a week, pending agreements on delivery schedules with its suppliers," Syker said in a statement.
It said it had secured a 30-million-euro ($44.4 million) convertible loan agreement with Gemini Investment Fund Ltd, one of Spyker's shareholders, and that it would also draw 29.1 million euros on its loan from the European Investment Bank.
"We will do everything in our power to restore the confidence in our company as soon as practically possible," Spyker CEO Victor Muller added.
The deal with Gemini, which according to Reuters data has 10.8 percent of Spyker, has a 6-months maturity.
Spyker said it continued to work on longer-term funding, of which a purchase by Antonov of 29.9 percent in Spyker for up to 30 million euros us expected to be a part.
Antonov's representative in Sweden said work was also continuing in attracting Chinese interest.
"We are more or less waiting for the outcome of the discussions in China," said Lars Carlstrom.
"The discussions are good and there is a good chance to make things work. Something is likely in the next two days at least," Carlstrom told Reuters.
), China Youngman Automobile Group and Jiangsu Yueda Group over a potential investment, though the source had said the talks should produce agreement over the weekend.
Antonov has also agreed to a buy Saab's real estate and plant and lease it back to release cash, though that has been held up after the EIB imposed terms Saab did not agree with.
Antonov used to be a shareholder, but was forced to drop out of the takeover of Saab after reports of links to money laundering and organized crime, which he has denied.
He has said he has cleared his name and Sweden's Debt Office, which has guaranteed the EIB loan, has approved Antonov's return.
