Analysis: Oil, other commodities still too pricey for China
2011-05-06 05:29:00.0
Analysis: Oil, other commodities still too pricey for China | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Analysis: Oil, other commodities still too pricey for China
Thu, May 5 2011
Thu, May 5 2011
Thu, May 5 2011
Thu, May 5 2011
Wed, May 4 2011
Fri  EDT
But those hoping Chinese buying will help reverse a sell-off in commodities in the short-term could be disappointed, as high stockpiles of copper, aluminum and zinc, and difficulties in securing loans, would keep some would-be buyers at bay.
Commodities fell further on Friday after crude oil prices crashed a record $12 a barrel on Thursday, copper fell more than three percent and silver dropped over eight percent.
"There is no reason to expect things to be different this time. When prices fall, China tends to make the most of that and go through a restocking cycle," said Andrew Driscoll, head of resources at CLSA in Hong Kong.
"But the buying activity could come in at lower levels than otherwise expected unless prices fall further to create a temptation they can't ignore," he said.
The 19-commodity Reuters-Jefferies CRB index .CRB fell 5 percent on Thursday, its fourth straight decline and the fifth biggest ever. The index has lost more than two-thirds of the gains it had made this year.
For copper, expectations of further losses that would cause some end-users to adopt a wait-and-see approach over the next few days or weeks, said Yingxi Yu, a commodities analyst at Barclays Capital.
"We have seen healthy Chinese buying for most of the year until the past few days but the speed and scale of yesterday's sell-off will make buyers very nervous and their price expectations would also be lowered," she said.
Successive interest rate hikes and increases to banks' reserve ratio requirements have made it more difficult for commodities traders to obtain credit.
Swollen copper stockpiles in China, the world's top consumer of the metal, means traders and end-users can afford to bide their time and wait for even better prices before restocking.
Analysts have warned that stocks in Shanghai's bonded warehouses, which account for about 80 percent of China's total inventories, are hovering at around 650,000 tonnes. This is equivalent to roughly four weeks of the country's domestic use and higher than the 200,000 tonne average over the past three years.
Aluminum stocks in the world's top producer are also at lofty levels of around 1.5-2 million tonnes, analysts said.
For oil, traders in China shrugged off the drop as too little and said it was too early to judge if the correction would be sustained.
"The current oil prices are not low enough to trigger a big increase in crude imports. It may not even be a good time for the government to build its strategic crude reserves since the previous reserves were filled when the oil prices were below $80 a barrel," said a crude trader in China.
The tumble in oil prices would benefit major refineries, he said, although he was doubtful current prices were low enough for the country's smaller "teapot refineries" to resume operations, since the government's last fuel price hike meant refiners could only cover crude prices at around $90 a barrel.
"Before this price drop, the market expected the government to raise fuel price again very soon. But now it is likely that the government will delay the fuel price hike or even not raise it at all if oil prices keep falling."
China's purchases have a major influence on any view on the longer term commodities demand outlook and thus whether the falls are a short-term correction in a long bull cycle.
The long-term bullish view would change only if one turned bearish on Chinese demand, said CLSA's Driscoll.
He said this was unlikely given China's robust economic growth, ambitious plans to build tens of millions of social housing units and spend billions in expanding its power grids that would boost demand for steel, iron ore, copper and coal.
Although some have cited Beijing monetary tightening as a big risk to China's commodities demand in the short to medium term, survey results from Barclays showed many in China were still positive on the country's economic outlook for this year.
"A majority cited price volatility and rising costs as their key challenges, with only a few concerned about weak demand and difficulties in getting finance," Barclays said in a May 4 report based on its survey of around 50 representatives from major producers, consumers and trading houses.
