China's unsteady economy seen holding April inflation in check
2013-05-06 12:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Subdued factory and investment growth probably capped China's inflation in April and depressed producer prices for a 14th consecutive month, a Reuters poll showed, clouding the outlook for the Chinese economy.
And risks that China's factory and investment growth in April may miss even conservative forecasts are mounting after surveys of the country's manufacturing and services industries cooled unexpectedly last month.
A median for forecasts by 27 economists showed the annual consumer price index ran at 2.3 percent in April, up from 2.1 percent in March but comfortably below the central bank's 3 percent forecast for 2013.
Producer price deflation is forecast at 2.3 percent compared to a year ago, the deepest in six months.
Analysts from Barclays said China's struggling exports sector and its fragile domestic demand have added to the problem of capacity under-utilization, and dampened producer prices.
"The manufacturing sector will face continued pressures from the uncertain external outlook and the modest domestic recovery, and painful adjustments given over-investment and over-capacity," economists from Barclays said in a note.
China's factory output is expected to have grown 9.5 percent in April from a year ago, recovering slightly from a seven-month low hit in March. Fixed-asset investment is forecast to have expanded 21 percent in the first four months from a year earlier, up a shade from 20.9 percent between January and March.
Two separate surveys of Chinese factories showed growth slowed in April after new export orders fell, reinforcing doubts about the health of the world's second-biggest economy after its disappointing first quarter.
China's services sector, having hitherto shown greater resilience than factories, has also faltered.
The dour surveys followed China's first-quarter growth report that showed its economy stumbling. Growth unexpectedly moderated to 7.7 percent from 7.9 percent the previous quarter, hurt by a surprisingly sharp factory cooldown.
Yet most analysts are hopeful China's economic recovery is merely delayed and has not reversed, with a credit boom underpinning growth. Credit ballooned nearly 60 percent in the first quarter from a year ago, fuelling future inflation risks.
(Reporting by Beijing Economics; Writing by Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Simon Cameron-Moore)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This article is another reason that my partners and I do not recommend investment in the US at this time. US economic reporters and writers cannot be trusted to present unbiased analysis. China¡¯s inflation is below 2%; factory output rose 9.5%; fixed asset investment rose 21%; and GDP growth is over 7.5%. US corporate leaders would sacrifice their children to the Chinese gods of prosperity for results like those. Any ¡°struggling¡± in trade is caused by crises in the EU and US, China¡¯s biggest and 2nd biggest trade partners. Another Reuters article claimed China would have a $15 billion trade surplus in April or a $180 billion yearly SURPLUS when the US should have a $528 billion trade DEFICIT in 2013. My math shows a $700 billion difference in China¡¯s favor. Finally, China should beat the US for decades because the year that China¡¯s GDP passes the US GDP (I estimate 2015 using purchasing power parity.), the US PER CAPITA GDP would be 4.5 times that of China, so China can grow its total GDP to become 4.5 times that of the US.
May 06, 20131:35pm EDT--
