Exclusive: China Construction Bank eyes stake in Malaysia's EON
2011-04-25 09:51:00.0
Exclusive: China Construction Bank eyes stake in Malaysia's EON | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Exclusive: China Construction Bank eyes stake in Malaysia's EON
Mon, Apr 25 2011
Thu, Apr 21 2011
Wed, Apr 20 2011
Tue, Apr 19 2011
Sat, Apr 16 2011
A man walks out of a China Construction Bank branch in Beijing March 26, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
By Zhang Shengnan, Don Durfee and Min Hun Fong
By Zhang Shengnan, Don Durfee and Min Hun Fong
Mon  EDT
) has approached the Malaysian government about buying a stake in lender EON Capital EONP.KL, a source with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters on Monday.
China's No.2 lender (
) is awaiting Malaysia's Ministry of Finance's response to its request for approval to begin talks with major shareholders in Malaysia's seventh largest bank by market capitalization.
"This is still at a very early stage. We've informed the Malaysian finance ministry," said the Beijing-based source.
"There are many other departments, including the Malaysian central bank. This might even need the approval of the prime minister. The specifics of the approval process aren't entirely clear," said the source, who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the deal.
EON Capital, with a market capitalization of about $1.6 billion, is the subject of a legal battle involving its largest shareholder, Hong Kong-based private equity fund Primus Pacific Partners, and other shareholders, over a plan by Hong Leong Bank (
Primus filed a lawsuit to stop Hong Leong Bank, Malaysia's sixth largest lender, from taking over EON Capital last year.
When contacted, a Bank Negara official said: "As a matter of policy, the central bank does not comment on individual institutions."
Primus and CCB also declined to comment, while EON could not be reached for comment.
Stanley Li, a Chinese banking analyst with Mirae Asset Securities, said a move by CCB on EON would be in line with Chinese banks' strategy to expand overseas, and Southeast Asia was a natural choice given their relatively close trade relationships.
"Most Chinese banks' Chinese business accounts for 90 percent of their revenue. In the longer run all the banks will need to diversify their revenue sources to outside China."
The Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank ADCB.AD, for example, has put its 25 percent stake in RHB Capital (
), which owns 24 percent of Malaysia's AmBank Group (
), the country's fourth-largest lender, is interested in bidding for the RHB Capital stake.
The last several years have seen a number of Chinese companies listing on the Malaysian stock exchange, while a special banking license was granted to Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
) last year to set up operations in the nation's capital.
"CCB is kind of a late mover in overseas expansion but I think it's inevitable that they make some acquisitions overseas," Li said. "So far, ICBC (
) are the early movers in this regard, so CCB is just catching up with competitors."
Bilateral ties between Malaysia and China have also been improving, with the Malaysian government opening its doors to more Chinese investments.
In a bid to further strengthen ties, Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao will visit Kuala Lumpur on Wednesday.
(Additional reporting by Terril Yue Jones in BEIJING; Writing by Julie Goh; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
