China to hold human rights talks next week
2011-04-22 07:42:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and China will hold talks on human rights in Beijing next week, including discussions on detentions, arrests and freedom of religion, the State Department said on Thursday.
"Discussions will focus on human rights developments, including the recent negative trend of forced disappearances, extralegal detention, and arrests and convictions, as well as rule of law, freedom of religion, freedom of expression, labor rights, minority rights and other human rights issues of concern," the State Department said in a statement.
The talks will take place on April 27 and 28 with Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Michael Posner leading an interagency delegation to the talks, the statement said.
China recently has extended a crackdown on dissidents, human rights lawyers and protesters challenging Communist Party controls, in a clampdown that has brought an outcry from Washington and other Western capitals.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said earlier this month that she was "deeply concerned" about China's clampdown and cited "negative trends" including the detention of Chinese artist and human rights activist Ai Weiwei.
Ai, 53, was detained on April 3 as he was about to board a flight to Hong Kong from Beijing. Chinese police said Ai, a critic of China's ruling Communist Party, was under investigation for "suspected economic crimes."
(Reporting by JoAnne Allen; Editing by Sandra Maler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
One doesn¡¯t really care about Human Rights, the other care even less. One is accusing the other to make the world forget about its own records thus appearing on a higher ground, the other is counter-attacking the other to justify its own records. Wondering what they could be talking about at the meeting besides the usual BS and mutual criticism?
Apr 21, 201111:58pm EDT--
You are right. This fake discussion wouldn¡¯t even be occurring if the US wouldn¡¯t initiate this by pretending to care. The equivalent would be for china to lambast the US during the Rodney King riots and simultaneously remind the black community of thousands lynchings¡­ all under the guise that they cared. I¡¯m sure we would¡¯ve appreciated that. We¡¯d invite them to send a delegation to talk about it.
Apr 22, 20111:12am EDT--
The difference is in the US we can discuss both sides of the Rodney King riots in the news without being afraid of having our newspapers shut down. Also, our history textbooks cover the lynching of blacks very thoroughly. How many Chinese newspapers have said they oppose the illegal detention of Ai Weiwei? How many Chinese history textbooks cover the Cultural Revolution? That¡¯s what I thought.
Apr 22, 201112:02pm EDT--
