China calls U.S. the real hacking empire after Pentagon report
2013-05-08 07:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Wednesday accused the United States of sowing discord between China and its neighbors after the Pentagon said Beijing is using espionage to fuel its military modernization, branding Washington the "real hacking empire".
The latest salvo came a day after China's foreign ministry dismissed as groundless a Pentagon report which accused China for the first time of trying to break into U.S. defense computer networks.
The Pentagon also cited progress in Beijing's effort to develop advanced-technology stealth aircraft and build an aircraft carrier fleet to project power further offshore.
The People's Liberation Army Daily called the report a "gross interference in China's internal affairs".
"Promoting the 'China military threat theory' can sow discord between China and other countries, especially its relationship with its neighboring countries, to contain China and profit from it," the newspaper said in a commentary that was carried on China's Defense Ministry's website.
The United States is "trumpeting China's military threat to promote its domestic interests groups and arms dealers", the newspaper said, adding that it expects "U.S. arms manufacturers are gearing up to start counting their money".
The remarks in the newspaper underscore the escalating mistrust between China and the United States over hacking, now a top point of contention between Washington and Beijing.
A U.S. computer security company, Mandiant, said in February a secretive Chinese military unit was likely behind a series of hacking attacks that targeted the United States and stole data from more than 100 companies.
"As we all know, the United States is the real 'hacking empire' and has an extensive espionage network," the People's Daily, a newspaper regarded as a mouthpiece of the Chinese Communist Party, said in a commentary.
The article -- which was published under the pen name "Zhong Sheng", meaning "Voice of China" -- said "in recent years, the United States has continued to strengthen its network tools for political subversion against other countries".
"Cyber weapons are more frightening than nuclear weapons," the People's Daily said. "To establish military hegemony on the Internet by repeatedly smearing other countries is a dangerous and wrong path to take and will ultimately end up in shooting themselves in the foot."
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
No, it¡¯s all propaganda, the Chinese aren¡¯t stealing anything from us. Hua Jun Zhao at the Medical College of Wisconsin cancer research, espionage of cancer research. Sixing Liu at L-3 Communications, a major defense contractor, epsionage of a device to allow drones, missiles and rockets to hit targets without satellite guidance. Yan Zhu at company that develops, implements, and supports software for environmental applications, espionage of source code. Bo Jiang at a contractor for the National Institute of Aerospace at NASA¡¯s Langley Research Center, espionage of sensitive technology. Walter Liew, Christina Liew, Tze Chao, Hou Shengdong, epsionage of DuPont¡¯s TiO2 technology. Bo Zhang, espionage of proprietary source code while working on a project at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Kexue Huang, espionage of organic pesticides from DOW chemical. Hanjuan Jin, espionage from Motorola of trade secrets. Shanshan Du, Yu Qin, epsionage of GM¡¯s hybrid technology. Zhan Gao university professor, espionage of US tech to Beijing for weapons development. And the list goes on and on and on! Stop hiring Chinese and stop allowing them sensitive positions where they have access to our best technology.
May 07, 201311:30pm EDT--
The US needs to stop living it its own self-generated fantasy world. We need to be honest about what we do. Or at least not point the finger when some other country does something on a minor scale compared to what our country is up to all over the world. In America this blind eye is ok because not many people really care, but to a lot of the rest of the world it makes us look like poltroons. Hypocrisy is what it is called. Subverting our own laws does us no good. Putting people in jail who have done nothing wrong is not doing us, or the victims of 9-11, an ounce of anything beneficial. Obama ordering the use of cluster munitions on civilians in Yemen to get two supposed al Qaeda operators, and trying to hide it, is not going to help us after it is found out and they count the bodies of the women and children. Moreover, using drones to kill so many innocent people reflects badly on the President, and on the nation. In America it is not going to interrupt many dinners as a topic of conversation, but in places where drones are being used we are making bitter enemies. It is a strategic mistake. So China and the US both engage in intense Cyber-warfare. And so why is it that the Chinese have been so brazenly successful? How about asking that question instead of pointing a finger at them. The lack of security and the failure to secure networks at key points is a lapse we are not discussing, but we should, and we need to do something about it.
May 07, 201312:13am EDT--
May 07, 201312:22am EDT--
