Hyundai Motor mulls fourth China plant: vice chairman
2013-05-10 02:34:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korea's Hyundai Motor Co (
) is considering building a fourth car plant in China, its vice chairman said on Friday, as it seeks to increase production overseas to counter the effect of a firm local currency coupled with a falling yen as well as labor issues.
The comments from Hsueh Yung-hsing might a indicate change in the group's attitude toward capacity expansion, but it is not clear whether group chairman Chung Mong-koo will approve the move because of his disciplined capacity approach, said a person familiar with the matter.
"We expect our capacity in China to become constrained by 2015 and 2016...and are considering a plant with a capacity of 300,000," Hsueh Yung-hsing told reporters, adding western China is a candidate location for the new plant.
Hsueh, who is in charge of the China operations for Hyundai and its affiliate, Kia Motors Corp (
), said a new plant is needed for the South Korean duo to maintain their Chinese market share of around 10 percent in 2015-2016 when the world's biggest auto market is expected to grow to 20 million vehicles a year.
He also said the construction of a third China auto plant by Kia Motors would be brought forward by two months and would be completed in February 2014, which will lead to a total manufacturing capacity of 1.8 million vehicles in China for Hyundai and Kia.
Hyundai and Kia officials still assume the effective ban Chung placed on a new factory globally will remain intact at least for a while, a person close to the matter told Reuters on Friday.
Shares in Hyundai ended down 2.3 percent and Kia Motors fell 3.3 percent on Friday after the U.S. dollar broke through 100 yen, fueling concerns about competitive disadvantage to South Korean automakers.
"Because of currency risks, we have been considering plants in the U.S, South America, Southeast Asia and elsewhere," a top group executive told Reuters on Friday. "We have been long considering a U.S. plant in Alabama or Georgia, but we are taking a wait-and-see attitude. It's fair to say the possible plant is on hold," he said.
"Salespeople are calling for us to expand U.S. capacity, but it costs lots of money to build a single factory and if the market goes wrong, it will be big trouble. So we have no choice but to be careful," the executive said.
Chung also said on Monday that Hyundai and Kia do not immediately plan to build a new car factory in the United States, downplaying speculation that the South Korean automaker would soon announce production facilities there.
(Reporting by Hyunjoo Jin; Additional reporting by Norihiko Shirouzu in BEIJING; Writing by Miyoung Kim; Editing by Paul Tait and Matt Driskill)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This would be an intelligent move for Hyundai because China is the world¡¯s biggest car market, and it sits next door to Siberia, the world¡¯s biggest oil and gas station. Russia and China already have several oil and gas pipelines connecting the two countries, so fuel is readily available. For electric cars, China is building charging and battery exchanging stations that serve electric cars. Also, China is developing its western and northern provinces in the five year plans from 2011 to 2020. Transportation infrastructure is being built. Construction workers have jobs and paychecks to become Hyundai¡¯s customers in western China. Stores and other businesses that service the workers and construction companies should provide more customers for Hyundai. Finally, China, Japan, and South Korea set up a Trilateral Cooperation Office in Seoul in 2011 to develop economic projects for the three countries, and it may have aid to offer for Hyundai¡¯s new plant.
May 10, 201312:47pm EDT--
