Japanese mayor sparks outrage with sex-slave remarks
2013-05-14 07:21:00.0
(Reuters) - China expressed outrage on Tuesday over remarks by the mayor of the Japanese city of Osaka who said Japan's system of military brothels during World War Two was "necessary", as the Japanese government sought to distance itself from the comments.
Asian victims of Japan's war-time aggression, including many people in China and South Korea, are sensitive to what they see as any attempt by Japanese politicians to excuse Japanese abuses before and during the war.
"Anyone can understand that the system of comfort women was necessary to provide respite for high-strung, rough and tumble crowd of men risking their lives under a storm of bullets," Hashimoto told reporters on Monday.
"At the time, it was a necessary system to maintain military discipline."
Historians estimate that as many as 200,000 so-called comfort women were forced into sexual slavery in the Imperial Japanese Army's brothels before and during World War Two.
China, where bitter memories of Japan's wartime aggression run deep, denounced the remarks.
"The forced recruitment of comfort women was a serious crime of Japanese militarism at the time of World War Two. This is an affront to human dignity and a major human rights problem," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said.
"We express shock and strong indignation toward the Japanese politicians who have made public an open challenge to human conscience and historical justice," Hong told a news conference.
South Korea also denounced the Japanese politician's comments and had demanded an apology, South Korean media reported.
Japan's government has recently sought to tone down remarks over wartime history by its own members - including Prime Minister Shinzo Abe - that have further frayed ties with China and South Korea, already tense due to territorial feuds.
Last month, tension mounted after three Japanese cabinet ministers visited Tokyo's Yasukuni Shrine for war dead and then Abe cast doubt on whether his government agreed with a landmark 1995 apology by Japan for its wartime actions.
Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga declined direct comment on Hashimoto's remarks.
Hashimoto is a former lawyer and co-leader of the small Japan Restoration Party, with which Abe has eyed cooperation to push conservative policies such as revising the pacifist, post-war constitution.
But Suga said: "The government's stance is, as we have said before, that we feel great heartache when we think about the indescribable suffering of those who experienced this."
He added that Abe's cabinet held the same view on the matter as previous Japanese governments.
In a 1993 statement by then Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono, Japan admitted military involvement in forcing Asian and other women into sexual slavery at wartime brothels and apologized for that.
Some conservative Japanese politicians, however, argue there is no conclusive proof of direct military involvement.
(Reporting by Linda Sieg, Kiyoshi Takenaka and Chris Meyers in Tokyo and Megha Rajagopalan in Beijing)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Yea, after a hard day of murdering people and invading other countries what a man really needs is a good lay. I wonder how the Americans beat the tar out of them without sex slaves.
May 14, 20137:32am EDT--
Hmnnn ¡­ OK then. I think all the U.S. servicemen in Japan need comfort too. Let¡¯s start with that Mayor¡¯s wife, daughter, aunts and nieces. I think he should be the one to recruit them and let them know that it is necessary, but let¡¯s not euphemistically call them comfort women. Let¡¯s call them Kidnapped and Raped. And here¡¯s what is really embarrassing for the Japanese people ¡­ no one seems to be calling for this guy to resign. It will be a cold day in hell before I buy a Japanese product. I have no problem buying a Korean product or a Chinese product, perhaps made by the sons and daughters of those raped by the fathers and grandfathers of today¡¯s Japan.
May 14, 20137:43am EDT--
Sex slaves to keep army discipline? lol this must be a joke¡­ or i suppose there must be dozens of brothels around the sdf bases in Japan
Sex slaves to keep army discipline? lol this must be a joke¡­ or i suppose there must be dozens of brothels around the sdf bases in Japan
May 14, 20138:29am EDT--
