No sign of global economy stalling this year
2011-04-14 10:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Surging inflation pressures and the natural disasters that ravaged Japan last month look unlikely to stall an ascendant global economy, a Reuters poll of around 350 economists showed on Thursday.
The survey of analysts from all over the world again showed the United States leading a rich-world recovery along with Canada, while respondents expect a jumble of strong and weak performances from the top European economies.
The world's third largest economy, Japan, will likely contract this quarter after the March 11 earthquake and tsunami that left nearly 28,000 dead or missing, also triggering a nuclear crisis that could last for months.
While economists are still digesting the ramifications of the disaster on global supply lines, many pointed to surging oil prices as the key risk for now.
"We've taken down our global growth forecasts over the last quarter very slightly, and that's on the back of higher oil prices," said Karen Ward, senior global economist at HSBC in London.
"The oil price impact is a net negative for the global economy, particularly for the United States. In the developed world, where wage growth is so weak, it already has dented U.S. consumer confidence and it will be an issue for consumer confidence elsewhere."
That was just slightly less optimistic than the International Monetary Fund's forecast on Monday of 4.4 percent for this year. The IMF said oil prices and inflation posed new challenges to the progress of the world economy.
Just as finance ministers from the Group of 20 rich and emerging market nations meet in Washington, the latest Reuters survey showed rich-world economies will lag far behind India and China, which will see near double-digit rates of growth in 2011.
Canada and the United States should lead the rich world recovery in 2011 with annual average growth rates of 3.0 and 2.9 percent, respectively. Even rising inflation pressure is unlikely to dent this view in the case of the U.S. economy.
"Inflation is going to be higher than most expect, but I do expect it to moderate some in 2012," said Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer of Hugh Johnson Advisors LLC in Albany, New York. "Does this mean there is a genuine threat to the recovery? No."
On Monday, Brent crude hit a 32-month high above $127 a barrel, pushed higher by unrest in oil producer Libya. While it has since fallen, the commodity and energy rallies since the start of the year have sent gauges much higher, especially in Europe and emerging countries.
While they see the economy rebounding in the third quarter once the reconstruction effort gets into full swing, the nuclear crisis and consequent energy shortages will depress the economy for the next few months.
"Not only exports, but private consumption will decline. And unstable power supply will probably prompt companies to postpone capital spending," said Junko Nishioka, chief economist at RBS Securities.
"Also a possible power shortage in the summer is seen weighing on consumer sentiment and pulling down spending, which could drag into the latter half of the year."
The Bank of Japan, which was already struggling to escape deflation before the disaster, will keep rates on hold until at least 2013.
The euro zone, which has already seen an interest rate hike this month in response to above-target inflation, will see mixed fortunes among its biggest economies.
While Germany could rival the growth rates expected of the North American economies with a 2.8 percent expansion this year, economists see the French economy growing 1.7 percent this year and Italy lagging behind with just 1.1 percent growth.
"Higher inflation and significant fiscal tightening will continue to constrain the recovery despite the resurgence in global manufacturing," said James Nixon at Societe Generale.
Overall, the 17-nation euro zone economy will expand around 1.7 percent this year, the poll showed.
Forecasters trimmed their 2011 UK growth forecasts for the third month running, as Britons toil under the strongest levels of inflation anywhere in the G7 and fierce austerity measures.
(Polling by Bangalore Polling Unit, Analysis by Sumanta Dey, Additional reporting by bureaux in Paris, Berlin, New York, Toronto, Rome, and London; editing by Stephen Nisbet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
We have inflation in the middle of a recession instead of at the end of an expansion¨Cnot good. When rates go up¨Ceven the slightest bit¨Cthere will be a contraction, lending will decrease slowing the economy further, forcing the FED to drop rates again to reverse the contraction; however, this time there will be nowhere for rates to go because we are already so close to the floor. US Bond ratings will drop, investment in the US will slow, production will slow, and the US will drop into a MAJOR MAJOR financial crisis,then,like the old saying goes ¡°when the US catches a cold, the world sneezes.¡± This so-called ¡°growth,¡± is the eye of a Hurricane that is gaining strength exponentially!
Apr 14, 201111:14am EDT--
WOW!!! They have us all fooled!
Apr 14, 201112:00pm EDT--
@Fin500: Good comment. I feel the same. Something is very phony about everything and I feel that another crash of some sort will be coming. But this time it will be 5x more disasterous, globally. It seems that there is a lot of fluffing up the numbers and trying to get the good feeling, but when i look around the real world, things are just out of place and falling apart at the seams and there seems to be no solutions or end to the bleeding, just old bandages being placed on the problems. i do not share this ¡°good feeling¡± that everything is on the recovery. i do not see it.
Apr 14, 20115:03pm EDT--
