Fidelity's Bolton goes against the herd in China
2011-04-18 06:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Fidelity's star fund manager Anthony Bolton is going against the herd in China betting that sectors such as consumers and services will drive growth in the world's second biggest economy over the next decade instead of exports.
"I decided with my fund here that I would have an overlay and I wanted to particularly emphasize that I felt would be the drivers for the next 5-10 years," said Bolton, whose often contrarian bets made him a top UK fund manager for more than two decades.
"I think you'll see for the forseeable future a majority of my fund in consumption in a very broad basis and services. They will be the main areas."
) is parked in consumer related sectors including retailers, travel and entertainment, and personal products companies.
Most other China focused diversified equity funds managing more than $1 billion, including those managed by his Fidelity colleagues, are significantly less exposed to the sector.
They have less than a fifth of their funds parked in consumer sectors, according to data from Thomson Reuters Lipper. Their exposure to the services sector is in single digits.
Bolton's top holdings at the end of February included BOC Hong Kong (Holdings) Ltd (
), China Unicom (Hong Kong) Ltd (
), the country's No.2 mobile carrier, HSBC Holdings Plc (
Bolton, Fidelity's investment figurehead who launched a China focused fund last year, putting 2.5 million pounds ($4.1 million) of his own money into the fund, is also underweight financial in China.
"Although valuations are attractive, some questions remain. What level of capital will they require in the medium term, that's a question I want to know for many banks," said Cambridge educated Bolton, whose hobby is composing classical music.
"Will there be bad loans from some of this big growth in credit in the past?"
"Where I am more overweight right now is on the Hong Kong banks, which I think are in a quite different position from the mainland banks," he added.
), China Merchants Bank (
), Gome (
), China's second-largest home appliances distributor and Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd (
), the Chinese joint venture partner of BMW AG (
The second half of this year will be difficult for China's property sector, said Bolton.
Bolton, president for investments at Fidelity, which administers assets worth about $300 billion, was speaking at a media briefing in Hong Kong on Monday.
"My view on the China property market is that we have had a series of tightening measures, unprecedented in their toughness," he said.
"I think the second half of this year will be very difficult, therefore I'm quite happy that I have minimal exposure to Chinese developers."
The investment veteran, known for correctly predicting a equity market downturn in late 2007, surprised the industry and colleagues when he announced to put off retirement to move to Hong Kong and run the Chinese equity fund last year. ($1 = 0.612 British Pounds)
