Exclusive: Dongfeng in talks to buy Getrag stake: sources
2011-03-25 11:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China's No. 2 automaker, Dongfeng Motor Group (
), is in advanced talks to buy a stake of around 30 percent in German auto supplier Getrag in a bid to gain access to transmission technology, people familiar with the matter said.
The discussions come as privately held Getrag, one of the world's largest automotive transmission manufacturers and a major supplier to Ford Motor Co (
), seeks a strategic partner to provide fresh capital for the company, these people said.
The stake of around 30 percent in Getrag would be worth less than 500 million euros, or $700 million, one of these people said.
) acquired a 30 percent stake in Getrag in 2000 from Germany's Hagenmeyer family but sold it back to the family in 2007 after Dana fell into Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
The Hagenmeyer family, which owns the entire company, tried to sell the 30 percent stake to other strategic partners after Dana's exit, including Canadian auto supplier Magna International (
), these people said. The talks with Magna a few years ago fell apart due to differences over prices, they said.
If the latest discussions with Dongfeng lead to a transaction, it would mark the first time that a Chinese company has bought into the German auto sector.
Like any other deal negotiations, the discussions between Dongfeng and Getrag could still fall apart, these people cautioned.
Transmission technology such as Getrag's is among the most sought-after assets by Chinese auto companies, people familiar with the matter say.
Chinese companies have also emerged as serious buyers in the global auto industry as they can often afford to pay more since they have a big and fast-growing customer base in China, the world's largest auto market.
Pacific Century Motors, a joint venture of Chinese auto parts supplier Tempo Group and the financing and investing arm of the Beijing municipal government, bought General Motors Co's (
(Reporting by Philipp Halstrick in Frankfurt and Soyoung Kim in New York; additional reporting by Hendrik Sackmann in Stuttgart; Editing by Steve Orlofsky)
