Chinatrust deal seals Metlife Taiwan exit
2011-03-28 09:06:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Mar 25 2011
Fri, Mar 25 2011
Thu, Mar 24 2011
Wed, Mar 23 2011
Mon, Mar 21 2011
Mon  EDT
) for $180 million, giving Chinatrust its long sought-after entry into the sector.
"The acquisition will be positive for Chinatrust in the longer term, as it can leverage its strong banking network into the insurance business," said Chen Tungli, a fund manager at Schroders in Taiwan.
"However, any effective synergy would not emerge until at least three years later."
Chinatrust, Taiwan's top credit card issuer, said on Monday it would pay for the deal from its own funds and retain all the unit's staff.
The sale would mark the latest exit by a foreign firm from Taiwan's $52 billion insurance market after American International Group (
"A while ago, we realized the business would be substantially better if it's owned by a financial holding company," said Peter Smyth, Metlife's regional managing director Asia Pacific.
Metlife's Taiwan unit has about 600 employees, and some 307,000 policyholders, giving it a market share of less than 1 percent. AIG's Nan Shan unit by comparison has 4 million policyholders, or one sixth of Taiwan's population.
For Chinatrust, , the deal marks the end of a lengthy search for an insurance unit to add to its stable, a search that had become something of a personal quest for President Daniel Wu. It was twice beaten in the bidding for the AIG unit.
"I am feeling very happy right now," Wu told the media briefing. "Chinatrust is paying 0.57 time price to book. We think the price we're paying is very reasonable."
The Metlife acquisition would complete Chinatrust's product lines which cover most financial services.
"This is good news for Chinatrust," said Jeff Chung, an analyst at Mega Securities in Taipei.
"Their bancassurance business is already No.1 in Taiwan, so adding an insurance company can reduce their costs. It will also have a good effect on profitability."
(Additional reporting by Denny Thomas in Hong Kong; Writing by Jonathan Standing; Editing by David Cowell)
