China to ban smoking at indoor public places
2011-03-23 23:09:00.0
(Reuters) - China will ban smoking at all indoor public venues from May in an effort to shield the world's most populous nation, and its largest cigarette producer, from the harmful effects of the habit, the health ministry said.
China, which has more than 300 million smokers, will require businesses to display prominent no-smoking signs, forbid vending machines from selling cigarettes and ensure that designated outdoor smoking zones not affect pedestrian traffic, according to a ministry statement reported in Chinese media on Thursday.
Businesses should educate customers about the health hazards of smoking and workers should attempt to stop smokers from lighting up, the ministry said.
China, the world's largest cigarette producer, has embarked on years of half-hearted campaigns to stub out the habit in some cities. The government previously it would ban smoking in all hospitals and medical facilities from 2011.
In 2008, Beijing formally pledged to restrict smoking in most public venues in the city, including government offices and public transport, but most of these venues remain choked with smoke and non-smoking signs are routinely ignored.
In the southern city of Guangzhou, smokers who light up in certain public places only have to pay a 50 yuan ($7.625) fine, a limited deterrent in one of China's richest cities, even as state news agency Xinhua dubbed it "the nation's toughest smoking ban."
Although nearly 1.2 million Chinese people die from smoking-related diseases each year, the habit is deeply entrenched in public life.
Chinese cigarettes, among the cheapest in the world, are considered an important part of socializing. More than half of all male Chinese doctors smoke.
Less smoking could reduce smoking-related health costs, but would also hurt government revenue, as the tobacco industry provides nearly one-tenth of tax revenues. ($1 = 6.558 Chinese yuan)
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Chris Lewis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Strange that a country that¡¯s taken capitalism in a love embrace would try to squelch smoking. Ayn Rand considered smoking a moral obligation, symbolic; the glowing tip representing both the fire man has tamed and the creative fire burning within the trader/capitalist¡¯s mind. What the cancer, emphysema, heart disease, nicotine stains, addiction, bad breath, spilled ash, furniture burns, accidental fires, and lingering smells symbolized she didn¡¯t say. Banquiao, Deep Water Horizon, Texas City Refinery, Prince William Sound, Bhopal, Upper Big Branch mine, and on and on are ideal candidates. Like a smoker enjoying his nicotine buzz, industry notices nothing but the pleasant revenue stream. All negative aspects are irrelevant. So far, Big Government has been somewhat helpful in protecting us from industry, but industry is steadily becoming the government, thanks in large part to the proletariat segment of Conservatives, who¡¯ve fallen for the rich Conservatives¡¯ story that industry is a big ¡®ole teddy bear who just wants us to have whatever our hearts desire.
Mar 24, 20116:06pm EDT--
