China reaches out to Germany on Libya
2011-03-24 22:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China has reached out to Germany over the two nations' shared opposition to escalating fighting in Libya ahead of a visit by the German foreign minister.
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi laid out China's "principled stance" about the U.N.-authorized military campaign against the embattled Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi during a telephone call on Thursday with the German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, said the Chinese Foreign Ministry website (www.mfa.gov.cn).
Westerwelle will visit China next week for talks that appear sure to cover the crisis in Libya. Although Beijing and Berlin have often traded barbs on human rights, trade and security, they have found some common ground in shared misgivings about the Western air campaign against Gaddafi.
China abstained from the U.N. Security Council vote that authorized the Libya intervention, and Germany too broke ranks with Western allies to join four other countries that also abstained, among them Russia.
Yang's comments echoed Beijing's repeated criticisms of the U.N.-backed Libya action, which as a veto-wielding permanent member of the Security Council it could have stymied.
"We hope that the situation in Libya returns to peace and stability as quickly as possible, avoiding an escalation in armed conflict and an even more serious humanitarian crisis," Yang told Westerwelle, according to the Chinese account.
Beijing's main fear appears to be that Libya could eventually be carved up into divided states, anathema to China's traditional views about the primacy of sovereignty in handling security crises.
Yang stressed that "the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Libya," said the account.
On Sunday, he dismissed claims that Berlin was isolated after refusing to join its NATO allies in staging military strikes on Libya.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel's decision to opt out of any military action in Libya has drawn criticism at home, putting the government on the defensive over a policy that opinion polls suggest should be popular with voters.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is ready to catch on to any scapegoat to stall the humanitarian assistance in Libya, knowing full well that countries like Germany have totally different reasons. The only reason China is trying to hinder the much appreciated effort of benevolent countries like France and the UK, stems from its well known fear and insecurity, being an absolutely autocratic communist state, that someday when there are the inevitable uprisings there, a no-fly zone would have to be put into place there!
Mar 25, 20112:40am EDT--
It¡¯s was a valid and relatively swiftly action by US. End is nowhere to be seen though as rebels are losing momentum.
Mar 25, 20118:37am EDT--
@ hedonist2, What have you been up to? Get your facts right! The German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle criticized the paragraph that opens the door to a possible military intervention, saying ¡°Our intention continues to be non-military intervention¡±, which is the same as China. What ¡°totally different reason¡± are you thinking of? Is the bombing war going on now humanitarian assistance? Are France and the UK benevolent by bombing Libya? Why not extend their benevolence to Bahrain and Yemen? Why is it right for other countries to impose no-fly zone whenever there are uprisings. There have been uprisings all over the world; India, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Canada, Northern Ireland, Germany, Turkey, etc. the local police never fail to use excessive force. Is it right to violate their sovereignty? Don¡¯t get high on dung.
Mar 25, 20119:46am EDT--
