Europe's top flu expert on alert for bird flu spread
2013-05-02 11:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Human cases of a deadly new strain of bird flu that has killed 27 people in China are likely to crop up in Europe and around the world but that should not cause undue alarm, Europe's leading flu expert said on Thursday.
In his first media interview since returning from an international scientific mission to China last week, Professor Angus Nicoll said the H7N9 flu outbreak in humans was one that should be taken extremely seriously and watched closely.
"We are at the start of a very long haul with H7N9," Nicoll told Reuters in a telephone interview from the Stockholm-based European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), where he is head of the influenza and respiratory viruses program.
He said there were many scientific questions to be answered about the new flu strain, which was first detected in patients in China in March having been previously unknown in humans.
The flu has so far infected at least 127 people in China and killed 27 of them, according to latest data from Chinese health authorities and the World Health Organization.
Scientific studies of the virus have established it is being transmitted from birds - probably mostly chickens - to people, making it a so-called zoonotic disease that humans catch from animals rather than from other humans.
Nicoll, who visited Beijing and Shanghai last week with a team of international scientific experts, confirmed what the WHO has repeatedly said - that there is no evidence yet of the virus efficiently passing from person to person - a factor that would make H7N9 a serious pandemic flu threat if it were to evolve.
Nicoll said the "most pressing public health question" for now was to identify the source of the circulating virus - the so-called "reservoir" - that is leading to chickens contracting it and sporadically passing it on to humans. This is likely to take time, with any results unlikely for several months.
In the meantime, Nicoll said the ECDC, which monitors disease in the European Union, and health authorities around the world should expect that "imported cases" of H7N9 flu may well begin to crop up elsewhere.
Just as Taiwan reported its first case on April 24, other countries should expect that business travelers and tourists may occasionally return from China having picked up the infection, he said.
"I'm not sure when that will happen. But the case in Taiwan shows that it can. If that person had got on a different flight and ended up in Paris, then we would have had a scenario that we would expect people to be alarmed at," he said.
"But again we should stress that this thing doesn't seem to be transmissible from human to human, so if we get some sporadic cases appearing in Europe, that doesn't change anything."
Flu experts speaking at a briefing in London on Wednesday said those mutations, together with evidence that H7N9 is still mutating rapidly and probably spreading almost invisibly among birds because it does not make them obviously sick, meant this new flu was a "serious threat" to world health.
"You can never predict anything about flu, but it is concerning to see those mutations there, Nicoll said. "That's why it's important Europe should take this very seriously."
Nicoll added that he thought the Chinese were doing an "impressive job" handling, reporting, investigating and seeking to contain the outbreak.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Influenza scientists and health officials are concerned about the pandemic threat posed by the emergence of a novel influenza A (H7N9) virus. Efforts have begun to develop a vaccine, but it is important to note that in the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, vaccination in the US prevented only 3-4% of all pandemic cases, hospitalizations and deaths. Moreover, more than 90% of the world¡¯s people had no access to pandemic vaccines or existing antiviral agents. Thus, by all measures, the global response to the 2009 pandemic was a comprehensive failure. If the H7N9 virus evolves to become easily transmissible between humans, another pandemic is certain, and it is naive to think the global response will be any different now than it was in 2009. Moreover, a call to develop new antiviral agents overlooks the long time frame from development to licensure, the high cost of any newly licensed agent, and consequently its availability only to people who live in developed countries. What influenza scientists, health officials and journalists have ignored is the ready availability of potentially effective agents that could improve survival in a pandemic. In an observational study of 3043 patients hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed influenza, statin treatment was associated with a 41% reduction in 30-day mortality, a reduction that was in addition to any that might have been attributable to previous vaccination and antiviral treatment. Surprisingly, influenza scientists have ignored this study, and health officials have shown no interest in extending these earlier findings. Yet, in a randomized controlled trial, giving statins to ward patients admitted with sepsis reduced progression to severe sepsis from 24% to 6%. Statins and other immunomodulatory agents are produced generically and available to anyone with access to basic health care anywhere in the world. The cost of treating an individual patient would be less that one dollar. Given what we already know, journalists and citizens must ask influenza scientists and health officials why they continue to ignore the remarkable promise of immunomodulatory treatment for influenza patients.
May 02, 20131:34pm EDT--
