Obama refocus on Latin America amid China push
2011-03-16 17:23:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Mar 16 2011
A t-shirt with an image of Ernesto Che Guevara for sale in Cinelandia Square, where President Obama will be giving a speech, in Rio de Janeiro, March 15, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Ricardo Moraes
Wed  EDT
On his first trip south of the border in nearly two years, Obama will visit countries where many are skeptical a president preoccupied with Middle East unrest, Japan's nuclear crisis and U.S. domestic problems can offer much to an increasingly independent-minded Latin America.
His March 19-23 tour takes him to South American powerhouse Brazil, free-market success story Chile and tiny El Salvador.
Obama's challenge will be to convince Latin Americans, who have long chafed at U.S. perceptions of their countries as Washington's "backyard," about his commitment to making the region a priority for trade and investment at a time when China is seizing the initiative there.
The trip also has important political implications at home. The White House is touting Latin America as a fertile market for increased exports that Obama sees as a path to creating U.S. jobs, considered crucial to his 2012 re-election chances.
But Latin America, buoyed by growth outstripping the U.S. recovery, is not only diversifying economically but showing it is no longer as willing to take its cues from Washington.
"We can't ignore the Western Hemisphere nor can we take it for granted, because other people are moving in very quickly and very effectively," said Eric Farnsworth, vice president of the Council of the Americas.
Though Washington's image has improved from the lows of the Bush era and Obama remains personally popular in Latin America, diplomatic advances have failed to materialize along with hopes for significant easing of a long-standing U.S. embargo on communist Cuba and reform of U.S. immigration laws.
There has also been disappointment at Obama's failure so far to win congressional approval for stalled trade pacts with Colombia and Panama, and over what was widely seen as a muddled U.S. response to the 2009 coup in Honduras.
With Obama preoccupied by crises abroad, budget battles in Congress and his own re-election bid, Latin America seems to have slipped down his agenda, although the White House insists he has been "deeply engaged," meeting the region's leaders regularly at world summits.
U.S. officials hope that Obama's trip, his most extensive to the region since taking office -- will reassure America's closest neighbors, show renewed leadership and bolster ties.
"There is a cost to disengagement," Ben Rhodes, Obama's deputy national security adviser, told reporters. "It's very much in the United States' interest, in the hemisphere's interest, for us to signal that we're committed."
While the visit will be sweetened with business deals and side agreements, it will yield more symbolism than substance.
China and India are making deeper inroads. Their appetite for raw materials at home is helping to spur growth in Latin America, which once lagged behind the United States.
Recognition of this trend is reflected in the choice of Brazil, the region's top economy and an emerging world power, as Obama's main stop on his tour.
He wants to take advantage of a chance to repair ties since President Dilma Rousseff took office in January, U.S. officials say. Tensions rose under former President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva over, among other things, Brazil's overtures to Iran.
Rousseff, a pragmatic leftist, has veered back toward Washington and away from anti-U.S. leaders like Venezuela's Hugo Chavez, but she will likely insist on results from Obama.
With China having overtaken the United States as Brazil's leading trade partner, the Obama administration is determined to push U.S. interests for boosting exports and creating jobs.
Rhodes acknowledged Beijing's growing presence in the hemisphere but said: "We don't believe that it needs to be a kind of zero-sum competition in the Americas."
Mike Froman, Obama's senior aide for international economics, made clear, however, that China would be up for discussion between Obama and Rousseff, especially given shared concerns on what is widely seen as an undervalued yuan.
Obama's visit to Chile will showcase the country as a U.S.-backed model of market reform and stability since it emerged from military dictatorship in the 1980s. He will use Santiago as the setting for a Latin American policy address.
The political counterpoint to Chile, governed by the center-right, will be Obama's stop in El Salvador. Its new elected government, led by members of a former leftist rebel movement Washington opposed in the Central American country's civil war, is seeking closer ties with the United States.
Obama's itinerary sends a message that he wants to avoid viewing Latin America through the ideological prism that prevailed under his Republican predecessor, George W. Bush.
But while the visit to El Salvador is also likely to focus on concerns about poverty and the spillover of Mexico's drug war to its neighbors, expectations are low for new aid commitments because of U.S. budget constraints.
There could be hard feelings in countries Obama bypasses. Argentina's media have depicted his choice of two market-friendly neighbors as a snub to President Cristina Fernandez and her interventionist economic policies.
(Additional reporting by Alister Bull in Washington, Brian Winter in Sao Paulo, Simon Gardner in Santiago, Helen Popper in Buenos Aires, Daniel Wallis in Caracas, Jeff Franks in Havana; Editing by Kieran Murray)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Obama is just wasting his time. Nobody wants US in South America. They no longer want to be US¡¯ backyard. US has used, ruined and destroyed the whole Central and South America for over a century, and they are now wise enough to know that US cares for no one but US corporate interests. All the political troubles in Central and South America were caused by the CIA. All the coup d¡¯etat, all the wars, and all the dictators were handworks of the US government. The US has done the worst environment damage to these once pristine lands. US corporations only go to take and loot until there is nothing left. Why would any country welcome US back after a whole century of war and dictatorship? They have had enough. Go home Yankee. America Sur, no te gusta nomas! South America wants you no more!
Mar 16, 20113:14am EDT--
OC Theo, You obviously lack any concept of what globalism means. These coorporations that you vilify with such passion don¡¯t care much for any country, including the US. If there is a Mc Donalds in your country, why? Why do you let these vicious beasts roam your land? You act like you¡¯re liberated, yet your economy depends on US (us). This popularized trend of America bashing is only half-way justified. Yes, we¡¯ve done terrible things, but we¡¯ve also done amazing things. You can only half blame us for your problems. If you come from Brazil, I¡¯ve noticed your ever increasing relationship with China. Can you justify that? Is dealing with China (the world capital of human exploitation) any better than dealing with the coorporate facists of America? You can pick your poison but I doubt you can rationalize your decision. It¡¯s trendy to be anti-American, fine, but if you can make a buck off of us you¡¯ll come crawling back. It¡¯s now how I want it to be, but that¡¯s just how the world works. Everyone wants money.
Mar 16, 20113:58am EDT--
to lighthouse,
to lighthouse,
Mar 16, 20114:16am EDT--
