Israel's Netanyahu, Palestine's Abbas head to China
2013-05-04 12:28:00.0
Israel's Netanyahu, Palestine's Abbas head to China | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Israel's Netanyahu, Palestine's Abbas head to China
Fri, May 3 2013
Thu, Apr 25 2013
Thu, Apr 25 2013
Tue, Apr 23 2013
Tue, Apr 23 2013
Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu attends the weekly cabinet meeting in Jerusalem April 21, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Gali Tibbon/Pool
Sat  EDT
Netanyahu's visit -- the first trip by a top Israeli leader to China since former prime minister Ehud Olmert visited in 2007 -- will be focused on trade, though experts have also said he is likely to discuss Iran's nuclear program with China.
China, Iran's top oil customer and a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council, has opposed unilateral sanctions on Tehran such as those imposed by Washington and the European Union and has called repeatedly for talks to resolve the stand-off over Iran's nuclear program.
Netanyahu's visit comes as a U.S. official said Israel has conducted an airstrike in Syria, apparently targeting a building, a development that is likely to worry Beijing.
Netanyahu is set to arrive on Monday in China's commercial capital of Shanghai, where he will meet business leaders, and fly to Beijing after for talks with Chinese leaders. Abbas will arrive in Beijing on Sunday.
It is unclear whether Netanyahu and Abbas will meet in China. China's foreign ministry said the country "is willing to offer necessary assistance if the leaders of Palestine and Israel have the will to meet in China".
China has traditionally had a low profile in Middle East diplomacy, but is keen to assert its role as a key player in international politics. It has tried on and off over the years to mediate in the Israeli-Palestinian issue but with little apparent success.
China believes that "strengthening its relationship with Jerusalem would be a sign that it gradually is coming to possess a foothold in the region, while somewhat offsetting, and perhaps even undermining, American political influence there", the Institute of National Security Studies (INSS), a top Israeli think-tank, said in a paper on Thursday.
Beijing has maintained close relations with the Palestinians for decades. In recent years, it has also cultivated good ties with Israel, especially in the field of defense.
In an interview with China's state news agency Xinhua on Friday, Abbas said he will let the Chinese leaders know the barriers currently rooted in the Palestinians' talks with Israel, as he "expects Beijing's contribution to the stalled peace process".
"It is very good that Netanyahu will visit China too because it is a good opportunity that the Chinese listen to both of us," Abbas was quoted by Xinhua as saying.
Israeli officials say Netanyahu is expected to sign several bilateral deals with China in sectors such as agriculture and water during his five-day visit, with the aim of boosting bilateral trade worth about $10 billion.
Netanyahu will also raise the issue of Iran, according to the INSS. Israel, the United States, the EU and their allies say Iran is amassing the capability to produce a nuclear bomb, an allegation the Islamic Republic denies.
Netanyahu, at the United Nations last September, set a "red line" of spring or summer for when Iran would be close to weapons capability, suggesting prospects for an Israeli attack around that time. But Iran's latest talks with world powers plus adjustments in Tehran's uranium enrichment processes are widely thought to have pushed back that deadline.
(Additional reporting by Crispian Balmer in Jerusalem; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Netanyahu will also raise the issue of Iran, according to the INSS. Because China has such a great track record with nuclear proliferation.
May 04, 20132:23am EDT--
May 04, 20139:57am EDT--
Nature attempted to denuclearize Japan, by exposing the horrendous corruption of Japanese corporations. However, despite endless heart wrenching display of what¡¯s at stake, the Japanese Government, unlike Germany, ignores the democratic wish of its people to denuclearize Japan. Instead, the Japanese ministers, not just Abe, keep manufacturing, fanning stories of military tension to distract the Japanese people. The young Japanese are particularly easy preys, and have been used as puppets to endanger the peace and security of the world. Recently, a rat was found to have unplugged the electric supply in the Fukushima plant, causing another near-disaster. The REAL reason Japan does NOT let go of nuclear energy is because it allows Japan to continue experiment with, and maintain high level Japanese technical capability to handle nuclear material, so that Japan can STEALTHILY manufacture a nuclear bomb ¡ª trust me, THAT IS WHY ABE IS ACTIVELY SELLING SO CALLED NUCLEAR ENERGY TO THE UAE AND TURKEY. Why would UAE need nuclear energy? It has plenty of oil!!! JAPAN IS DEVELOPING A NETWORK OF ALLIES, HELPING THEM TO DEVELOP WHAT AMERICA IS ON THE VERGE OF GOING TO WAR TO PREVENT IRAN FROM DEVELOPING. ABE, by keeping Japan in the nuclear business, does not just eye the profit¨C it has cost Japan a lot more to have nuclear energy, due to the nuclear leak, but ABE DOESN¡¯T CARE ABOUT THE PLIGHT OF JAPANESE PEOPLE. ABE KEEPS NUCLEAR ENERGY HIGH ON ITS AGENDA ONLY AND ONLY BECAUSE OF ITS NEO-NAZI, STEALTH NEO-NAZI AGENDA. All Japanese people, and the whole world, should free Japan from the bondage of these oppressors, who caused the Fukushima disaster, and insists on subjecting Japanese people and people around the world to the danger of similar disasters ¡ª ALL BECAUSE OF ABE¡¯S HIDDEN MILITARISTIC AGENDA FOR KEEPING A READY CAPABILITY TO PRODUCE A NUCLEAR BOMB VERY QUICKLY, LITERALLY ¡°ON STANDBY¡± READINESS. Just like his grandfather, who waged wars incessantly, caring nothing about the suffering of the Japanese people, Abe doesn¡¯t care about the potential carnage and disaster, and continues to place Japanese people under the lies, manipulation and oppression of the Japanese Government. Japanese people have not functional criminal procedures ¡ª the confession rate is over 99% whenever any Japanese is so unlucky to be arrested by the Japanese police ¡ª it is considered their duty to confess even though they were innocent. Japanese women suffer from some of the worst chauvinism among affluent nations. The expectation for them to obey is the most horrendous among affluent countries. For example, in the not so old movie, the Last Samurai, in which the woman was forced to marry the man who killed the husband she loved; yet the movie has to make up the crazy propaganda that she loves to obey her brother-in-law instead of the reality, which is, women hate it. Not only do women have to suffer horrible women¡¯s rights violation, they have to act as if they love it, which is the greatest women¡¯s rights violation of all. Free Japan from militaristic leaders, from the revival of neo-Nazism, from the oppression of culturally forced confessions, from oppressive culturally ingrained women¡¯s rights violations.
May 04, 20136:12pm EDT--
