U.S. urges China to halt detention of activists
2011-03-08 15:46:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States has urged China to stop what it called the "extralegal" detention and abduction of leading lawyers and human rights activists, the State Department said Tuesday.
"The United States is increasingly concerned by the apparent extralegal detention and enforced disappearance of some of China's most well-known lawyers and activists, many of whom have been missing since mid-February," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley said.
"We have expressed our concern to the Chinese government over the use of extra-legal punishments against these and other human rights activists," Crowley said.
"We continue to urge China to uphold its internationally recognized obligations of universal human rights, including the freedoms of expression, association and assembly."
Chinese authorities have also barred foreign reporters from sites of would-be protests in Beijing, and stepped up censorship and Internet controls as they move to stifle public signs of dissent.
Crowley said the United States had also brought up the issue of journalists with Beijing. "This has been a subject of long-standing concern and long-standing discussion with China," he said.
The United States has stepped up its criticism of Beijing's human rights record in recent months, and U.S. President Barack Obama brought up the issue during Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit to Washington in January.
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in February singled out Beijing as one of the governments facing the "dictator's dilemma" of trying to control the Internet while also taking advantage of its opportunities.
China, which rejects criticism of its human rights record as meddling in its internal affairs, responded by deleting U.S. embassy blog posts about Clinton's speech.
(reporting by Andrew Quinn; editing by Jackie Frank)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
you just think follow the subject of idea of ccp.neither voice of democarcy,nor vision of human right.
you just think follow the subject of idea of ccp.neither voice of democarcy,nor vision of human right.
many people’life are absence of respectflu,feer,fair,but just corrupt of goverment,inenqulity around the society.
where is human right organize,and UN,and the other democracy nation,yet you blind to see the suffer we surround.
Mar 09, 20118:17am EST--
Mar 09, 20118:26am EST--
我不会英语，所以我就用汉语留言了
Mar 09, 20118:26am EST--
