Analysis: For China, new plan is a question of balance
2011-03-14 10:07:00.0
(Reuters) - By Alan Wheatley, Global Economics Correspondent
BEIJING, March 14
(Reuters) - It's a roundabout way for China to rebalance its economy, but launching the world's largest housing investment scheme should eventually generate the extra consumption long sought by Beijing and its overseas critics alike.
As part of its new five-year plan for 2011-2015, China intends to build 10 million affordable homes this year and 36 million units over the period 2011-2015.
Assuming three people to a flat, that is enough to house the combined populations of France, Australia and Canada.
The short-term impact will be to further whet China's appetite for steel, copper and other materials, to the benefit of commodity exporters, and to prop up its unprecedented investment rate of 48 percent of gross domestic product.
In theory, millions of Chinese will no longer have to save for an exorbitant, market-priced home, leaving more spending money in their pockets.
Louis Kuijs, an economist with the World Bank in Beijing, said China was putting substantially more effort into affordable housing than he had expected.
"It should ensure urbanization continues and help free up not just the savings rate but disposable income among households," Kuijs said. "I wouldn't be surprised if big efforts like this also raise confidence in the economy."
In effect, China is adopting the Singapore and Hong Kong model of a two-tier market: social housing for those on lower incomes and market-priced property for the better off.
As well as sowing the seeds for greater consumption, the huge new supply of flats should deflate bubbly property prices and so ease a source of fierce resentment among ordinary Chinese.
During the annual session of parliament that ended on Monday, Premier Wen Jiabao flagged an array of other policies to improve "people's livelihood" that also bode well for consumption.
All in all, the five-year plan is likely to "spark the greatest consumption story in modern history" and boost household spending to a range of 42-45 percent by 2015 from just 36 percent now, Stephen Roach, non-executive chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia, wrote in a Project Syndicate column.
Reducing China's surplus savings would, by definition, diminish its current account surplus, which came to 5 percent of GDP last year and is a perennial irritant in relations with Washington and Brussels.
The government's projected 14 percent increase in social outlays this year, while outstripping the planned 11.9 percent rise in the total budget, is inadequate given the low starting base, according to Qu Hongbin, HSBC's chief China economist.
"Though a step in the right direction, the shift in spending from construction to education, health care and other social welfare is still too modest to make a meaningful impact on Chinese consumers' saving behavior any time soon," he said in a report.
And China's budget deficit is still projected to shrink this year to 2.0 percent of GDP from 2.5 percent in 2010.
Moreover, all other things being equal, a smaller budget deficit will translate into a higher current account surplus.
"I suspect that at the highest levels of the Chinese government policymakers do not see the connection between their fiscal position and their current account position. It's as simple as that," Williams said.
Forecasts of the current account surplus diverge. Williams expects it to widen this year to around 6.5 percent of GDP, which he said was "not anywhere near enough to keep the Americans happy".
By contrast, economist Ting Lu with Bank of America Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong last week reduced his estimate of the surplus to 4.0 percent of GDP from 4.2 percent.
Ever-stronger demand for imports argues for a drop in the surplus. January's statistics show Germany exported more to China and Hong Kong than to the United States for the first time ever. High oil and commodity costs inflate China's import bill further.
On the other hand, industrial upgrading is another priority of China's planners. If importing better machinery means China can produce more exports, the process of external rebalancing will take longer, Kuijs with the World Bank said.
Yao Yang, deputy director of the China Center for Economic Research at Peking University, firmly believes rebalancing is a marathon not a sprint.
He traces China's export-led growth model to rapid industrialization, accompanied by migration from the land to cities, and the demographic dividend of a young workforce attributable to the one-child policy dating back to 1979.
These two profound shifts are a long way from running their course, and so, therefore, are the serious structural imbalances they have generated, including suppressed wages and surplus savings, Yao argues.
"The double transition will take 10 to 15 years to finish," he wrote in the East Asia Forum newsletter. (Editing by Mathew Veedon)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Mind you if we point Stephen Roach¡¯s piece : http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/roach2/English , ¡°China¡¯s Turning Point¡±.
Mind you if we point Stephen Roach¡¯s piece : http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/roach2/English , ¡°China¡¯s Turning Point¡±.
Thanks !
Mar 14, 201110:22am EDT--
