CIC official: not heard of plans to buy Glencore stake
2011-03-04 06:14:00.0
(Reuters) - A senior official at China's $300 billion sovereign wealth fund said on Friday that he had not heard of any plans for the fund to buy a stake in Glencore International AG, the world's largest commodities trader, which is aiming for a potential stock market listing.
Glencore's GLEN.UL possible initial public offering could value it at about $60 billion and the deal could be a fee bonanza for investment bankers.
"I haven't heard about this," said Jesse Wang, an executive vice president with China Investment Corp (CIC) CIC.UL, when asked about making investments in Glencore. He was speaking on the sidelines of a meeting of the advisory body to the Chinese parliament.
), Asia's biggest commodities trader.
Qatar Investment Authority, one of the sovereign wealth funds flagged as a possible cornerstone shareholder, is considering investing in Glencore, the country's prime minister said on Monday.
Cornerstone shareholders usually have anywhere between a six- and 12-month lock-up on their investments and their presence on a company's register helps to generate demand in the IPO.
Asian wealth funds are natural targets for companies planning large IPOs, as was evident in last year's two mega deals from Agricultural Bank of China Ltd (
Glencore's possible IPO is one of the most hotly anticipated capital market events this year, although the company told investors on Thursday that no decision had been taken over the listing.
Glencore could float 20 percent or more of its stock, possibly split between London and Hong Kong, raising up to $16 billion. If it reached that, a Glencore deal would be around the same size as Europe's largest IPO to date, the 1999 flotation of Italy's Enel SpA (
), which raised $16.6 billion.
), Morgan Stanley (
) have been appointed to lead Glencore's possible flotation, with other investment banks scrambling for a slice of what they hope will be lucrative fees if the IPO goes ahead.
(Writing by Denny Thomas; Editing by Chris Lewis)
