China's Wen offers Japan further aid after quake
2011-03-14 01:36:00.0
(Reuters) - China stands willing to offer earthquake-struck Japan further help, Premier Wen Jiabao said on Monday, expressing his deep sympathy to a country with which Beijing has had often-hostile relations.
China has set aside acrimony over territorial disputes and wartime memories to extend the hand of friendship to Japan, sending a team of rescuers to help search for survivors from the disaster, which likely killed more than 10,000 people.
"I want to use today's opportunity to extend our deep condolences for the loss of lives in this disaster and to express our sincere sympathy to the Japanese people," Wen said at the end of his annual news conference in Beijing.
"China is also a country that is prone to earthquake disasters and we fully empathize with how the Japanese people feel now," he added.
"When the massive Wenchuan earthquake hit the Japanese government sent a rescue team to China and also offered supplies," said Wen, referring to the 2008 Sichuan earthquake that killed more than 80,000 people.
In 2008, Chinese President Hu Jintao himself thanked Japanese rescue teams that had searched for survivors of the devastating Sichuan earthquake, though the Japanese team actually ended up rescuing no one.
A litany of issues characterize China's difficult ties with Japan, from spats over Chinese limits on rare earth exports to Japanese concerns about Beijing's growing defense budget.
Relations chilled again last September after a Chinese fishing trawler collided with Japanese patrol vessels near a group of disputed islands in the East China Sea, which are close to potentially vast oil and gas reserves.
But China moved quickly to send aid to Japan following last Friday's earthquake and tsunami.
China's 15-member rescue team headed immediately to the main quake zone upon landing in Tokyo on a chartered flight to help search for survivors, according to state news agency Xinhua.
China's state-run television news has given over hours of live coverage to the disaster, largely displacing its dry reports on a meeting of China's rubber stamp parliament.
While some nationalists have voiced satisfaction online at the sight of China's neighbor stricken by catastrophe, grief and sympathy have been much more common reactions, sometimes mixed with a political message.
China is Japan's biggest trade partner and a severe blow to the Japanese economy would also hurt China's exports. Trade between the two nations grew by 22.3 percent in 2010, compared to levels in 2009, reaching 26.5 trillion yen, according to the Japan External Trade Organization.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Chris Buckley; Additional reporting by Sabrina Mao; Editing by John Chalmers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I sincerely hope this is not the limit of the Chinese involvement and assistance with the relief effort in Japan. Sending a single 15-person team out of a population of 1.3 billion seems like a poor excuse for ¡®help¡¯. One would think that a nation with such robust trade relations with Japan would offer a plethora of aid and assistance to their geographic neighbors in this time of extreme turmoil. My heart goes out to the Japanese people during this epically tragic disaster.
Mar 14, 20118:04pm EDT--
so jmtnusa, tell me what is the right formula to use for calculating the size of the rescue team based on a China¡¯s population? Do you have any idea how big is the size of its rescue team if she sends 0.01% of its population? Don¡¯t sound like the Family Guy scriptwriter Alec Sulkin. If you truly care about the victim in Japan, please donate your money in your local Red Cross office rather than politicizing the tragedy.
Mar 15, 201111:18pm EDT--
