Wheat falls for 2nd day on crop weather, soy firm
2011-03-01 22:36:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. wheat futures lost more ground on Wednesday, falling around half a percent as rains in China's wheat belt and forecasts for much-needed moisture in the U.S. Plains continued to weigh on the market.
Soybeans ticked higher, with support from forecasts of rains likely to cause delays in the harvest of Brazil's bumper crop, while front-month corn fell from near a 32-month top, tracking losses in the wheat market.
"They are forecasting rains for China and the U.S. wheat areas which should help the crops," said Adam Davis, a senior grains trader at Melbourne-based Merricks Capital.
"But there is still some concern around hard red winter wheat, which is in need of rains. They have had lower-than-average rains so far this year and conditions aren't looking good."
The Chicago Board of Trade May wheat contract fell 0.6 percent to $8.05-3/4 a bushel by 0308 GMT. The benchmark May soybeans rose 0.3 percent to $13.79 a bushel, while May corn fell 0.2 percent to $7.34-1/4 a bushel.
The wheat market is focused on weather, with some forecasts calling for rains in dry areas of the U.S. Plains this weekend.
Eastern and central portions of the U.S. Plains have had moisture over the winter but western sections of Kansas, the top U.S. winter wheat state, remain dry.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), in a monthly crop condition report late on Monday, graded 40 percent of the Kansas wheat crop as in poor to very poor condition.
In China, the wheat acreage affected by a drought in eight provinces has fallen by two-thirds since February 8, to 2.52 million hectares (6.2 million acres), the Ministry of Water Resources said this week.
Corn futures fell, tracking lower wheat, but the market has been supported in recent sessions after the USDA last week said huge U.S. corn plantings this spring were unlikely to increase razor-thin stocks much.
For soybeans, harvest delays in Brazil helped underpin the market.
February has turned out to be one of the wetter months for Brazilian soy fields this season, forecasters Somar said this week, with continued downpours expected in the center-west where harvesting is most advanced.
Brazil's main grain port of Paranagua resumed normal loading of grains on Tuesday, after heavy rains interrupted operations the previous day.
Still, oilseeds analysis firm Oil World raised its forecast for Argentina's 2011 soybean crop by 0.5 million tonnes from its previous estimate in February after parched crops received rain.
(Reporting by Naveen Thukral; Editing by Ed Lane)
