Clinton says China seeks to outflank Exxon in Papua New Guinea
2011-03-02 14:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China wants to elbow oil giant Exxon Mobil out of a $15 billion liquefied natural gas (LNG) project in Papua New Guinea, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Wednesday in an example of the new competition Beijing presents to U.S. interests.
Clinton told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that Republican proposals to cut the U.S. foreign affairs budget would hit U.S. efforts to compete with China's rising power on the global stage.
"We are in a competition with China," Clinton said, citing the Papua New Guinea energy find as an example.
"Exxon Mobil is producing it. China is in there every day, in every way, trying to figure out how its going to come in behind us, come in under us," she said.
Exxon Mobil is the majority stakeholder in the Papua New Guinea project, which is due to come on stream in 2014 and is expected to produce 6.6 million tonnes of LNG per year -- a potential windfall for the poor island nation.
Clinton said China was also boosting ties with other states across the Asia-Pacific, including what she called the "dictatorial regime" in Fiji and other island nations that have long been reliable if little noticed U.S. allies.
Clinton said funding cuts that would require a U.S. pullback on everything from support for global health programs to protection of women's rights could have a serious long-term impact on U.S. influence around the world.
"If anybody thinks that our retreating on these issues is somehow going to be irrelevant to the maintenance of our leadership in a world where we are competing with China, where we are competing with Iran, that is a mistaken notion," she said.
Republicans have proposed a 16 percent cut to U.S. spending on diplomacy and foreign assistance, among other things, saying it is imperative to fight the ballooning federal deficit.
Clinton said the U.S. retreat was opening new doors to competitors, noting new media challengers such as Al Jazeera and Russian and Chinese English-language broadcasters were winning "the information war".
"Let's put aside the moral, humanitarian do-good side of what we believe in and let's just talk straight realpolitik," Clinton said of the various U.S. programs that could be hit by the budget cuts.
"I also look at this from a strategic perspective, and it is essential."
(Reporting by Andrew Quinn; editing by John Whitesides)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
LOL¡­ Ms. Clinton just wanna keep using money borrowed from China for the US foreign affair agenda, to real politicking, and to help US companies such as Exxon Mobile compete abroad using US geopolitical influnces. She makes me wonder if Exxon Mobile is a state owned company of the US government¡­ :)
Mar 02, 20112:20pm EST--
So the US would borrow money from China to support China in order to compete with China? Shouldn¡¯t the aid money if there is any go to the American citizens first?
Mar 02, 20113:37pm EST--
No problem, how about you rob a few trillion more from Social Security and Medicare to help make your crony friends rich? Lord knows the oil cronies don¡¯t have the money to support their own deals. And the kicker, they¡¯re considered multi-national companies, that means they¡¯re allowed every tax-loophole known to man. So they don¡¯t pay squat in taxes. American taxpayers foot the bill to fill their pockets. Just like with the Iraq and Afghanistan wars. They made a fortune off of Iraq, And they¡¯ll keep is in Afghanistan forever so that Iran doesn¡¯t build that pipeline to supply India and Pakistan with oil and gas. Don¡¯t you just love the way the Mafia works? Legally robbing the public to enrich themselves.
Mar 02, 20117:04pm EST--
