China exports set to underscore worries over U.S., Europe demand
2013-05-07 17:14:00.0
(Reuters) - China's trade data on Wednesday is expected to underline concerns about the pace of a U.S. recovery and recession in Europe and that economic growth in the world's second-biggest economy is struggling to pick up.
The median forecast of 27 economists polled by Reuters pointed to annual export growth of 10.3 percent in April, up from an increase of 10 percent in March.
China's imports were seen rising 13.9 percent in April from a year earlier, compared to a rise of 14.1 percent in March.
That would leave an estimated trade surplus of $15.1 billion, compared with a slight trade deficit of $0.88 billion in March. The data is due on Wednesday at around 10.00 p.m. ET.
China's figures come after major exporters South Korea and Taiwan posted weaker-than-expected exports for April, showing the fragility of global demand. Although the United States posted firm jobs numbers for April, they followed a series of weak data, while the recession-hit euro zone has record unemployment.
"The chance is very low of seeing a quick pick-up in the U.S. and EU economies and government austerity measures will continue to crimp consumer confidence, which could further weigh on demand for goods assembled in China," said Yang Weixiao, analyst at Lianxun Securities in Beijing.
The uncertainties will keep growth mild for the coming months, though Yang expects the pace of exports this year to pick up from last year.
"Generally speaking, we may see higher annual export growth this year than last year, and we expect a rise of 12-15 percent in 2013 versus 7.9 percent in 2012," he said.
A pair of PMI surveys last week showed growth in China's vast factory sector eased in April as new export orders shrank, offering new signs of a delay in an economic recovery.
That weakness has spread to the services sector, where a separate private PMI survey showed growth slowed sharply in April to its weakest pace since August 2011, adding to the risk that China's economic growth is weaker than previously anticipated.
China's economy unexpectedly stumbled in the first quarter, growing 7.7 percent from a year earlier versus a rise of 7.9 percent in the previous three months, as factory output and investment slowed. Analysts had expected growth to pick up in the first quarter.
To be sure, most economists expect a steady and gentle economic recovery this year, as investment growth quickens and retail sales stabilize from the second quarter onwards as government policies to stimulate growth kick in.
(Reporting by Beijing economics team; writing by Jonathan Standing; Editing by Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The article is correct that China¡¯s exports may lag because the EU is China¡¯s biggest trade partner, and the US is second. The EU remains in recession, and the US struggles with a GDP growth that is less than one third of China¡¯s growth rate. However, the sources of China¡¯s PMI¡¯s may need some changes because the two five year plans that will cover 2011 to 2020 will raise growth in the west and north instead of the east and south that are extensively developed. The infrastructure continues to be built, but not in the old places, so using purchasing managers tied to the new areas might improve the accuracy of economic forecasts about China in the 21st Century¡¯s second decade.
May 07, 20137:14pm EDT--
Xinhua had an article today that revealed shifts in China¡¯s foreign trade in 2012. Emerging economies in developing nations increased their share of China¡¯s total trade by 6.2%. China¡¯s trade with Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa rose 188.5%, 83%, 72%, and 327% respectively, so the BRICS have been good to China. Foreign trade from different regions shifted to central provinces that were up 13.1% and to western provinces that rose 4.6% within China¡¯s total foreign trade. I have advised Reuters to seek PMI¡¯s from businesses that are farther from the south and east coasts because China¡¯s five year plans from 2011 to 2020 will develop the west, center, and north. This will create more customers from the infrastructure workers who have jobs with paychecks to become customers and taxpayers. The projects will help businesses develop and grow with transportation, energy, customers (workers), and supply contracts. The government may give paychecks, but it collects profits and taxes. In state owned companies, it receives profits and employee taxes; in state private partnerships it has partial profits and partial taxes; and in private companies, it receives taxes on profits and employee wages. This allows China to spend vast sums on development and take some of it back in profits and taxes. It also allows the government to pursue more consistent trade that develops smaller trade partners into bigger customers and creates cushions when the EU and US suffer economic hardships of their own making.
May 10, 20135:25pm EDT--
