China blames foreign media for police fracas
2011-03-01 08:51:00.0
(Reuters) - The Chinese government blamed foreign reporters on Tuesday for a weekend ruckus with police who tried to prevent them covering a planned protest in Beijing, as rights groups slammed China for curtailing press freedoms.
An American news cameraman in Beijing was kicked and battered in the face with brooms and taken into police custody, witnesses said. Police detained and manhandled other reporters.
There was no obvious sign of any protesters, however.
Despite assurances that China is immune from the kind of unrest roiling the Middle East, China's ruling Communist Party has responded nervously, detaining scores of dissidents and tightening censorship of online discussions.
"It's a busy street with many people passing through it. There was nothing going on. So many reporters went there on receiving whose instructions? Who called them to congregate there and mill around?" she said.
Reporters had ignored police instructions that they had to get permission before reporting on Beijing's Wangfujing shopping street, Jiang added. The street was mentioned in online messages as the place to gather and protest.
"Foreign reporters in China must respect China's rules and laws. This is an international norm," she said.
According to rules issued just before the Beijing Olympics, China allows foreign reporters to interview anyone as long as they have their permission.
But the government often interprets the rules to suit its needs, especially when it comes to sensitive subjects. Tibet remains off limits apart from government-organized visits.
While foreign journalists are occasionally harassed or detained in China, local media have a far harder time and there has been no sign of the government relaxing its grip there. Chinese reporters can be fired or jailed for writing stories that stray too far from the government line.
"This is the worst aggression against the foreign press we've seen since the Olympics in 2008," Bob Dietz, the group's Asia program coordinator, said in a statement on its website.
The U.S. ambassador to China, who is considering a run for the White House, weighed in on Monday to condemn the harassment, as did the European Union.
Before the designated protest time last Sunday, police warned foreign journalists to stay away, apparently out of jitters about the protest call.
"Some journalists were told Wangfujing and several other areas in Beijing, including Xidan, Tiananmen, and Beijing Station, are considered 'special zones' and journalists who wish to report in these areas must apply in advance," the Foreign Correspondents Club of China said.
"The Wangfujing Management and Construction Office told one journalist it takes three days to process official application letters, and journalists must promise to submit a copy of the finished story after it is released."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese authorities have no one to blame but themselves. If Chinese government officials followed their own constitution and allowed their own citizens to have the liberties spelled out in the constitution, then China would actually be a fairly free country. The people could practice religion as they wish, speak their mind, protest against injustice, etc. Instead, China has become the world¡¯s biggest prision in many ways. The Chinese Communist Party, it seems, is never able to point the finger at itself and say, ¡°We made a mistake. We are sorry.¡± Has anyone noticed how the government is never at fault for anything that goes wrong in China. When there are protests, they blame foreign media and governments. It¡¯s time the Chinese authorities looks themselves in the mirror and see that the fault for unrest in China is staring them right in the face.
Mar 01, 20116:55am EST--
After the Middle East is liberated, including Iran, then the free world will set its sights on China. I even expect Arabs will help out in undermining the one party state in China since they will have the freshest taste of democracy still in their mouths and will have the best ideas. The Chinese Communist Party is going to become irrelevant in people¡¯s lives as Chinese people fear less and less what their government can do to them. The Chinese people are thirsting for real freedom just as everyone one else in the world. We can no longer believe the Chinese communist dictators when they say that the Chinese are not ready for democracy. I wake up smiling every day to see such wonderful people power overthrowing wicked governments, and I know that this same fate awaits the authoritarian rulers of China, none of whom were elected by the people.
Mar 01, 20117:13am EST--
After US has failed and becomes desparate in economic competition with China for 30 years, the ¡°demon-crazy¡± is the last toxic that US sneaks smuggling to China. China only needs another 10 years.
Mar 01, 201110:29am EST--
