Morgan Stanley hit by China-based hackers: report
2011-03-01 08:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Morgan Stanley experienced a "very sensitive" break-in to its network by the same China-based hackers who attacked Google Inc's computers more than a year ago, Bloomberg reported, citing leaked emails from an Internet security company.
The emails from the Sacramento, California-based computer security firm HBGary Inc said that Morgan Stanley -- the first financial institution identified in the series of attacks -- considered details of the intrusion a closely guarded secret, the report said.
Bloomberg quoted Phil Wallisch, a senior security engineer at HBGary, as saying that he read an internal Morgan Stanley report detailing the so-called Aurora attacks.
The HBGary emails don't indicate what information may have been stolen from Morgan Stanley's databanks or which of the world's largest merger adviser's multinational operations were targeted, according to the report.
"Morgan Stanley invests significantly in IT security and manages a robust program to deal with malware and attempted computer compromises," spokeswoman Sandra Hernandez said in a statement emailed to Reuters.
"We often hear this kind of story. I don't know if related parties have reported this to the relevant authorities asking China to cooperate," Jiang told a regular news briefing.
"We ... will use the law to go after any kind of hacking or crime on the Internet," she added.
(Reporting by Soyoung Kim and Yinka Adegoke in New York, Noel Randewich in San Francisco and Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This shows Chinese hacking skills are at rudimentary levels. Chinese never complain about hacking activities from U.S. We know Americans carried out lot more hacking into different Chinese institutions, but those hacking activities are just going unnoticed by Chinese. U.S rocks.
Mar 01, 20119:23am EST--
Lol HBGary? The security firm that took a whole day for hackers to infiltrate and take over their homepage, as well as thousands of emails of people at the company (one of the five-membered team apparently being a 16-year-old girl). http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2011/02/the-ridiculous-plan-to-attack-wikileaks.ars
Mar 01, 201112:38pm EST--
Hmm, didnt China just increase its holding to around 10% of Morgan Stanley? If so, why would they need to ¡°hack¡± them, when they hold #2 shareholder position. They can simply telephone John J Mack and threaten to sell all their shares unless he tells them what they want to know.
Mar 01, 201110:25pm EST--
