Panda-monium in Japan after pair arrives from China
2011-02-22 02:30:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Feb 18 2011
Fri, Feb 18 2011
Thu, Feb 17 2011
Wed, Feb 16 2011
Tue, Feb 15 2011
A male giant panda named Bili is seen at the Ueno zoo in Tokyo February 22, 2011. Panda fever showed few signs of dying down in Japan on Tuesday after the arrival in Tokyo of the country's latest pair of giant pandas from China. Credit: Reuters/Tokyo Zoological Park Society/Handout
Tue  EST
(Reuters Life!) - Panda fever showed few signs of dying down in Japan on Tuesday after the arrival in Tokyo of the country's latest pair of giant pandas from China.
Xiannu and Bili, both five years old, reached the capital's Ueno Zoological Park late at night after a journey of nearly 4,000 km (2,500 miles) from China's Sichuan province and were greeted by nearly 200 journalists.
"When the first panda came to Japan in 1972, they came here to Ueno," said Ueno Zoo president Teruyuki Komiya. "As there haven't been any pandas at Ueno for a while now, there's been a lot of people wanting to see a panda again."
The last panda at Ueno, Ling Ling, died in 2008, although there are pandas at other zoos in Japan.
Morning news programmes reported at length on the arrival of the pair, featuring shots of their special plane in white and black livery. Airport staff held up a banner saying: "Welcome to Japan, dear pandas."
Little was seen of the pandas themselves, except for distant glimpses of one's head inside its cage as it was transferred to a truck.
Some reported on their characters. Their Chinese keeper, quoted by Kyodo news agency, described Bili, a male, as "a big eater and sporty". Xiannu, a female, was "active and affable".
The presence of pandas in Japan is often linked to the state of relations between the neighbors, whose ties occasionally chill over issues such as Japan's handling of its wartime past and territorial rows over islands.
"Animals can open up the way for wonderful communications that help overcome difficult problems between countries," said Katsuya Okada, secretary general of the ruling Democratic Party.
The privilege of hosting the pandas comes with a hefty price tag of $950,000 a year. Ueno Zoo has also renovated its panda habitat at a cost of 90 million yen ($1.1 million).
But the cost seemed to matter little to many near Ueno, with shopkeepers hoping the presence of the pandas, to be put on view from sometime in March, will draw plenty of visitors.
Streets were festooned with banners hailing their arrival, while some shops sold products like bread with panda designs.
"We bake 20 to 30 of the breads, and they usually sell out in about an hour," said the manager of one bakery, adding that long lines form before the loaves goes on sale twice a day.
(Reporting by Saika Takano and Reuters Television; writing by Elaine Lies; editing by Ron Popeski)
