India says China agrees retreat to de facto border in faceoff deal
2013-05-06 08:44:00.0
(Reuters) - India and China have ended a three-week standoff on a windswept Himalayan plateau where they fought a war 50 years ago by agreeing to pull forces back to positions held before the confrontation, India's foreign ministry said on Monday.
The two countries packed up tents and left the disputed patch on the 5,000-metre-high (16,000-foot) Depsang Plain late on Sunday. But it had not been clear how far they had withdrawn.
Delhi had said the soldiers were 19 km (12 miles) beyond the point it understands to be the border with China in the Ladakh region of Kashmir, a vaguely defined de facto line called the Line of Actual Control, which neither side agrees on.
"The governments of India and China have agreed to restore status quo ante along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the Western Sector of the India-China boundary as it existed prior to 15 April, 2013." India's foreign ministry spokesman Syed Akbaruddin said in a statement.
He did not elaborate or say whether China's soldiers had already retreated the agreed distance, only saying that "flag meetings" between border commanders had been held "to work out the modalities and to confirm the arrangements".
On Sunday, an army officer from India's Northern Command told Reuters Indian troops had initially moved back 1 km, but that he did not know how far the Chinese had moved.
China's foreign ministry on Monday stopped short of saying the standoff had been resolved, but said the two countries had treated the situation from the perspective of their wider bilateral relations, which include important trade ties.
"Currently, based on my understanding, the friendly consultations between the relevant departments from both countries achieved positive progress," spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters at a daily press briefing.
Some experts and Indian officials say tensions are likely to persist as the area is highly strategic and abuts the Karakoram Highway joining Pakistan to China, which Beijing hopes to develop into a high-traffic trade route linking it to the Arabian Sea port of Gawadar.
Indian media, which had criticized the government's handling of the standoff, on Monday speculated that Delhi had agreed to Chinese demands that it dismantle some infrastructure in another disputed sector in order to defuse the standoff.
Throughout the crisis, China denied it had crossed into Indian territory. Its soldiers displayed bright orange banners at the site which warned India's troops that they were in fact in Chinese territory, photos leaked by the Indian army showed.
The tensions had threatened to overshadow a visit by the Indian foreign minister to Beijing on May 9. China's Premier Li Keqiang is expected to visit India later this month.
(Reporting By Frank Jack Daniel in NEW DELHI and Michael Martina in BEIJING; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is fighting its devil within and also at times cuddles along with it. It just want to depict that it is a big power and enjoy the gravitas that comes along with it while the same time it also displays its recklessness as was demonstrated by its recent action at high mountain areas. All this done stealthily that it does not want the rest of the World (especially democratic powers) to know about it let alone its Chinese citizen. In this day of internet, Facebook the best one can do is to highlight China¡¯s temerity by publishing it in open, something it abhors. I believe the increased focus on Chinese action by the Indian media is the reason alone the Chinese did a fast retreat. The similar tactics were on display, when it wolfed down the Aksai-Chin region about four decades back and when the media out reach were limited in its scope. At the end of the day, I wonder what was gained other than poor publicity?
May 06, 20131:22pm EDT--
