BM&FBovespa says not in merger talks with CME
2011-02-18 09:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian exchange operator BM&FBovespa is not in merger talks with Chicago-based exchange operator CME Group but expects their partnership to expand in the near future, BM&FBovespa Chief Executive Edemir Pinto said on Friday.
Pinto told analysts at a seminar in Sao Paulo, where the Brazilian exchange is based, that CME Group (
"The partnership with CME is strengthening and has room to get even stronger," Pinto said. "But answering objectively to any questions about this, no, there are no current talks leading to a merger."
BM&FBovespa said on Thursday that it would sign an agreement with China's state-owned Shanghai Stock Exchange that could open the door for future partnerships between two of the world's largest exchange operators. The deal is to be signed on Monday.
Pinto, who told Reuters on Monday that BM&FBovespa is on the lookout for expansion opportunities in China and India, stressed on Friday that the exchange is not interested in making acquisitions in South America.
Instead, BM&FBovespa wants partnerships that will help it boost liquidity, he said, without elaborating. He added that BM&FBovespa is not interested in acquiring Brazil's largest clearing house, CETIP (
Pinto also said recent government efforts in Brazil to curb excess short-term investment inflows -- such as tax increases on trading -- are hampering the performance of BM&FBovespa's share price.
"The company has this sword over our head, all this regulatory risk -- we know this issue is being watched closely by foreign investors," Pinto said when asked by an investor about BM&FBovespa's stock price.
At some point, that could also hurt efforts to open the financial exchange and clearing markets, he said. "Everyone is looking at this regulatory risk," he added.
The exchange is prepared to face increased competition in Brazil from BATS, Pinto said.
"It is in our DNA, competing. We welcome competition because it means that more global investors are watching Brazil seriously," he said.
(Writing by Brian Ellsworth, Editing by John Wallace)
