U.S. to boost naval forces as China develops carrier: admiral
2011-02-21 10:31:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. navy will continue to upgrade its military capabilities in the Pacific given its steadfast commitment to the region, a U.S. vice admiral said on Monday, while urging China's growing navy to avoid provocation.
China's swelling defense budgets, rapid development of advanced systems including aircraft carriers and anti-satellite missiles, and its growing naval aggression in bordering seas, have unnerved regional neighbors and the United States in recent years.
"It is our sincere hope that as China continues to develop a blue-water navy, one which may soon include an aircraft carrier, it will employ that navy in a way that is responsible and constructive," said Vice admiral Scott Van Buskirk during a visit to Hong Kong.
The vice admiral who commands the U.S. Navy's 7th Fleet -- the largest forward deployed military force with up to 70 ships and 300 aircraft -- also urged China not to utilize such military hardware in a "threatening or provocative manner."
Following on from Gate's comments that China's military advances in cyber and anti-satellite warfare technology could challenge the ability of U.S. forces to operate in the Pacific, Van Buskirk said the United States would upgrade its hardware there.
A new Littoral combat ship (LCS) will be deployed to the area soon, carrier fighter squadrons upgraded, attack submarine attack capabilities increased, and surface destroyers rekitted to "boost their ability to detect and kill enemy submarines", Van Buskirk said.
"We remain committed. We remain engaged," he said.
While Gates breakthrough visit to Beijing last month reestablished high-level strategic level ties, Van Buskirk said much more needed to be done at a tactical level to ensure encounters at sea wouldn't escalate or lead to conflict.
"We're just not as successful in receiving return communications," said Van Buskirk of attempts by U.S. ships to hail Chinese vessels on the high seas.
(Reporting by James Pomfret; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Feb 21, 20116:06am EST--
I¡¯m pretty sure the two former Russian Keiv Class aircraft carriers China has tied up in specially constructed ports aren¡¯t really used as Amusement Parks as were told by the media. Personally, they look ship shape and well kept (google earth them) How to hide two aircraft carriers? hide them in plain site and call them something there not. Then there¡¯s the 3rd Carrier they have that they TOWED to China!!!! it was 60% built at the time, currently nearing completion. The 4th Carrier ¡­. Former HMAS Melbourne purchased in 1980/82? was probably stripped bare and rebuilt several times over using the technology. We in the West think too hard. You don¡¯t need to build massive Super Carriers that look like Carriers, to have them. Personally, if I were the Bad guys, I¡¯d build Dozens of Small Carriers to look like Super Tankers. That way you can build em and hide them in plain view till their needed. All your Air training ship take off landings ect ¡­. Do it on land. Never underestimate a potential enemy, never doubt his abilities, never disregard what you can¡¯t see. Or no matter how great you are, you will be defeated.
Feb 21, 20117:21am EST--
so, 7th fleet is on China¡¯s doorstep with 70 ships and 300 aircrafts, and US urges China not to utilize military hardware in a provocative manner ? is this a joke or what ?
so, 7th fleet is on China¡¯s doorstep with 70 ships and 300 aircrafts, and US urges China not to utilize military hardware in a provocative manner ? is this a joke or what ?
Feb 21, 20118:11am EST--
