Chinese stance throws G20 indicator deal into doubt
2011-02-18 17:32:00.0
(Reuters) - China rejected plans on Friday to use real exchange rates and currency reserves to measure global economic imbalances, casting heavy doubt on the ability of Group of 20 major economic powers to reach agreement.
Speaking shortly before the start of a two-day meeting of finance ministers and central bankers, Chinese Finance Minister Xie Xuren also said the G20 should use trade figures rather than current account balances to assess economic distortions.
G20 countries, which together account for 85 percent of world economic output, are trying to agree a set of measurements as a basis for economic policy guidelines to avoid a repeat of the 2008 global financial crisis.
"We think it is not appropriate to use real effective exchange rates and reserves," Xie said at a meeting with Russian, Brazilian and Indian counterparts.
The hardline Chinese stance highlighted splits over how to define economic imbalances and prescribe action to remedy them, a key aim of France's G20 presidency.
"I cannot tell you what will happen tomorrow. Nobody knows," he said. "No-one is trying to push China into a corner."
Even then, agreement was uncertain, they said.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who holds the G20 presidency this year, urged ministers not to get sidetracked by the indicators dispute and welcomed the fact that China had agreed to host a G20 seminar on reforming the international monetary system in Shenzhen in late March.
"I want to avoid your debates getting bogged down in interminable discussion about these indicators, which are distracting us from the essentials," Sarkozy said in a speech.
The European Union's economic affairs commissioner, Olli Rehn, said the right indicators to tackle global imbalances included the current account, the real effective exchange rate and currency reserves as well as public and private debt.
"Especially, the current account and the real effective exchange rate are essential," Rehn told reporters.
But even if all the yardsticks are agreed, there is no sign of numerical targets even being broached.
Sarkozy told the ministers that economic policy coordination was the only way forward. "Giving priority to national interests would be the death of the G20," he said.
Differences over the causes of and cures for global economic imbalances were also on display at a public debate among the world's top central bankers on Friday.
Bank of England Governor Mervyn King, reflecting the view of many Western policymakers, said the world risked protectionism or another financial crisis if policymakers failed to reduce currency distortions and other imbalances.
Behind closed doors, senior officials wrangled over possible compromises to solve the indicators conundrum.
The G20 official said China's opposition had left G20 deputies with limited options to suggest on Saturday: either accept the four indicators or reject them; introduce a hierarchy where some indicators count more than others or use a time delay for their gradual introduction.
With world shares near 30-month highs, investors seem content for the G20 to take its time, whereas at the height of the crisis two years ago markets were baying for policy action.
In a public debate before the G20 meeting, the U.S. and Japanese central bankers defended their easy money policies against criticism from some emerging countries that they were fuelling disorderly capital flows and commodity price spikes.
Emerging powerhouses such as China have already raised interest rates to combat inflation and complain that "hot money" risks destabilizing their economies, pointing the finger at the Federal Reserve's money printing to pump prime its economy via a $600 billion bond purchase program.
In turn, Washington has been urging China to let the yuan rise faster, which it says is vital for balanced global growth.
But People's Bank of China Governor Zhou said: "External pressure has never been an important factor of consideration and we have never paid special attention to it."
(Additional reporting by Toni Vorobyova, Gui Qing Koh, Louise Egan, Julien Toyer, Catherine Bremer, Toni Vorobyova, Glenn Somerville; Writing by Paul Taylor and Mike Peacock)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Loose monetary policy in the developed world is pushing capital into emerging economies¡± So basically, they are just sucking us dry!?
Feb 18, 20113:29am EST--
Germany and China, nations more heavily dependent than nearly any other on maintaining big trade surpluses to gainfully employ their bloated labor forces, are resisting the rebalancing. What a surprise. The U.S. doesn¡¯t need the G20 to rebalance the economy. All it needs is to bid farewell to the World Trade Organization and return to the sensible application of tariffs to assure a balance of trade.
Feb 18, 20116:25am EST--
There is a very simple fix, but all the parties involved in this world varied economies are reluctant to accept it, because it would place them at equal levels in the monetary markets. The simple fix is Global standard economy rates. If all countries worked on a single monetary value, we would not be going through all the financial problems that we are facing today. There would be no issues with someone out-beating another due to improper imbalances in economic figures. Let¡¯s face it, those in power wish to hold control by controlling who can make more money by grinding others down with shaky economic figures.
Feb 18, 201110:43am EST--
