BM&FBovespa, Shanghai to start venture talks
2011-02-17 20:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's BM&FBovespa (
) and China's state-owned Shanghai Stock Exchange will sign a deal that could lead to joint ventures between two of the world's largest exchange operators.
The announcement on Thursday by BM&FBovespa, the world's fourth-largest operator, comes after a frenzied week of announced mergers that show bourses are aggressively strengthening global ties in the face of competition at home.
The planned talks between the two exchanges are the latest sign of rapidly expanding financial and economic ties between Brazil and China, two of the world's fastest-growing economies and members of the BRIC group of emerging powerhouses that includes India, Russia and now South Africa.
But BM&FBovespa's push to expand overseas could also reflect mounting concerns about greater competition at home in Latin America's largest market. U.S. exchange Bats Global Markets said on Tuesday it had teamed up with Brazilian fund manager Claritas to explore setting up a new stock exchange in Brazil with clearing and settlement services.
"No matter what kind of global partnerships they unveil, it's hard not to sense that they're concerned about the prospects of domestic competition and regulatory risk," said Marcio Macedo, who manages about 65 million reais ($40 million) in assets for Humaita Investimentos in Sao Paulo.
Some investors worry that, in its zeal to foment competition to drive down fees, the Brazilian government might consider separating the trading business from clearing and settlement services, a move that would hurt BM&FBovespa.
The Brazil- and China-based exchanges are set to sign a memorandum of understanding on Monday, BM&FBovespa said in a securities filing.
"The objective (is) to initiate a common discussion about business opportunities and exchange information," it said without elaborating.
It wasn't immediately clear what kind of partnership might be on the table, though BM&FBovespa did say that the exchanges did not plan to discuss cross-listing of Brazilian and Chinese companies on each bourse.
Chief Executive Edemir Pinto told Reuters on Monday that BM&FBovespa was on the lookout for opportunities to expand in China and India, stressing the similarities between the South American and Asian markets.
But he declined to say whether BM&FBovespa was in merger talks with another exchange. Instead, Pinto said the exchange's strategy was focused on expanding in markets and instruments with sizable trading volumes and ample liquidity.
On Tuesday, Germany's Deutsche Boerse (
). Last week, London Stock Exchange (
) agreed to buy Canada's TMX Group (
), reviving a wave of exchange mergers that was on hold the last few years.
BM&FBovespa, formed by a merger between rival exchanges BM&F and Bovespa in 2007, has been actively seeking to expand abroad in recent years.
) that allows Brazilian and Chinese companies to list jointly on both bourses. In December, Brazilian mining giant Vale (
BM&FBovespa also has a partnership with Chicago's CME Group (
), which Pinto said has "room to grow." BM&FBovespa and CME bought stakes in each other to share and build up trading platforms to lure investors.
) signed a memorandum of understanding in 2009 on stock-order routing between exchanges, market data, and services. That same year, NYSE Euronext signed an agreement with the Shanghai exchange to cooperate on listings and exchange-traded funds.
BM&FBovespa announced the talks with the Shanghai exchange on the same day it reported an 18.8 percent jump in net profit for the fourth quarter, exceeding expectations. Net income surged to 261.5 million reais or $157.4 million in the last three months of 2010, as a rise in trading volumes offset technology-related and personnel costs.
(Additional reporting by Ana Nicolaci da Costa in Brasilia and Jonathan Spicer in New York; Writing by Todd Benson; Editing by Richard Chang, Phil Berlowitz)
