China protest call smothered in police blanket
2011-02-27 07:43:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Feb 25 2011
Thu, Feb 24 2011
Thu, Feb 24 2011
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Police arrest a man in front of the Peace Cinema in downtown Shanghai, after calls for a ''Jasmine Revolution'' protest, organised through the internet February 27, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Carlos Barria
Sun  EST
Officials from China's ruling Communist Party have dismissed the idea that they could be hit by protests like those that have rippled across the Middle East.
In Shanghai, police bundled away at least seven men, one of whom had been taking photos. Reuters TV filmed several policemen forcing a man in a brown jacket into a Public Security Bureau van, while other police held up an umbrella to block the view.
In Beijing, uniformed police were joined by plainclothes officers who kept shoppers and journalists moving. Men in sanitation uniforms with armbands that said "Public Security Volunteer" used brooms to sweep pedestrians along.
An American news videographer was kicked and beaten repeatedly in the face with brooms and taken into police custody, witnesses said. Other reporters were detained by police and some were roughed up, including one from Taiwan whose hand was injured, they said.
"We call on the Chinese government to respect the rights of foreign journalists to report in China and urge public security authorities to protect the safety and well being of anyone who is subject to illegal harassment or intimidation," embassy spokesman Richard Buangan said.
MCDONALD'S CLOSED BRIEFLY
Security was evident throughout Beijing's Wangfujing shopping street, one of the venues singled out as a protest site by the website, Boxun.com. Shoppers strolled along, but there were at least 40 public security vehicles at the south end of the pedestrian-only street.
Passage was partly blocked by construction fences that went up late in the week outside a McDonald's restaurant, which the Boxun message designated as a place for the gathering. The McDonald's was shut down on Sunday afternoon for about an hour.
"A few days ago some people were creating a stir over by the McDonald's, so they have stepped up security," said an employee at a nearby store. She said she did not want her name reported.
A similar call for protest a week ago brought out few people, and dozens of dissidents and human rights activists have been detained or warned to avoid such activities.
(Additional reporting by Sui-Lee Wee, Benjamin Kang Lim, David Gray and Petar Kujundzic in BEIJING; writing by Terril Yue Jones and Chris Buckley; Editing by Yoko Nishikawa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I wouldn¡¯t say that they are smothering protests. More likely, there are very few protests to be had in the first place regarding any ¡°Jasmine Revolution¡±. As for what¡¯s happening in Libya, the CCTV is not reporting as though their is a revolution in Libya. Simply by ignoring the topic on the 7pm news, most of the country will ignore it as well. There is no doubt that there are some half hearted attempts to have a protest in Shanghai and Beijing, but deep down inside every one of those potential protesters, is just another unemployed college graduate, wishing they had a sweet government job. There will be a time for change, but we are no way near that time. There are no bread lines in China.
Feb 27, 20116:33pm EST--
Obviously, those foreign reporters firstly violated related regulations and laws of China on Feb 27, 2011. They should read and understand the content of local rules and abide by them. Legal actions are protected by authorities in China.
Feb 28, 201111:53pm EST--
In China, a lot of people are talking about the uprisings that have gripped North Africa and the Middle East, particularly Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, and Yemen. They don¡¯t lack in information as the Western media claim. They care about the situation there. But to relate it to China is absolute nonsence, a fantasy of the West!
Mar 02, 20114:37am EST--
