China says U.S. should watch Japanese nationalism
2013-05-01 06:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States should be just as concerned as other countries about a rise in Japanese nationalism, China's ambassador to Washington said, hinting that the United States should not offer Japan encouragement in its dispute with China over a group of islets.
China and Japan are involved in an increasingly bitter stand-off over the uninhabited islands in the East China Sea, called Senkaku by Japan and Diaoyu by China, which lie atop of possibly large energy reserves.
While tensions flared between Japan and China and South Korea last month after Japanese lawmakers visited a shrine seen by China and Korea as a symbol of Japan's past militarism.
"What kind of message does this send to the international community?" Cui Tiankai, China's ambassador in Washington, was cited as saying in a statement issued by the Foreign Ministry on Wednesday.
"All of these kinds of acts have attracted a lot of attention from international public opinion, and I believe that the U.S. cannot not know about this," Cui said.
"The U.S. side should stay alert against the recent provocative actions taken by Japanese political leaders," the official Xinhua news agency cited Cui as saying, in a separate report.
Japan was "clearly" the one acting provocatively over the islands, not China, he added.
"We hope that other parties do not lift up rocks for the Japanese, and we hope even more that these rocks don't end up falling on their own feet," Cui said, in apparent reference to United States support for Japan over the islands.
Cui also expressed the hope that "Washington will avoid repeating the same mistake by sacrificing its long-term benefits for immediate short-term needs on the issue of the Diaoyu Islands", Xinhua added.
However, the U.S.-Japan security treaty commits the United States to intervene in defense of Japan if there is an attack on Japanese-administered territory.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Michael Perry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
We, in the western world, too easily forget that the PRC (China) is still communist and that communism sees nationalism as one of the monsters it has to slay, at every turn. So the criticism of non communist nations being ¡°too nationalist¡± borders on the absurd when it comes from communists who are secretly sworn to destroy all forms of nationalism in the pursuit of what they ultimately believe is to become a pne nation, one government, world state under communist party control.
May 01, 20137:49am EDT--
why don¡¯t they drill for oil under one company and split the proceeds and investment 50/50..
May 01, 20139:08am EDT--
Good Comments Rhino1 and Boberergailis Japan is our good Ally, which is more then can be said about China. China has enough land, and The Japanese economy could benefit from having a little more land. Of course China is gunna speak ill of japan, it Furthers there own(China) goals.
May 01, 201310:37am EDT--
