China concerned about Libya, slow to rebuke Gaddafi
2011-02-22 07:47:00.0
China concerned about Libya, slow to rebuke Gaddafi | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China concerned about Libya, slow to rebuke Gaddafi
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Tue, Feb 22 2011
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Mon, Feb 21 2011
Tue  EST
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu's comments were the first from Beijing on the crisis in Libya, but he omitted mentioning Gaddafi in his remarks, reflecting China's traditional reluctance to criticize authoritarian governments in the developing world.
"China is extremely concerned about the developments in Libya and hopes Libya will quickly restore social stability and normality," Ma said.
The main evening news on state television led with a statement that President Hu Jintao had ordered "all-out efforts to secure the life and property of Chinese nationals in Libya." Beijing was sending chartered aircraft and ships to the region to prepare for evacuations, it added.
Gaddafi's government is waging a bloody battle to hang on to power as the revolt against his 41-year rule reached the capital, prompting widespread condemnation from foreign governments including the United States and Britain.
But Beijing's reaction to the upheaval in the Middle East has been more cautious than other countries.
China's Communist Party government is wary of any foreign upheavals that could reflect badly on its own authoritarian controls and it has long been suspicious of what it sees as Western-led efforts to topple governments in other countries.
The U.N. Security Council, of which China is a member, is prepared to meet later in the day to discuss the crisis, diplomats said.
Ma said China has asked Libya to investigate the incidents of looting and arson against some Chinese companies in Libya, an oil-exporting country with which it has close business ties.
In 2010, trade between China and Libya grew to $6.6 billion, a rise of 27 percent compared with 2009. China's exports to Libya grew by 3 percent, while its imports from Libya grew by 42 percent, reflecting oil purchases.
State news agency Xinhua said a construction site run by Huafeng Construction Co. Ltd. from China's Zhejiang Province was looted by a group of armed gangsters Sunday in the eastern city of Agedabia. Nearly 1,000 Chinese workers there were forced from their on-site living quarters and had become homeless.
State media have reported on the unrest in Libya and Chinese Internet sites have allowed searches on Libya, in contrast to the crisis in Egypt.
Censors restricted public comment on Egypt, apparently reflecting worry that criticism of deposed Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's regime could also turn toward criticism of Beijing.
Hussein Sadiq al Musrati, who was second secretary in the Libyan mission to Beijing before he stepped down four days ago, joined about 20 students and protesters in front of the Libyan Embassy in Beijing Tuesday, CNN reported.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley and Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°all-out efforts to secure the life and property of Chinese nationals in Libya.¡± That statement from a communist country can be condensed to read ¡± all-out efforts to secure property in Libya.¡±
Feb 22, 20117:20pm EST--
