China censors U.S. posts on Internet freedom
2011-02-17 05:57:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Internet censors have deleted U.S. Embassy posts promoting Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's speech on Internet freedom from microblogs, parrying U.S. efforts to spur debate about Beijing's grip on free speech.
Clinton said on Tuesday that China faces a "dictator's dilemma" on Internet censorship, and that the government risks being outrun by online opinion.
The online scrap over Clinton's comments underscores how Beijing is learning to cope with a booming microblog industry that is sparking social activism.
Twitter itself is blocked in China, along with Facebook and other websites that are popular abroad.
The Embassy posts, issued by U.S. Ambassador to China Jon Huntsman and removed on Wednesday, asked Chinese users to opine on Clinton's speech, including on whether freedom of speech should apply in cyberspace, the Wall Street Journal reported.
It is unclear whether their removal was ordered by the government or censored by the companies that host the Embassy's microblogs, Sina.com and Tencent Holdings.
"The Ambassador recently responded to a query to the Wall Street Journal saying that we are disappointed that some Chinese Internet sites have decided to remove discussion of Secretary Clinton's Internet freedom speech from their websites," the U.S. Embassy said in an emailed statement.
"It's ironic that the Chinese are blocking an online discussion about Internet freedom."
On Thursday, it appeared the U.S. Embassy was having difficulty updating its Sina Weibo (microblog) page with information unrelated to Clinton's speech.
The Twitter feed of U.S. Embassy spokesman Richard Buangan linked to a screenshot of the Embassy's Sina microblog which showed an error message after Buangan said he tried to post an explanation for an English-language idiom.
"Tried to update our Sina weibo account today (to explain the English idiom 'old hand') and this is the message we (got)," he wrote, linking to a picture of the message.
In response, China's Foreign Ministry said that freedom of speech on the Internet in China was guaranteed by law, but that it was firmly against other countries meddling.
"We oppose any country using the Internet as a pretext to interfere in China's internal affairs," spokesman Ma Zhaoxu told reporters at a regular news briefing.
He Weifang, a professor of law at Peking University in Beijing and an outspoken advocate of political liberalization, said China was facing a dilemma over control of the Internet.
"The government is expending a huge amount of resources and attention to control the Internet, but even so that's proving difficult," he said.
A scathing editorial in Thursday's Global Times, a popular Chinese tabloid run by the Communist Party's official newspaper, said the U.S. pressure over the Internet was "grandstanding."
The Global Times added that China's growing number of Internet users would soon challenge the U.S. in defining language and content on the Web.
"... The U.S. cannot play tricks on the Internet and expect to turn China into another Middle East," it wrote, where Internet-fomented uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia helped topple those countries' rulers.
Chinese Internet sites have restricted public comment on the unrest in Egypt, apparently reflecting official worry that criticism of former President Hosni Mubarak's regime could also turn on Beijing.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I don¡¯t blame China. After all the ¡°protests¡± driven by manipulations on Twitter and Facebook, if I were a leader of a country, I would not allow them. The posts on these sites are suspect ¡­who knows who is writing the comments and who checks the veracity of the commentors. The IQ of most of the people on these two ¡°social sites¡± is not high if you look at their comments. And ones directed at other countries are heavily manipulated by our government and the media¡­obvious. The people in these countries are easily led when someone promises them the things they desperately want. Unfortunately, the US cannot promise these people anything and rarely help any situations. When our world relies on sources such as these for diplomacy and relations with people of different countries, the uprisings we¡¯ve seen in the last month will be continuous. This cannot continue. The US should stop using the State Dept as another CIA¡­not a good thing.
Feb 17, 20118:37am EST--
Hannah2 are you one of the thousands of bloggers hired by the Chinese government to promote their cause? Just wondering.
Feb 17, 20112:56pm EST--
peanut345, you may be one of the usa government people that try to stop China from becoming the most important country in the world, and with 20% of the world population living in china maybe it should.
peanut345, you may be one of the usa government people that try to stop China from becoming the most important country in the world, and with 20% of the world population living in china maybe it should.
but do not worry ,, china does not spy along the usa seaboard like the usa does near china.
the usa understand on thing very well ,, they do not want china to be like the usa with its control freak policing the world behavior .
Feb 17, 20117:56pm EST--
