G20 ministers fudge deal on imbalance indicators
2011-02-20 16:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Finance ministers of the world's major economies reached a fudged accord on Saturday on how to measure imbalances in the global economy after China prevented the use of exchange rates and currency reserves as indicators.
French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, who chaired the Group of 20 talks, said the deal nevertheless represented a significant step toward better coordination of economic policies worldwide to help prevent another financial crisis.
"It wasn't simple. There were obviously divergent interests but we were able to reach a compromise on a text that seems to us to be both balanced and demanding in its implementation," she told a news conference.
Ministers and central bank governors agreed on a list of indicators including public debt and fiscal deficits, private savings and borrowing, the trade balance and other components of balance of payments such as net investment flows.
"Reserves have been dropped," Lagarde acknowledged, adding that the deal included a mechanism to take account of exchange rates when assessing the overall balance of payments.
The United States and other western countries accuse Beijing of keeping the yuan artificially undervalued to boost its exports, hence accumulating massive foreign currency reserves that they say distort the world economy.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner repeated after the talks that China's currency "remains substantially undervalued" and its real exchange rate had not moved much despite a slow appreciation since a reform last June.
"There is broad consensus that the major economies, not just Europe, Japan and the United States but also the large emerging economies, need to allow their exchange rates to adjust in response to market forces," he said.
The world's number two economy, which overtook Japan this week, has resisted Western pressure to substantially revalue its currency to help rebalance global growth.
China's trade surplus has shrunk of late, perhaps explaining why it prefers that measure.
Western and Japanese officials said the indicators would in practice cover balance of payments and foreign reserves, even if those terms had been omitted to assuage Beijing. Chinese Finance Minister Xie Xuren left without speaking to reporters.
"We needed to be inventive about wording in the communique in consideration for a country that did not want to use the term 'current account balance'... The statement lists components of the current account balance," Japanese Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda told reporters.
Lagarde said the indicators were not binding targets but would lead to the drafting of guidelines for coordinated economic policies to reduce distortions, and then to a mutual assessment process.
Germany, Europe's biggest exporter, which has resisted U.S. efforts to set numerical targets for current account surpluses, said no specific goals would be set for certain indicators.
The G20 ministers acknowledged that economic recovery was diverging between developed and developing economies, but they differed in their assessment of global inflation risks.
The communique noted that while growth was subdued in most developed economies, with unemployment high, major emerging markets were roaring ahead, "some with signs of overheating."
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said inflationary pressures coming from energy and commodities prices must be taken seriously, and the ECB was determined to avoid second-round effects on wages.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who holds the G20 presidency this year, urged ministers on Friday not to get bogged down by the indicators dispute and welcomed the fact that China had agreed to host a seminar on reforming the international monetary system in Shenzhen in late March.
China and Brazil complain that "hot money" inflows risk destabilizing the economies of emerging countries, pointing the finger at the U.S. Federal Reserve's money printing via a $600 billion bond purchase program.
With world shares at 30-month highs, investors seem content for the G20 to take its time, whereas at the height of the crisis two years ago markets were baying for policy action.
(Additional reporting by Toni Vorobyova, Catherine Bremer, Francesca Landini, Julien Toyer, Gernot Heller, John Irish, Leigh Thomas, Rie Ishiguro; writing by Paul Taylor; editing by Mike Peacock)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
yes, we need a global economy! It only works if everyone agrees. It will bring our middle class to their standard, not bring theirs up to ours! We are allowing China to take us over from the inside! Wake up people!
yes, we need a global economy! It only works if everyone agrees. It will bring our middle class to their standard, not bring theirs up to ours! We are allowing China to take us over from the inside! Wake up people!
¡°The United States and other western countries accuse Beijing of keeping the yuan artificially undervalued to boost its exports, hence accumulating massive foreign currency reserves that they say distort the world economy¡±
Feb 20, 20119:33am EST--
Who is right and who is wrong?
China, in an effort to rebalance its economy so as to reduce its reliance on export, is boosting its local consumption and its imports. Last year, import has increased more rapidly than export and consumption in China has increased even more rapidly.
The US on the other hand, besides pointing an accusing finger on his neighbours (mainly, China), is doing nothing to reduce its debt level and to stop the free printing of the US dollar notes.
Feb 20, 201112:36pm EST--
The G20 is a dysfunctional, totally useless organization. All 20 member nations have to agree to every proposal or there is no agreement. Thus, South Africa, Turkey, Argentina, Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia all have the power to nix any agreement. The dispute this time however, had to do with trade imbalances in general and China in particular. The fight was over a single 53 word sentence. 19 countries agreed to the statement but China would not. At the last moment, France (which is part of the G-20 through the EU) managed to come up with a wording change China could agree to. G-20 Deal Reached, No One Knows What The Agreement Says As with the Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg failed to produce the key sentence or a link to the communiqu¨¦. Why is it so hard for news organizations to link to sources they are quoting? Look at the entire communiqu¨¦, it should be crystal clear there is no agreement to do anything, and even if there was, the agreement is not binding. Nonetheless, we can be 100% certain that Geithner and President Obama will be trumping up the ¡°deftly¡± worded non-agreement.
Feb 20, 20116:44pm EST--
