Hong Kong exchange should resist merger temptation
2011-02-16 07:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Feb 15 2011
Tue, Feb 15 2011
Mon, Feb 14 2011
Mon, Feb 14 2011
Mon, Feb 14 2011
Wed  EST
) should avoid rushing in to join the global merger frenzy among markets so that it doesn't get sidetracked from its booming China-related business.
Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Ltd (HKEx) stressed last week it was open to strategic alliances to arrest a slide in the share price of the world's most valuable exchange operator after a wave of merger deals swept the financial sector.
"Hong Kong Exchanges is busy with the pipeline of companies coming to them from China," said Christopher Wong, senior investment manager at Aberdeen Asset Management, which has $287 billion in assets under management and advice globally.
"It's not worth getting distracted right now by potential tie-ups."
A wave of tie-ups and mergers has gripped the sector in the past two weeks, including a $10.2 billion takeover of NYSE Euronext (
) unveiled on Tuesday. The merged entity could create a more attractive partner for Asian exchange operators, the companies said.
) bid for Australia's ASX (
) late last year. And last week, London Stock Exchange (
In Asia, tough regulatory regimes, cumbersome ownership structures and protectionist minded governments mean cross-border mergers involving regional markets will be difficult.
As if to underline that, India's two biggest stock exchanges held out little hope of entering any significant merger deals with Brazil's BM&FBovespa (
) or other market operators because of regulatory hurdles, sources said on Wednesday.
In response to the mergers, the HKEx issued two statements emphasizing that it was open to strategic alliances, but had not yet identified any opportunities.
"Due to changes in the financial market landscape, HKEx will consider international opportunities for alliances, partnerships and other relationships that present strategically compelling benefits consistent with its focus on markets in China," it said.
) or Chicago's CBOE (
A long list of IPOs, a fledgling but mushrooming offshore yuan market and strong investor interest in a bourse seen as a proxy for China's growth are reasons HKEx should not resort to anything drastic, the market sources said.
"The HKEx can afford to take its time and not worry about being left behind in the merger frenzy," said Shirlia Chung, a fund manager at Shin Kong Financial's (
) Asia Equity Fund in Taipei, which owns HKEx shares.
Riding on China's coattails, HKEx has been the world's biggest IPO market for the past two years.
Buoyed by that growth, HKEx shares have risen about 60 percent from their May 2010 low, making it the most expensive major stock market operator in world. Its market capitalization is about $23 billion.
The stock trades at about 36 times 2011 price-to-earnings, compared with 24 times for Singapore and 15.6 times for the NYSE, Thomson Reuters Starmine data showed.
On its part, HKEx is launching new products and increasing trading hours to boost competitiveness.
China's major decision in July last year to loosen controls on its yuan currency, also known as the renminbi (RMB), has provided further fuel for HKEx earnings.
While others, such as Singapore, have said they want to target the offshore yuan market, companies such as McDonalds (
), who have issued bonds in the Chinese currency, have all done so in Hong Kong.
"Listed (yuan) products are going to happen," Romnesh Lamba, the HKEx's executive vice president and head of market development said.
Hong Kong's stock market is also attracting global luxury brands, such as Prada. The company could become the first Italian firm to list in the former British colony.
Analysts urged HKEx to seek closer co-operation with the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges, in particular a common platform where shares can be traded among the three exchanges.
"The future direction for exchanges is probably a common platform so that investors can trade across jurisdictions," said David Lai, a fund manager at CITIC Securities, with about HK$200 million in assets under management.
However, a common platform may take time for the same reasons that will limit the merger possibilities for overseas exchange operators eyeing China.
Chinese regulations limit the amount of yuan that can flow into the country and there are also restrictions on foreigners who want to invest in Shanghai's domestic A-share market.
(Additional reporting by Denny Thomas in HONG KONG and Faith Hung in TAIPEI; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman and Neil Fullick)
