Analysis: Central bank demand to buoy commodity currencies
2011-02-16 04:07:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Feb 15 2011
Mon, Feb 14 2011
Fri, Feb 11 2011
Fri, Feb 11 2011
Thu, Feb 10 2011
Wed  EST
These currencies' share of global reserves is among the fastest growing and analysts see this trend continuing.
"The Australian dollar won't become the new euro, but you could imagine commodity currencies collectively making up around 5 percent of global reserves," said Simon Derrick, currency strategist at Bank of New York Mellon.
IMF data shows central bank holdings hit a record $9 trillion in the third quarter of 2010. Of those where the currency composition was identified, the dollar's share was 61.3 percent, versus around 71 percent a decade ago.
The main beneficiary of the drive to reduce dollar exposure has been the euro, whose share was 26.9 percent in the third quarter. Indeed, sovereign flows into the euro could limit any falls in the single currency due to the sovereign debt crisis.
However, the share of "other currencies," including commodity currencies, rose to just over 4 percent, up from around 3 percent a year earlier.
"Central banks are still uneasy over the prominence of the dollar in their FX reserves holdings given the loose monetary and fiscal policy stance of the U.S.," said Lee Hardman, currency strategist at BTM-UFJ.
China -- Washington's biggest creditor -- has expressed concern that loose U.S. monetary policy will erode the value of their U.S. currency reserves.
"If the yen can represent 1-2 percent while sterling can represent 5-6 percent then why can't the Aussie, CAD, South African rand and Norwegian krone represent 4-5 percent?" Derrick at BNYM said.
Last year, Russia began adding Canadian dollars to its reserves and said it was looking at the Australian dollar. The Swiss National Bank has added Canadian, which made up 4 percent of reserves in the third quarter of last year, and Australian dollars.
They are not alone. Bank of Israel Governor Stanley Fischer said last month that Israel was diversifying into currencies "we would never have put in the reserves before, including the Australian dollar.
But the euro remains the main alternative to the dollar, given limited liquidity in Canadian and Australian currencies.
China has helped to prop up the euro, pledging to buy bonds from debt-ridden euro zone countries, including Greece and Spain. U.S. data also shows China has reduced its holdings of U.S. Treasuries.
Yu Yongding, an influential economist in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, last week reiterated confidence in the euro and a bearish view on the dollar, although he told Reuters China must be wary of investment risks.
"They want to reduce their holdings of dollars. They desperately need the euro to survive," said Michael Derks, currency strategist at FXPro.
Even if euro zone debt problems intensify, central bank demand is likely to prevent a sharp fall in the single currency.
"The strategy of reserve managers has been clear over the last decade in terms of buying on dips, so when we see sharp sell-offs in the euro they do more actively increase new inflows into the euro," said Hardman at BTM-UFJ.
Sterling, which made up around 4 percent of global FX reserves in Q3 according to the IMF data, may be another attractive investment, given the likelihood that high inflation will force the Bank of England to raise interest rates.
ING's head of currency strategy Chris Turner said sterling could also benefit if rising crude prices put the central banks of oil producing countries -- such as Middle East states and Russia -- in the driving seat rather than Asian central banks.
"Historically Middle East central banks and Russia have higher compositions of sterling than Asian central banks, maybe up to 10 percent. This is one reason why cable could rise to $1.70 this year, particularly if yields move higher."
However, the problems of sticky inflation and weak growth that are troubling the UK may limit flows into sterling.
