Brent surges on Middle East, China but U.S. oil slips
2011-02-14 16:13:00.0
Brent surges on Middle East, China but U.S. oil slips | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Brent surges on Middle East, China but U.S. oil slips
Mon, Feb 14 2011
Mon  EST
U.S. crude prices, however, fell in volatile trading, weighed down by high stockpiles, especially at the Cushing, Oklahoma, delivery point.
After Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak stepped down last week, protests in Yemen, Iran, Algeria and Bahrain highlighted the potential for unrest to spread to other oil-producing nations. Concerns about the unrest and supply disruptions, lifted Brent crude, which is seen as more immediately vulnerable to any supply interruption.
Brent crude for April delivery rose $2.14 to settle at $103.08 a barrel, having reached $104.30, the highest price since September 25, 2008.
U.S. crude for March fell 77 cents to settle at $84.81 a barrel, having slipped to $84.58, the lowest intraday price since December 1.
High inventories at Cushing, Oklahoma, have pressured U.S. crude to close lower seven out of the last eight sessions and pushed out the spread between Brent and U.S. crude to $14 on Monday.
Brent's premium to U.S. crude surged to a record $16.24 on Friday as the Brent March contract expired. The much narrower April-to-April spread attracted spread buyers on Monday, especially at levels below $14 a barrel, according to analysts and brokers.
"There has to be a lot of spread trading going on keeping Brent priced so high above WTI," said Gene McGillian, analyst at Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut.
Further pressure on U.S. crude could come from weekly inventory reports due out on Tuesday and Wednesday. Analysts surveyed by Reuters forecast crude oil and gasoline inventories rose last week on an import rebound, with distillate stocks expected to have fallen.
Iranian security forces deployed in Tehran to prevent an opposition rally and government backers chased down thousands of pro-reform demonstrators in Yemen's capital, turning unrest increasingly violent.
More fundamental support for oil came from news that China's crude oil imports rose 27 percent from a year ago to the fourth highest on record as China's trade surplus fell to its lowest in nine months in January.
Higher demand prospects in China also sent copper to a record high, after a surprise jump in Chinese imports reinforced prospects for robust.
U.S. gasoline and heating oil futures both rose more than 2 percent on lift from Brent crude's jump.
The gasoline strength came despite news Europe is set to export around 300,000 tonnes of gasoline to the United States in the next few weeks.
"We've heard that refineries in the (U.S.) Northeast are pricing off of Brent and that is keeping products up despite no real signs of strong demand and with the inventory surplus the refiners shouldn't be low on supplies," McGillian said.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos in New York, Alex Lawler in London and Jennifer Tan in Singapore; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What we have is a contrived shortage by brokers to raise prices and make money on their futures. I think, for the good of our country, and many world countries, that this practice has to be stopped. Britain has been doing this for a long time and they think if the rich get rich the country will be rich. Just more of the same malarky
Feb 14, 201111:47am EST--
