China launches yuan options to support FX flexibility
2011-02-16 02:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China will launch yuan options trading, the government said on Wednesday, a market that will help pave the way for a more flexible exchange rate but will be limited in scope at first.
The move is Beijing's boldest attempt yet to give firms more hedging tools to cope with steady yuan appreciation as well as uncertainties in global currency rates.
"This marks an important step in the development of the yuan derivatives market," said Zhao Xijun, senior economist at Renmin University in Beijing. "The exchange rate regime will become more market-oriented and the yuan will be more flexible."
Yuan options are currently tradable in the offshore market, primarily in Hong Kong. Within China, firms have been able to use forward contacts to hedge their foreign exchange exposure.
"The key purpose for the options is to eventually hand over the function of setting the yuan's exchange rate to the market, and in this sense, it is the biggest reform so far in China's rigid currency regime," said a senior trader at a European bank in Shanghai.
The regulator said that the onshore options would be European-style, meaning that it would only be possible to exercise them when they mature and not beforehand.
A key provision in the new rules is that firms will only be permitted to trade call options, not put options, a defensive move that traders said was meant to prevent short-selling and keep the options business confined to genuine hedging.
Along with other restrictions such as strict vetting procedures for banks seeking licenses, traders expect that initial volumes will be low.
"With the yuan exchange rate becoming increasingly flexible, there is greater demand from banks and firms to hedge FX risks through derivative trading. This is the impetus for the launch of options trading," SAFE said.
"In the future, except for the appearance of some special situations, such as global financial crisis, the yuan exchange rate will become increasingly flexible."
It also published new rules at the end of last year classifying forex market makers into a number of categories, clarifying which can handle derivatives such as forwards and swaps, and opening up forex trading to some smaller banks that had not been able to participate before.
The National Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors (NAFMII), an industry association set up under the central bank, also said late last year there were plans to develop more forex-based derivatives to provide more opportunities to hedge risks.
(Additional reporting by Aileen Wang, Lu Jianxin Chen Yixin; Editing by Simon Rabinovitch)
