D.Boerse, NYSE see deal giving them leg up in Asia
2011-02-15 17:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Deutsche Boerse AG and NYSE Euronext say they hope their planned merger will create a more attractive partner for exchange operators around the world, especially in Asia.
The deal, which was agreed on Tuesday, will make the merged entity "the inviter, the enabler, the convener with other exchanges in Asia and the developing world down the road," said NYSE Euronext Chief Executive Duncan Niederauer.
The combined company, which would be the world's largest exchanges operator, will attract emerging market companies for listings, and have a strong presence in Asian markets through existing investments and technology agreements, he said.
"As the rest of the world develops and is looking for a valuable, global and diversified partner, we will hopefully be their first choice," Niederauer said. "We see significant growth opportunities in Asia."
Hong Kong was the world's hottest IPO market in 2010 with a total of $57.2 billion in IPOs. Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Ltd said last Thursday it is open to international alliances and partnerships, although the exchange added that it had not identified any opportunities.
Others are also eyeing the Asian markets. Edemir Pinto, the CEO of Brazilian exchange operator BM&FBovespa, told Reuters on Monday it was on the lookout for opportunities to expand in China and India.
The fourth-largest exchange company in the world sees more potential in those countries than in Europe and North America, he said.
Singapore Exchange has bid $7.9 billion for the Australia stock exchange operator ASX Ltd, though it is facing major regulatory and political hurdles.
China aims to build Shanghai, its financial capital, into an international financial center able to compete with New York and London, and Shanghai has long said it will allow foreign companies to sell shares on its stock exchange.
Fang Xinghai, Director-General of the Shanghai Financial Services Office, said late last year he hoped the country will start letting foreign companies sell shares in Shanghai in 2011, with approval processes for such listings to be made relatively simple.
In the near-term, a combined Deutsche Boerse-NYSE Euronext is planning to further cultivate relationships in markets like Singapore, Hong Kong, China and Tokyo, Niederauer said.
A merger with another Asian exchange was not likely anytime soon, Niederauer and Francioni said.
"We have a bumpy road ahead of us. It's too early to already develop an Asian strategy," Francioni said.
(Reporting by Paritosh Bansal, editing by Martin Howell)
