Lawmakers try again for China yuan bill
2011-02-10 17:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Feb 10 2011
Thu, Feb 10 2011
Thu, Feb 10 2011
Wed, Feb 9 2011
Wed, Feb 9 2011
Thu  EST
The same proposals cleared the House last year but died in the Senate. If approved this time, they would clear the way for the Commerce Department to treat currencies deemed to be undervalued as an illegal subsidy under U.S. trade law.
That would allow companies, on a case-by-case basis, to seek higher countervailing duties against imports from China that compete with U.S. production.
Congressional anger at China over what lawmakers see as deliberate undervaluation of the yuan, also called the renminbi, was fanned anew last Friday by a Treasury Department decision not to declare China a currency manipulator.
"What we are doing is adding weapons" to the U.S. government's arsenal of tools to deal with currency manipulation, said Representative Sander Levin, a Michigan Democrat who spearheaded last year's drive for the bill when he was still chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
Senator Sherrod Brown, an Ohio Democrat, said he and Senator Olympia Snowe, a Maine Republican, were introducing a similar bill in the Senate.
"Currency manipulation plain and simple is a form of subsidy ... When China manipulates its currency, that's not competing, that's cheating," Brown said.
Chinese President Hu Jintao faced pressure on the issue when he visited Washington last month, but Beijing has said it would move at its own pace to revalue the yuan.
The new U.S. push came as China's central banks appeared to send a strong signal that the government was more willing to let its yuan currency appreciate by fixing its daily mid-point trading range at a record high 6.5849 to the dollar.
The yuan closed at 6.5865 against the dollar, up from 6.5938 on Wednesday. It has now risen 3.64 percent since China ceased pegging its value to the dollar in June 2010.
However, U.S. critics say it is still undervalued by as much as 15 percent to 40 percent, giving Chinese companies an unfair advantage in international trade.
With congressional elections looming, the House passed the Currency Reform for Fair Trade Act in September by a wide margin of 348-79. But the Senate never took up the measure and it died when Congress adjourned at the end of the year.
Any House bill aimed at China's exchange rate practices would have to start in the Ways and Means Committee, where Michigan Republican Dave Camp is now chairman.
"This particular bill is not Chairman Camp's primary focus or priority when it comes to China relations," a spokesman for Republicans on the Ways and Means Committee said.
President Barack Obama's administration never took a public position on last year's bill and a top Treasury Department official on Thursday shed little light on its views.
Asked about the new push in Congress, Treasury Under Secretary for International Affairs Lael Brainard said lawmakers had the same goals as the administration -- eliminating the yuan's undervaluation.
However, she said that the administration has "different means and mechanisms than Congress to pursue these goals."
(Additional reporting by Rachelle Younglai; editing by Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The real question is how do we play hard ball with the Chinese, when they continually have the strategic advantage in international trade, without hindering the growth of American products within China. If we label them currency manipulators, how many minutes will it be before the Chinese stir up ¡°artificial protests¡± of American business. Maybe they will even go out and arrest some tourists like they did to the Japanese last October. Their biggest weapon may very well be the Chinese governments stranglehold on the peoples opinion. As everyone stares at the same 6pm news program every day that details what we (the Chinese) should think and feel about everyone else in the world. Intricately lasing duty to the people, soft news and diplomatic relations into 30 minutes of propaganda. There is no doubt that action must be taken to right the boat and get the west¡¯s feet back out of the water, labeling China a currency manipulator makes sense and other countries around the world will follow the US in a heart beat. Yes China is still a ¡°developing country¡± but even a developing country that is producing 43% of the worlds exports, must follow the guidelines by which it was allowed to be a member of the club (WTO) in the first place.
Feb 10, 201110:15pm EST--
To throw a little wood on the fire Id like to say; Why is it that while most Republican representatives claim that stopping China¡¯s unfair trade practices are a priority, their leadership openly states that they are unwilling to do so. Is it that the old guard still subscribes to Bush era ideology of supporting American exporters while throwing away the American peoples jobs and opportunity, while the newbies (Tea Party) are actively trying to fight for the American peoples right to have jobs and manufacture things. Are we on the verge of a three party system? Where does this new group fall in our political society?
Feb 10, 201110:20pm EST--
Keep trying, guys!
Feb 11, 20119:08am EST--
