Chinese shares up, yields down on talk of inflation easing
2011-02-14 03:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese stocks posted their best day in two months on Monday, while interest rate swaps (IRS) and bond yields fell moderately, as talk of slower-than-expected inflation in January relieved a market haunted of late by expectations of more monetary tightening.
Traders said that consumer prices (CPI) may have risen 4.9 percent in the year to January, well below the consensus forecast of 5.3 percent. The official data will be announced on Tuesday.
But they added that the surprisingly low reading may have been the result of changes to the weighting of the consumer price index (CPI), which are due around now according to the statistics agency's regular practice.
The agency is expected to reduce the weighting of food in the CPI and, with rising food prices having led the pick-up in Chinese inflation in recent months, such a change would likely lead to a lower inflation reading.
That, together with signs that more cash was now available in financial markets, helped lift the benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
to an eight-week high of 2,899 points. The gain of 2.5 percent was the biggest daily percentage rise in two months.
"The (CPI) talk is really fuelling market confidence, but we think the index has big pressure around 2,900 points, so it may fall back again a bit after tomorrow's data," said Cheng Yi, analyst at Xiangcai Securities in Shanghai, adding that the index still had the potential to rise thereafter.
China's markets were the worst performers in Asia last year and have lagged so far this year, mostly on worries over the impact of Beijing's efforts to control the amount of cash sloshing around the economy and, with it, inflation.
Securities companies outperformed, underscoring the expected boost to the stock market from more mild price rises, which could forestall the need for further monetary tightening.
Four of the country's listed brokerages, including top house Citic Securities (
), were among Monday's best performers, jumping by their daily limit of 10 percent.
) also performed well, rising 3.4 percent, as investors expected the pricing leader for the Chinese steel sector to increase its main steel product prices for March.
But high-speed rail companies were weaker as investors took profits from a recent speculative rally on policy support for the sector, and after news that the country's railways minister was the subject of a disciplinary investigation.
) closed down 2.7 percent, after falling as much as 5.8 percent during the session.
Interest rate swaps (IRS) and government bond yields edged down, but traders said the rates should have limited potential to fall sharply as the longer-term trend was still for more monetary tightening.
While lower inflation now might help push back further benchmark interest rate rises to the second quarter, traders said there were lingering worries over another hike in bank reserve requirement ratios (RRR), in part because the supply of cash in the financial system appears to have rebounded in recent weeks.
By late Monday, the benchmark five-year IRS dropped 5 basis points, while the yield on the five-year benchmark government bond fell 9 bps. Most other tenors fell between 5 and 10 bps, traders said.
On the money market, the weighted average seven-day repo rate, the main barometer of short-term liquidity supply, closed up slightly at 2.7270 percent from 2.6818 percent at the previous day's close.
That is still sharply lower than just a few weeks ago, signaling more relaxed liquidity conditions. That rate rose to nearly 10 percent in January as the money market suffered an unprecedented liquidity squeeze, hit by a slew of government tightening steps including several interest rate and RRR rises.
The yuan, which is largely guided by the central bank, fell slightly as the People's Bank of China set a weaker mid-point in the face of a rebound in the dollar against other currencies. There was no clear reaction in the currency market to the talk of more moderate inflation. <CNY/>
Li Xunlei, chief economist with Guotai Jun'an Securities in Shanghai, estimated that January CPI would come in at 4.97 percent if the weighting of food in the CPI basket was adjusted to 29 percent from the previous 33 percent.
Had the weighting not changed, the CPI in January would have been 5.3 percent, as economists had previously forecast, Li said.
"The weighting adjustment and a lower CPI number, in general, are positive for the market," Li said.
An official with the news department of the National Bureau of Statistics declined to confirm the number but said special notes about the weighting of China's CPI would be given in tandem with the release of the economic indicator on Tuesday.
(Additional reporting by Reuters China Bureau; Editing by Alex Richardson)
