China to vet inward M&A deals for national security
2011-02-12 07:55:00.0
(Reuters) - China will launch a state-level investment review body to check that merger and acquisition deals struck by foreign firms in one of the world's fastest-growing economies do not endanger "national security," China's State Council, the cabinet, said on Saturday.
The new regulation, which will come into effect in March, is set to install a new red-tape barrier for doing business in China, the world's second largest economy where double-digit growth has attracted more than $105 billion in foreign direct investment last year.
Foreign investments in military, agriculture, energy and resources, key infrastructure, transport systems, key technology sectors and "important equipment manufacturers" may be subject to reviews, according to a statement published on the central government Internet portal, www.gov.cn.
The review will be conducted by a "foreign investment security review board" under the cabinet. Members of the board will come from the National Development and Reform Commission, the Ministry of Commerce and other agencies on ad hoc basis.
China suffered the biggest knock to its deal-making confidence in 2005, when state-controlled oil firm CNOOC Ltd withdrew an $18.5 billion bid for U.S. oil firm Unocal after the Senate moved to block it on national interest grounds.
But Beijing, which introduced an anti-trust law in 2008, has also blocked deals that do not conform with its national plans in the past.
China rejected Coca-Cola's $2.4 billion bid for China's top juice maker Huiyuan, in 2009 and buyout giant Carlyle's $375 million bid for Xugong, China's biggest construction equipment maker, in 2008.
The government wants to consolidate many heavy industries such as steel into the hands of a few big players, and it has blocked several foreign attempts to buy into its huge steel sector, by far the world's biggest.
In 2007, it blocked ArcelorMittal from gaining a majority stake in China Oriental Group and in 2009 it forced Russia's Evraz Group to abandon an option to take control of Delong Holdings Ltd, a Chinese steelmaker listed in Singapore, in a $1.5 billion deal.
INVESTOR-UNFRIENDLY?
China attracted $105.7 billion in foreign direct investments in 2010, 17.4 percent more than in 2009, but some foreign businesses have complained that the Chinese government is becoming more unfriendly toward investors.
According to the new regulation, Chinese government agencies, trade associations, competitors, suppliers and other related parties are allowed to apply for the start of a review of a foreign-related M&A deal.
The process will include two parts as "general review" and "special review." For those deals failed to pass the "general review," a "special review" will be started that may last up to 60 days.
If Beijing finds a deal that could potentially threaten national security, it can terminate the deal.
"Related departments and units must enhance the sense of responsibility to guard state and commercial secrets... to effectively safeguard national security," the cabinet said in the notice.
The body could be similar to Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB), which has held sway over dozens of planned Chinese investments into resources sector in Australia, and which can block deals it deems not to be in the national interest.
The FIRB advises Australia's treasurer, who has the final say. In 2009, the state-owned China Non-Ferrous Metal Mining (Group) Co dropped a $400 million bid for 50.6 percent of Lynas Corp, owner of the world's richest deposit of rare earth minerals, saying the conditions set by the FIRB were too stiff.
Earlier in the same year, Treasurer Wayne Swan forced Chinese metals group Minmetals to withdraw a $1.7 billion bid for OZ Minerals until it revised the deal to exclude a mine situated in a restricted weapons testing area.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Tom Miles, editing by Miral Fahmy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If they did that in the US, the government would have to shut down so many businesses that the economy would shut down¡­ And we sell top military hardware to basically anybody, even those that seem to be affiliated with terrorism. Corporate America is our own worst enemy, IMHO. For a buck they would sell the Statue of Liberty¡­
Feb 12, 20119:29am EST--
What do you mean? We ALREADY do this in the US and have engaged in flagrant protectionism and nixed many legitimate foreign investments here in the US under the pretext of national security. But you are right, corporations push final product weapon sales everywhere and sell WITH our gov¡¯t encouragement and participation; we are by far the largest arms dealer in the world.
Feb 12, 201110:25am EST--
China has a good idea that could be implemented in this country. It is time the United States had its own ¡°merger and acquisition¡± (M&A) panel to check ¡°deals struck by¡± Chinese ¡°firms¡± in this country to make sure our economy is not ¡°endangered¡± and our ¡°national security¡± is not at risk. China not only buys ours National Debt but it is also buying up a great deal of this country. China trades on the DOW. It is buying up banks and other financial interests in this country. It is buying up our businesses. It is buying up our property. Where in the world does everyone think the technology is going to come from to build ¡®high speed rail¡± in this country. Why shouldn¡¯t it be China; it has everything else. ¡°Hear that whistle blowing,¡± it will be made in China, along with the rails laid for the tracks, and the trains that run on those tracks. China infuses money into our political campaigns and elections, whether legitimately or through the hidden back door. China¡¯s influence peddling is rampant in the ¡°Halls of Congress,¡± whether anyone will admit it or not. It is time the ¡°Made in China¡± stamp was removed from the United States of America. The Egyptian people just laid the ground work for their future and it is time the American people had a say in their future!
Feb 12, 201111:14am EST--
