Analysis: China's tightening shows global rebalancing at work
2011-02-09 06:37:00.0
Analysis: China's tightening shows global rebalancing at work | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Analysis: China's tightening shows global rebalancing at work
Wed, Feb 9 2011
Wed, Feb 9 2011
Wed, Feb 9 2011
By Alan Wheatley, Global Economics Correspondent
By Alan Wheatley, Global Economics Correspondent
Wed  EST
China's current account surplus, though shrinking, will not melt away overnight. Finance ministers from the Group of 20 major economies who are meeting next week are still likely to urge China to let the yuan's nominal exchange rate rise faster.
But economists said the same inflationary forces that triggered Tuesday's quarter-point rise in interest rates by the People's Bank of China were inexorably hastening the shift toward consumption and away from exports that the United States and Europe have long urged.
"This broader story of rising inflation in China contributes to global rebalancing," said Ashley Davies, an economist with Commerzbank in Singapore. "China is getting more expensive relative to the West."
An unprecedented surge in money and credit growth in 2009 to fight the downturn induced by the global financial crisis is the root cause of China's rising inflation.
The economy is now growing too fast for comfort, helping to push up global energy, food and commodity prices that in turn are feeding back into domestic inflation.
In addition, wages, which have long risen at a double-digit pace, are climbing ever faster: employers are having to compete for a shrinking pool of young migrant workers willing to quit the family farm and toil long hours in often Dickensian conditions a long way from home.
So much, so familiar. China has suffered worse bouts of inflation in the recent past, notably in early 2008.
"It's not just the inflation rate. It's what's happening to wages and productivity that is probably the key," said Michael Buchanan, chief non-Japan Asia economist with Goldman Sachs in Hong Kong.
"Up until quite recently, even when you saw strong nominal wage growth, productivity growth was even stronger," Buchanan said. "More recently, that may no longer be the case."
So buoyant wages, apart from providing fuel for domestic consumption, should further erode China's current account surplus, which fell to a five-year low in 2010 of 5.2 percent of GDP from 6.0 percent in 2009.
"It's a good thing for the world and for China if you do see wage growth outstrip productivity growth going forward," Buchanan said.
Economic theory dictates that a huge external surplus is ultimately corrected either by a rise in the nominal exchange rate or by inflation, which causes the all-important real exchange rate to climb.
In China's case, both processes are at work but the latter is predominating. Because China has much higher inflation than the United States, the yuan's real exchange rate has climbed by much more than its 3.6 percent nominal appreciation since June.
Alaistair Chan, an economist with Moody's Analytics in Sydney, said inflation differentials were effecting an adjustment that the Chinese government, by capping the yuan's nominal rate, was preventing.
"Evidence suggests that rising prices in China are beginning to deter some large U.S. buyers," Chan said in a report.
Tellingly, the cost of goods imported into the United States from China rose 0.9 percent in the fourth quarter after holding broadly steady for the previous 18 months.
As for the immediate consequences for Asia of Tuesday's rate rise, Johanna Chua, chief Asia-Pacific economist at Citi based in Hong Kong, said it would allay anxiety that China was falling too far behind in its efforts to stop the economy boiling over.
"Obviously people are still worried about inflation, but the fact that China continues to tighten could at least avert the risk of overheating later on," she said.
Beijing's demonstrable concern about inflation argued in favor of permitting a faster rise in the yuan, also known as the renminbi (RMB), she said.
"Moving the RMB would give other countries in the region a little more leeway. In fact a lot of currencies in the region have already started to move," Chua added, citing the rupiah and the won.
Both Chua and Davies at Commerzbank said China's rate move increased the chances that the Bank of Korea would follow suit at its rate-setting meeting on Friday.
Asian policymakers are preoccupied by their countries' relative competitiveness against China, Davies said.
"So if this interest rate hike facilitates further currency appreciation by China, then that would mean a greater likelihood of rate hikes by other central banks in the region," he said.
But Buchanan argued that other factors would count for more in policy deliberations: capital inflows that were a big worry in late 2010 have dwindled, allaying central bank fears that higher rates would suck in hot money; inflationary pressures have continued to build; and confidence in the U.S. economic outlook has strengthened.
"All of that is much more important to the case for tightening in the region in comparison to the rate hike we saw yesterday," Buchanan said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This analysis is completely off the mark. The fact is that China¡¯s account surplus is as high as ever in spite of rising wages, and the trend remains upward. It is China¡¯s population density that drives the trade imbalance, not low wages or currency manipulation. An extreme population density depresses per capita consumption, making such a nation utterly dependent on exports to increase and sustain its standard of living. In 2009, when the U.S. trade deficit in manufactured goods is expressed in per capita terms, the deficit with China barely makes a list of the top 20. The deficit with wealthy nations like Japan, Germany and a host of other European nations is far worse. If the nations of the world are divided evenly around the median population density, in 2009 the U.S. had a surplus of trade in manufactured goods of $102 billion with the less densely populated nations. With the more densely populated nations (the same number of nations), the U.S. had a trade deficit of $422 billion. An exhaustive study of global trade over the past 20 years reveals that currency exchange rates have no effect whatsoever. And the effect of wages (measured in GDP purchasing power parity) is to drive trade imbalances (both surpluses and deficits) higher. Among nations less densely populated than the U.S., higher wages tend to increase the U.S. trade surplus. Among more densely populated nations, higher wages tend to increase the U.S. trade deficit. The relationship between between wages and trade imbalance cited in this article are backwards. Rising wages in China are the result of the trade imbalance. The trade imbalance is the result of the population density disparity, not low wages. Absent some action by the U.S. to limit imports from China, the deficit with China will remain and will likely worsen. A reliance upon ¡°market forces¡± to do the job is what led to the huge global imbalances that collapsed the economy in the first place.
Feb 09, 20116:41am EST--
Feb 09, 20117:57am EST--
China should not even consider the views of those non-China based analyst which as usual give their ¡°professional¡± views from thin air and on already prooven useless and nonsencetical US financial models. In a short period of time All these ¡°professional¡± analysis will be prooven wrong. China should stick to its independent path of prooven success, spent prudently, value the virtues of hard work and avoid gambling, speculating and punting in the stock market.
Feb 09, 201111:00pm EST--
