Russia raps Japan over island dispute
2011-02-11 08:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia and Japan crossed swords publicly Friday over Moscow's invitation for China and South Korea to invest in an island chain at the center of a dispute that has poisoned ties for half a century.
The disagreement came during a visit to Moscow by Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara, which brought the two nations no closer to resolving their dispute over islands Russia calls the Southern Kurils and Japan calls the Northern Territories.
Tensions have escalated since November, when Russian President Dmitry Medvedev made the first visit by a Kremlin leader to the small, windswept and sparsely populated islands off Japan's Hokkaido, 7,000 km (4,350 miles) from Moscow.
At a joint news conference after talks with Maehara, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said the Kremlin would be happy to see Chinese, Korean and even Japanese investment in the islands, which Moscow has held since 1945.
He also gave a chilly response to Lavrov's call for a committee of historians to weigh in on the territorial dispute, saying previous discussions by specialists had brought little in the way of results.
Lavrov said Tokyo's recent behavior in the dispute was "unacceptable" and made clear that vocal Japanese demands for the return of the isles would only hurt its cause.
Monday, marked with rallies and speeches in Japan as Northern Territories Day, Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan called Medvedev's trip "an unforgivable outrage."
"When radical approaches gain the upper hand in Japan and are shared by the country's leadership, of course it is useless to conduct any discussion on this issue," he said after the talks with Maehara at a Foreign Ministry mansion in Moscow.
Russia will only discuss a peace treaty without any preconditions or "unilateral historical links," Lavrov said, a reference to Japan's claim the islands are rightfully its own.
Maehara reiterated Japan's claim.
"The Northern Territories are indigenous territories of Japan," he said through an interpreter.
Sitting down for the talks, he said Moscow and Tokyo should try to find a way to overcome the dispute.
"There is a territorial problem between Russia and Japan but we should rack our brains to overcome it," he said.
Moscow has pointedly asserted sovereignty over the islands by dispatching high-level officials there since Medvedev's visit, which added to Japan's troubles amid a dispute with fast-growing powerhouse China over another group of islands.
Japan's anger flared again when Russia's defense chief visited military units on the islands last week, and Medvedev said Wednesday that Moscow will deploy new weapons to step up defences there.
Lavrov stressed, as Russia has repeatedly, that Tokyo should focus not on the islands but on improving trade ties with Russia, a major oil and gas producer that is seeking to increase its influence in Asia.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Why can¡¯t there be a sit down where an arbitrator whom will not benefit from the deal can settle the problem. Like when the US and Britain let Germany determine where in Puget Sound the border should be. Looking back at that case, it was determined that the deepest waterway should be the border which forced Britain to give up Vancouver and most of Washington state. If the same concept was applied to this problem the Russians would have to move. Their real argument over controlling the islands is because they want sole control over the deepest waterway between Japan and Russia. And while 99% of the people whom lived on the islands before the end of world war II were Japanese, those people have long since been displaced to Kazakhstan and replaced by loyal Russian citizens. Do not the Russians owe some sort of reprisal to those displaced peoples? Isn¡¯t this something that Japan can support within Russia¡¯s ¡°free and democratic¡± court system. I¡¯m just saying is all there might be a better approach to this argument for Japan then to just have their foreign minister show up once a year in Moscow and call everyone an ass hole.
Feb 14, 20118:26pm EST--
