Factbox: What are rare earths? How are they used?
2011-02-14 16:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Rare earths stormed into the public spotlight in 2010 over fears that China's policy of curbing exports will cause global shortages.
In 2011, the game is shifting, as investors look for winners in the race to break China's stranglehold on this tightly controlled group of high-tech metals.
Despite their name, the rare earths are a relatively abundant group of 17 chemical elements, but finding them in economically viable deposits is rare.
WHAT ARE THE RARE EARTHS?
There are 17 rare earth elements: lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium, promethium, samarium, europium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, terbium, thulium, ytterbium, lutetium, scandium and yttrium.
China produces about 97 percent of global supplies. The biggest single producer is Inner Mongolia-based Baotou Steel and Rare Earth Co. The United States and India both produce around 3,000 tonnes a year.
China, Japan and the United States. Global demand is forecast to grow rapidly as demand for green products increases.
MAGNETS - Currently, the most dynamic market for rare earths, with demand growing 15 percent annually for the past 10 years. Neodymium, praseodymium and dysprosium are needed.
GLASS AND POLISHING - Cerium is used in ultra-violet light filtering. It is also used in glass polishing, a rapidly growing sector that is based on the unique chemical and mechanical properties of cerium.
-Neodymium for laser range-finders, guidance systems, communications
Every hybrid-electric and electric vehicle has a large battery. Each battery is made using several pounds of rare earth compounds. The use of electric vehicles is expected to increase rapidly, making them an important source of growth for rare earths.
MOBILE PHONES, LAPTOPS
Rechargeable batteries used in mobile phone and portable computers require rare earths. Rare earths were the key to smaller, more efficient battery technology.
Source: Company websites, USGS, Thomson Reuters
(Compiled by James Regan, Julie Gordon and Leonora Walet, edited by Frank McGurty)
