Treasury: Can't say China a forex manipulator
2011-02-04 19:22:00.0
(Reuters) - The Obama administration declined to name China a currency manipulator on Friday, even though it said the yuan was "substantially undervalued," sparking fresh calls for legislative retaliation to try to reduce a swelling trade deficit.
Treasury said China's yuan should rise more quickly but said it lacked evidence to label Beijing a manipulator, a designation that could trigger trade action.
"Treasury's view...is that progress thus far is insufficient and that more rapid progress is needed," the report said. "Treasury will continue to closely monitor the pace of appreciation of the (yuan) by China."
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has been trying to prompt China into letting the yuan -- also known as the renminbi -- rise more swiftly, something that is seen as vital for rebalancing global growth.
JOBS LOST, FACTORIES CLOSED
The decision in the semi-annual report, which was due last October 15, disappointed and angered lawmakers.
"China has been given a free pass on its currency practices for far too long," said Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, which has jurisdiction over trade issues. "We need to hold China and our other trading partners accountable for their actions."
Democratic Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan said he would reintroduce legislation next week proposing to let the Commerce Department treat an undervalued currency as a subsidy under U.S. trade law. Companies could, on a case-by-case basis, seek countervailing duties against competing Chinese imports.
China contends the yuan's value is not the main cause of the United States' mounting trade deficits and that if the currency did appreciate swiftly the effect would only be to shift production from China to other lower-cost countries.
Spot yuan ended at 6.5938 against the dollar last Tuesday compared with 6.6030 at Monday's close.
NEED CHINA'S MONEY
"If it does not, China will face the risk of more rapid inflation, excessively rapid expansion of domestic credit, and upward pressure on property and equity prices, all of which could threaten future economic growth," Treasury said.
The usual tool for controlling inflation is higher interest rates, but higher rates attract more capital inflows that in turn require more foreign exchange purchases to keep a stable yuan.
(Reporting by Glenn Somerville and David Lawder; Editing by Leslie Adler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Congress sold our hides to the likes of the WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION and now it¡¯s all about they are going to do this or that but in the end they legally can¡¯t do a damn thing. When going broke what head of the household in her right mind would consider cutting paying the bills and increasing charity contributions. Now China wants to build the next presidential helicopter and our fighter trainers . Why not? The president is just another free market ambassador to the middle kingdom. Happy Year of the Rabbit. Pass the fish head soup and be sure to schedule your spouse for her mandatory spay job.
Feb 04, 20117:46pm EST--
The best thing for the United States to do is to continue pushing exports. We have neglected exports for so long that other nations took over as manufacturing centers. We are still the largest manufacturing nation in the world, and we can hold on to this buy exporting more. But, I will say again what other refuse to admit. We could export massive amounts of goods from the US if we just didn¡¯t buy so much. We would have over capacity in our manufacturing and could then export it. 70 percent of our GDP is from consumption, and that is just way too much. It should be reduced by 10 to 15 percent.
Feb 04, 20118:23pm EST--
This is the most accurate decision. Manipulating currency means unilaterally declaring the value of the currency. But China sets the value of the currency by purchasing USD in exchange for RMB (that they continuously print as more USD arrives). This is very similar to the US currency situation during our days on the gold standard. We would declare the value of the USD by hoarding an equivalent value of gold. China does the same thing but by hoarding USD. It is strange to me that people believe China is getting the best of the US due to the trade imbalance. The disappearing US manufacturing jobs would have left anyway because labor prices are cheaper in every developing country. China isn¡¯t out competing the US, they are outcompeting Mexico, Vietnam, India, etc. Actually, a trade imbalance is impossible in the long term. China is selling us real good in exchange for USD (which we print). USD is only good in the US economy. It is monopoly money everywhere else (except that it is a ¡°reserve currency¡±). So it has to return to our economy someday or else we have received real goods in exchange for cheaply printed paper. Hurray for us! China hoarding USD and never spending it is functionally no different from China burning the USD. And the trade imbalance will cause prices to change in order to correct the imbalance. It is currently causing inflation in China that will eventually correct the imbalance. In the long run we will stay rich and China will become less poor. Just like Japan, Taiwan, and Korea.
Feb 04, 20118:43pm EST--
