Treasury: Can't say China a forex manipulator
2011-02-04 18:35:00.0
(Reuters) - The Obama administration declined to name China a currency manipulator on Friday, even though it said the yuan was "substantially undervalued," sparking fresh calls for legislative retaliation to try to reduce a swelling U.S. trade deficit.
Treasury said China's yuan should rise more quickly but said it lacked evidence to label Beijing a manipulator, a designation that could trigger trade action.
"Treasury's view...is that progress thus far is insufficient and that more rapid progress is needed," the report said. "Treasury will continue to closely monitor the pace of appreciation of the (yuan) by China."
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has been trying to prompt China into letting the yuan -- also known as the renminbi -- rise more swiftly, something that is seen as vital for rebalancing global growth.
JOBS LOST, FACTORIES CLOSED
The decision in the semi-annual report, which was due last October 15, disappointed and angered lawmakers.
"China has been given a free pass on its currency practices for far too long," said Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, which has jurisdiction over trade issues. "We need to hold China and our other trading partners accountable for their actions."
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown echoed the call for action. "Congress must act this year to pass legislation addressing currency manipulation to level the playing field and help get our economy back on track," he said.
China contends the yuan's value is not the main cause of the United States' mounting trade deficits and that if the currency did appreciate swiftly the effect would only be to shift production from China to other lower-cost countries.
Spot yuan ended at 6.5938 against the dollar last Tuesday compared with 6.6030 at Monday's close.
NEED CHINA'S MONEY
"If it does not, China will face the risk of more rapid inflation, excessively rapid expansion of domestic credit, and upward pressure on property and equity prices, all of which could threaten future economic growth," Treasury said.
The usual tool for controlling inflation is higher interest rates, but higher rates attract more capital inflows that in turn require more foreign exchange purchases to keep a stable yuan.
(Reporting by Glenn Somerville and David Lawder; Editing by Leslie Adler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Well, the Chinese will be pleased to hear that judgment rendered; maybe they¡¯ll even make us another loan if we don¡¯t rag on the banker.
Feb 04, 20115:27pm EST--
Sounds to me like more excuses for our poor monetary policy, plus failure to make any meaningful changes. We cannot continue to spend more than we take in neither can we continue to import more than we export. Facing facts is one thing that our government cannot seem to do.
Feb 04, 20116:03pm EST--
Well lets see. If the free market is at work, and someone feels the Yuan is undervalued, wouldn¡¯t you want to buy the Yuan, and benefit as it rises in value¡­??
Well lets see. If the free market is at work, and someone feels the Yuan is undervalued, wouldn¡¯t you want to buy the Yuan, and benefit as it rises in value¡­??
Why doesn¡¯t the U.S. invest in Yuan if it continues to think it is so undervalued¡­??
Oh yeah, we are broke, and China isn¡¯t.
They buy our bonds and dollars, not the other way around.
Feb 04, 20116:28pm EST--
