Swiss franc slips as markets sanguine on China hike
2011-02-08 18:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar eased and the Swiss franc stayed under pressure early in Asia on Wednesday as markets took China's latest interest rate hike in their stride, a move that helped the Australian dollar hold well above parity against the greenback.
Investors quickly regained composure after China late on Tuesday delivered a 25 basis-point rate hike, the second move in little more than six weeks and on the final day of the Lunar New Year holidays.
"Chinese policy-makers' efforts to rein in overheating pressures are now seen in a relatively more positive light by global investors in that they will help slow growth to a more sustainable pace, while other engines of growth in the region begin to rev up," said Samarjit Shankar, analyst at BNY Mellon.
The Swiss franc, seen as a safe-haven currency, fell across the board. The dollar rose to a 2- week high around 0.9643 francs, while the euro climbed to 9-week highs around 1.3144 francs.
The dollar index .DXY, which tracks the greenback's performance against a basket of major currencies, slipped 0.07 percent to 77.973.
Against the Japanese currency, the dollar stood at 82.27 yen, recovering from a fall to 81.75 overnight.
The dollar failed to gain much lift from a further spike in Treasury yields <US/>, perhaps because a poorly received three-year debt auction pointed to diminishing foreign demand for Treasuries.
The euro fetched $1.3625, having earlier broken a key resistance level at $1.3680. A sustained break will bring into view the next hurdle at $1.3767, the February 2 low.
Still, further gains for the single currency may prove difficult after European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet last week sharply diminished expectations of a near-term interest rate hike.
Meanwhile, the Australian dollar traded at $1.0140, having recovered from a selloff to around $1.0115 in reaction to the Chinese rate hike.
The Aussie dollar is among the most sensitive to Chinese interest rate policy as China is Australia's biggest customer for its two top exports: iron ore and coal.
"The fact that China is tightening means it's got a strongly growing economy and that is ultimately good news for the Australian economy and commodity prices," said Joseph Capurso, strategist at Commonwealth Bank.
"I'm still fairly optimistic about the Aussie, I think we'll trade in the $0.97-1.02 range for the next few months and then start to ease at the back-end of the year when the Fed indicates it's going to tighten policy."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Reuters always tries hard to talk down the euro: I can only assume that either Gertrude Chavez-Dreyfuss or the owner of Reuters is trying to make money on the side. The reports are full of unattributed empty conjecture such as ¡°Analysts, however, said the euro¡¯s rally against the dollar could be short-lived.¡± Obviously it could be short-lived, as could be Mr Chavez-Dreyfuss¡¯s career. However, in the absence of any real information such fluffy speculation should be left out.
Feb 08, 20112:35pm EST--
