Wary China avoids comment on calls for reform in Egypt
2011-02-01 23:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China's tightly controlled state-run media has largely avoided commenting on the turmoil sweeping Egypt, wary that calls for political reform in the Arab world's most populous nation could ripple into China.
The strife has been reported as a secondary story, concentrating on government efforts to rescue stranded Chinese and hardly any images shown of the mass protests or tanks on the streets.
"It's a highly sensitive story for the government and brings back memories of 1989," said Li Datong, a former journalist sacked for challenging censorship, referring to the bloody crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in and around Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
"Certainly they want to limit coverage, and would be especially nervous of pictures showing troops mixing peacefully with protesters and not opening fire on them."
But China's situation is very different from Egypt and the Communist Party's grip on power is as strong as ever. The economic boom over the past few decades has raised millions from poverty, and few Chinese would likely wish to see the sort of unrest which has riled Cairo repeated on Beijing's streets.
Chinese websites have disrupted searches for "Egypt" on micro-blogs, though some comments have been getting through, as well as pictures of the protests and tanks on the streets, in an echo for some of the anti-government protests in Beijing in 1989.
"These are the real soldiers of the people," wrote one poster on a blog operated by portal baidu.com. "The Egyptian army has not opened fire on their fathers or brothers."
"Rising corruption, inflation, high housing prices - I think there's another country like this, but which could that be?" wrote another person sarcastically on the sina.com micro-blog.
Pictures carried in newspapers and on official websites on Wednesday generally showed either screenshots of beleaguered Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak speaking on television, or Chinese travelers smiling on their return to China.
Xinhua's English-language service, which is aimed at a foreign audience, noted the call by some Egyptians to stay away from violence.
"Despite opposition parties' calls for an indefinite strike and a one-million-people march to the presidential palace, some Egyptian intellectuals distributed leaflets among protesters, urging people to stay away from 'violence' and 'chaos.'"
State television, in contrast to the likes of CNN and the BBC which have given blanket coverage to Egypt, has hardly mentioned the unrest, concentrating its reporting on the run-up to the traditional Chinese lunar new year holiday.
China's response also reflects its traditional reluctance to criticize other authoritarian governments in the developing world, as well as its limited sway in the Middle East, a major source of oil for the fast-growing Asian economy.
Almost the only Chinese newspaper to comment on Egypt has been the Global Times, a popular tabloid with a strong nationalist bent run by Communist Party mouthpiece the People's Daily.
On Sunday, it warned in an editorial that "color revolutions" in places like Tunisia and Egypt would not bring about the kind of democracy hoped for by Western nations.
"Democracy is still far away for Tunisia and Egypt. The success of a democracy takes concrete foundations in economy, education and social issues," it wrote.
"As a general concept, democracy has been accepted by most people. But when it comes to political systems, the Western model is only one of a few options. It takes time and effort to apply democracy to different countries, and to do so without the turmoil of revolution."
