Japan, Russia agree to revive talks on island dispute
2013-04-29 13:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia and Japan said on Monday they would revive talks on resolving a territorial dispute that has prevented them signing a treaty formally ending their World War Two hostilities, and, wary of China's rising influence, agreed to bolster trade ties.
At the two G8 powers' first Moscow summit for 10 years, President Vladimir Putin and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe had China's economic and political might in mind as they launched a new effort to warm up their relationship.
An end to the dispute over four Pacific islands is not in sight, but reviving long-stalled talks is a first step to improving economic cooperation, which both sides say has failed to live up to its potential.
"We have agreed to revive talks (on the islands)," Putin told a news conference with Abe after a Kremlin ceremony at which about 20 economic cooperation agreements were signed, but said this did not mean the issue would be resolved "tomorrow".
Looking relaxed in talks with Putin in an ornate Kremlin hall, Abe said bilateral trade had grown eightfold in the 10 years since then-Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi held a summit with Putin in Moscow.
"Nevertheless, our potential for cooperation has not been opened wide enough," Abe said.
Underlining this, the sides failed to clinch any major deals on energy cooperation.
During a luncheon, Abe gave Putin a pair of skis and a ski outfit, and Putin gave his guest a bottle of wine from 1855, the year the countries concluded a treaty on trade and friendship, Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman Yutaka Yokoi said.
Russia wants to firm up its footing in Asia as it warily watches China's regional influence grow, even though Putin hosted Chinese President Xi Jinping at a lavish Kremlin summit only a month ago. Japan is also locked in an islands dispute with China, giving it jitters about its neighbor.
They were seized by the Soviet Union, of which Russia was then the biggest part, after it declared war on Japan in August 1945 and days before Japan surrendered, forcing about 17,000 Japanese to flee. They are near rich fishing grounds.
Japan and Russia are still nominally at war, although hostilities ended shortly after Japan surrendered. The conclusion of a peace treaty depends on the resolution of the territorial dispute.
"This really is a complex matter. And there is no magic wand in the world that could solve the problem in one move," Abe said. "To solve this it takes time and thorough talks."
Japan is the largest importer of liquefied natural gas (LNG) and sees Russia as a strategic partner as it looks to diversify and cut the costs of LNG imports, which shot up after a 2011 disaster at its Fukushima nuclear plant.
(Additional reporting by Antoni Slodkowski in Tokyo and Steve Gutterman and Gabriela Baczynska in Moscow, Writing by Steve Gutterman and Timothy Heritage; editing by Mike Collett-White)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
っていうか、ニュ`ス事が短すぎる。 嫌がらせか？ It is too briefly to get acknowledged what you want to tell us. Would you like to disturbe?
Apr 29, 201310:13am EDT--
同じコメント３回も承Jするなよ。 uずかしいじゃないか？ I never mind if you won’t like to accept my comment. I’m always okay with it.
Apr 29, 201310:17am EDT--
あと　一つ何かコメントしやなアカンな。 めんどくさいな。お前ら。 There is nothing I can say. We would just like to take a ride on Siberian Rail way through our Rail Road “JR.” That’s all. Thanks
Apr 29, 201310:19am EDT--
