Simple life changes could stop millions of cancers
2011-02-04 03:20:00.0
(Reuters) - About a third of all common cancers in the United States, China and Britain could be prevented each year if people ate healthier food, drank less alcohol and exercised more, health experts said on Friday.
Estimates from the American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) and the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF) suggest that making simple lifestyle changes could prevent some 40 percent of breast cancers alone in Britain and the United States, as well as tens of thousands of colon, stomach and prostate cancers.
"It is distressing that even in 2011, people are dying unnecessarily from cancers that could be prevented through maintaining a healthy weight, diet, physical activity and other lifestyle factors," Martin Wiseman, a WCRF medical and scientific adviser, said in statement.
In China, 620,000 cases, or 27 percent are preventable, the WCRF said, as are about 35 percent, or 340,000, in the United States and 37 percent in Britain. Healthier lifestyles could prevent 61,000 cancers in Brazil and 79,000 in Britain.
The WCRF findings are backed by World Health Organisation (WHO) recommendations, which say regular exercise can prevent many diseases such as cancers, heart diseases and diabetes.
According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), cancer will kill more than 13.2 million people a year by 2030, almost double the number it killed in 2008 -- and the vast majority of deaths will be in poorer countries.
In a separate statement, the Geneva-based WHO said low levels of physical activity are the main cause of an estimated 21 to 25 percent of breast and colon cancers, 27 percent of diabetes cases and 30 percent of heart disease cases worldwide.
Rachel Thompson, the WCRF's deputy head of science, said that while the message was simple -- that not smoking, eating good food and being a healthy weight can help ward off many cancers -- it was still a difficult one to get across.
"It's all very well us saying 'this is what you need to eat and this is how much physical activity you need to do', but we need to make it easier for people to make those changes," she said. "Everybody has a role in that -- from international organizations, to governments, to people themselves."
Peter Baldini, head of the World Lung Foundation, also called on all governments to introduce smoke-free laws and raise the price of cigarettes.
Tobacco kills millions of smokers every year, and tobacco-related lung cancers also kill hundreds of thousands of people who don't smoke but have been exposed to it second-hand.
"There isn't a magic bullet to cure all forms of cancer, but we have the opportunity and the obligation to protect people from developing cancer wherever possible," Baldini said.
(Additional reporting by Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva, editing by Matthew Jones)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If it is well known that eating healthy food is major factor to reduce cancer and other deseases rates, why governments and health organization allowing unhealthy food to be sold? Even in upscale ¡°healthy¡± food stores majority of food is heavy processed. The answer is obvious that global economy will further collapse if people will be healthier.
Feb 04, 20112:32pm EST--
I have inoperable cancer in both lung so have been researching this subject intensely for the last year, I generally agree with the gist of this article. I¡¯m also in contact with many others who have lung cancer, unfortunately many of them do not seem to want to help themselves, they are looking for the magic cure-all pill. I have developed a supplement of raw liquidised vegetables with a few common additives like turmeric, ground pepper, oregano; I also drink genuine Japanese Matcha Green Tea. The preparation time for this complementary diet supplement is just over one hour, I¡¯ve been taking it daily for 120 days and am now feeling better for it. Just had a CT Scan which indicates the dimensions of the main tumour have reduced but they say the size of it remains the same. I have mentioned my diet to others but nobody else seems to want to make the effort.
Feb 04, 20115:41pm EST--
