Treasury official: more progress needed on China
2011-01-21 11:22:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States is seeing progress on China's commitment to let the value of its currency appreciate, but more work is needed on the issue, as well as on other parts of the U.S.-China relationship, a top U.S. Treasury official said on Friday.
Lael Brainard, the Treasury's Undersecretary for International Affairs, said the United States was also pleased with the steps on stronger enforcement of intellectual property rights taken during President Hu Jintao's visit to Washington, but she added: "We are not complacent."
"China affirmed its commitment to enhance exchange rate flexibility and dropped previous references to maintaining basic stability at an equilibrium rate," Brainard told the Council on Foreign Relations.
Many economists and politicians in the United States argue that China has gained an unfair competitive advantage in international trade by artificially holding down the value of its currency, the renminbi, thereby making its exports cheaper.
Brainard praised China for the currency's appreciation of about 3.5 percent over the last six months, but said more was needed.
"They have themselves been debating internally how to move on this very important issue," she said.
She lauded China's assurances that it would do more to enforce intellectual property rights, saying the country had agreed to implement mechanisms for ensuring government agencies did not use pirated software.
"The intellectual property issues with China are large and we will continue to move forward with them," she added.
She said the United States and China were continuing to talk about new investment treaties, though the main focus of the effort is still on what model to use for any new treaty.
"There are a lot of differences between the way China approaches investment treaties traditionally, and our models traditionally." Brainard said. "So it will take some time to work through those issues."
(Reporting by Jonathan Spicer and Emily Flitter; Editing by Andrew Hay)
