China central bank says Fed easing ineffective and dangerous
2011-01-30 08:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve and other central banks cannot address fundamental economic problems but may lead to excessive global liquidity and competitive currency depreciation, China's central bank said on Sunday.
In its monetary policy report for the final quarter of 2010, the People's Bank of China (PBOC) also confirmed that it would target 16 percent growth of the broad M2 measure of money supply this year, down from the 19.9 pct growth recorded at the end of 2010.
The central bank said the Fed's monetary easing was pushing up international commodity prices and asset prices in emerging markets, including China.
"Quantitative easing policy cannot fundamentally address economic problems, and it may cause excessive liquidity on a global scale as well as risks of competitive currency depreciation," the Chinese central bank said in its 59-page report.
"It is creating imported inflation and short-term capital inflows, pressuring emerging markets," it said.
As a result, China needed to work hard to soak up liquidity from foreign exchange inflows in order to minimize the impact on the domestic economy, it added.
The central bank said it would continue to use different tools, including interest rates, bank reserve requirements and open-market operations, to rein in money supply and bank credit growth as a way of handling inflationary pressure.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Michael Martina; Editing by Simon Rabinovitch)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Given the dismal record of the Fed in the last decade in guiding the American economy into fraud-powered deep recession, it is time to hire the CHINESE central bankers as consultants and turn over the management to them. If they can produce only HALF the performance they have for the Chinese economy, most Americans would be very happy.
Jan 30, 20114:41pm EST--
I dont really think average short sighted american will be happy to get chinese central bankers managing their economy, at least not for their long sighted plan that brings short term discomfort to american. No pain no gain, american had been enjoying their supremacy for decades, now is time to let the hard workers enjoys the wealth.
Feb 01, 201110:19am EST--
Instead of complaining about about American inflation , simply remove the peg between the American Dollar and the Yuan and then the American inflation won¡¯t be ¡°imported¡± anymore!
Feb 02, 20111:55pm EST--
