Obama pushes China on yuan, Hu silent
2011-01-19 20:57:00.0
Obama pushes China on yuan, Hu silent | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Obama pushes China on yuan, Hu silent
Wed, Jan 19 2011
Wed, Jan 19 2011
Wed, Jan 19 2011
Wed, Jan 19 2011
Tue, Jan 18 2011
Chinese 100 yuan banknote is seen in this picture illustration taken in Shanghai January 19, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Aly Song
Wed  EST
Obama, in blunt language for a formal state visit, made clear Washington remained unhappy with the pace at which Beijing has allowed the yuan to rise against the dollar, a bone of contention between Washington and Beijing for years.
"I told President Hu that we welcome China's increasing the flexibility of its currency. But I also had to say that the renminbi (yuan) remains undervalued, that there needs to be further adjustment in the exchange rate," he said at a news conference with Hu.
"The currency is a part of the problem. The renminbi is undervalued. The Chinese government has intervened very forcefully in the currency markets," Obama said. "There has been movement, but it's not as fast as we want."
In the statement, China said it will "continue to promote (yuan) exchange rate reform and enhance RMB exchange rate flexibility."
Wednesday's joint statement said the United States would focus on controlling the budget deficit and will "maintain vigilance against excess volatility in exchange rates.
China has pushed back at Washington's criticisms of its currency system by pointing to the huge U.S. budget deficit and ultra-loose monetary policy which it claims represents the biggest risk to the world economy and undermines the dollar.
Democrat Obama, like his predecessor George W. Bush, has resisted this pressure, mindful of China's status as the single biggest U.S. creditor. But he signaled at the start of the press conference, unprompted by reporters' questions, that the currency issue remained pressing.
Expectations had been low for any summit breakthrough on the currency. Washington wants it to rise faster against the dollar and lift Chinese demand for U.S. exports, boosting the still fragile recovery of the world's biggest economy.
The Chinese president's only direct remarks on the international economy were to note that global growth had resumed but uncertainties remained, referring to the financial crisis that Beijing says was caused by the United States.
"Hu was largely conciliatory in tone but was very clear ... that China did intend to make progress on the issues that Obama raised, but on its own terms and at its own pace," said Eswar Prasad, a former head of the IMF's China division who is now a professor at Cornell University.
The yuan has risen about 3.7 percent against the dollar since it was de-pegged from the U.S. currency in June. It closed on Wednesday at 6.5824 per dollar, close to a record high.
"Past experience has been that when the pressure is stepped up, China has moved, so perhaps they will continue to be accommodating in the months ahead," said Steven Dunaway, an adjunct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.
(Additional reporting by Steve Holland, David Morgan and Patricia Zengerle; editing by Anthony Boadle)
