Analysis: Immelt's selection shows policy shift by Obama
2011-01-21 19:01:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama's pick of Jeffrey Immelt as head of a key White House advisory panel is part a shake-up aimed at making jobs growth the administration's top priority leading into the 2012 presidential election.
Though Immelt's role as head of a White House panel on jobs and competitiveness is only part time, he will join Obama's new chief of staff William Daley, a former JPMorgan Chase & Co executive, as a voice for corporate America in an administration struggling to shake off an anti-business image.
Immelt replaces former Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker as the head of Obama's economic advisory panel.
Analysts said the new team, including Immelt, shows an emphasis on the business sector rather than financial markets as the focus shifts from reversing the market meltdown to finding a way to get companies to start hiring again.
"Bringing in one of the most respected CEOs in the country captures the thematic shift within the White House," said David Rothkopf, a former Clinton administration official. "Volcker was a brand name brought in at a time of crisis to try and help calm the markets. ... Now, the focus is on job creation."
Upset over a U.S. unemployment rate above 9 percent, U.S. voters in the November congressional elections delivered a stinging rebuke to the president's Democratic party and handed control of the U.S. House of Representatives to Republicans.
The White House fears that vote could be a harbinger of what is to come for Obama when he runs for re-election in 2012, if he fails to reignite robust economic growth and get the engine of private-sector employment growth churning again.
Reacting to the news about Immelt, Brendan Buck, a spokesman for new House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner, a Republican, said Obama's newly configured advisory panel "will only be helpful if it yields a new way of looking at the economy in the White House."
One factor that may have worked in his favor for his new role was that GE, a maker of everything from refrigerators to jet engines, is a household name most Americans do not associate with government bailouts of Wall Street and Detroit automakers after the economy entered into its deep recession.
But he is also a CEO who slashed thousands of jobs during the downturn as his storied company struggled to weather a credit crunch that forced it, too, to seek government help.
"There is no swifter way to alienate working class voters than to name an outsourcing CEO to lead your jobs strategy. Yet that's exactly what President Obama is doing," said Scott Paul, head of the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
But William Galston, a scholar at the Brookings Institution, said Immelt is "very well placed within the corporate community."
"He represents the right kind of firm symbolically, a firm that is a world-class manufacturer, that has global reach but also an enormous amount of domestic production."
Immelt served the last two years as one of several members of Volcker's panel of outside advisers.
In December, Immelt participated in a White House summit with chief executives aimed at extending an olive branch to the business community after ties were frayed in the last year over the administration's regulatory and fiscal policies.
He dined with Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao during the U.S.-China state visit this week and was part of a high-level business delegation during the president's trip to India in November.
Immelt told Reuters on Wednesday he wants the United States and China to open their borders to truly free trade between the world's two largest economies.
"We want to make sure we see the evolution of free trade and transparency," he said.
"From China, how can they invest more in the United States? How can they grow their companies here? There's a little bit of angst on both sides, but on balance there is comfort that over time a lot of these things will get solved."
(Reporting by Scott Malone in Boston and Caren Bohan in Washington; editing by Todd Eastham)
