Factbox: U.S. companies announcing deals with China
2011-01-19 14:15:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the United States reached agreements on export deals worth $45 billion, the White House said on Wednesday, as Chinese President Hu Jintao and U.S. President Barack Obama met in Washington.
The pact includes 737s and 777s and helps support more than 100,000 American jobs, including those at Boeing and its suppliers throughout the United States, according to Boeing.
Boeing projects that over the next 20 years China will need 4,330 new airplanes, worth more than $480 billion, and will be Boeing's largest commercial airplane customer.
* Boeing and Air China announced an agreement to initiate planning of an inaugural international flight using sustainable aviation biofuels. Boeing, Honeywell (
), and United Technologies Corp's (
) Pratt & Whitney announced an agreement on the details of the technical support they will offer to Air China in the planning, execution and analysis of the inaugural biofuel flight.
-- GE and China Shenhua Energy Company Limited formed a joint venture that will seek to advance cleaner coal technology for industrial chemicals, fuels and power generation. GE estimates about $150 million in U.S. exports over the first five years of the joint venture, with the potential to generate $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion in U.S. exports over the long term.
-- GE and the Chinese Ministry of Rail expand upon an existing strategic partnership to bring Chinese high-speed rail technology to the United States. GE and China South Locomotive & Rolling Stock Corp Ltd plan to form a U.S. joint venture to manufacture high- and medium-speed electric multiple unit trains. GE estimated that new business generated by the joint venture could support up to 3,500 jobs in the United States. GE also will agree to manufacture locomotives for China and provide components for 500 or more locomotives.
) and Caterpillar China Investment Co Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary, will sign an agreement under which $1.4 billion in U.S.-manufactured mining and construction equipment and diesel and gas turbine engines will be shipped to China. The intra-company sale will support about 7,567 U.S. jobs, according to a U.S. official.
) announced central Chinese government approval for a $400 million, 50-50 joint venture with the state-owned Anhui Jianghuai Automobile Co. Navistar will export services and parts to be used in the manufacture of diesel engines and commercial trucks. The joint venture will make and sell heavy duty trucks and light to medium/heavy duty engines, primarily in China and be based in Hefei City, Anhui province.
* UPC Management LLC, a Miami-based wind power developer, negotiated a strategic framework agreement with the China Guo Dian Corp for ventures leading to the establishment of wind power generation joint ventures. The total value of the investments could reach $1.5 billion, of which UPC will invest up to $735 million.
) and Haier Group are in an agreement to collaborate on low-emission, high energy-efficiency products and solutions. Honeywell estimates the total value of the five-year memorandum of understanding at $265 million and U.S. export content at $210 million.
* Celanese Far East Co., a subsidiary of Celanese Corp (
), and Wison Group Holding Ltd will conclude a memorandum of understanding for the construction and operation of an industrial ethanol production facility in China. Celanese plans to invest about $650 million in an ethanol complex using the output from Wison as feed stock, and Celanese proprietary technology, to produce ethanol for industrial use, and potentially for fuel ethanol. This transaction is valued at about $815 million, with $50 million to $80 million in U.S. export content. Celanese estimates the project will support about 200 to 250 U.S. jobs.
(Reporting by Jessica Wohl; Editing by Will Dunham)
