Dangdang CEO's anger not enough for lawsuit
2011-01-21 18:55:00.0
Dangdang CEO's anger not enough for lawsuit | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Dangdang CEO's anger not enough for lawsuit
Fri  EST
) may be angry over the pricing of his company's initial public offering, but that does not mean he has any basis for a lawsuit, U.S. securities lawyers said.
) for setting his company's price too low in its IPO. But U.S.-based securities lawyers said companies cannot fault underwriters for giving their best price advice.
"There is zero legal standing for a company that underwent a public offering to sue its underwriters strictly for price," said Gregg Berman, a partner and vice chairman of the securities practice group in the New York office of law firm Fulbright & Jaworski LLP.
"Nobody held a gun to the company's head to sign the underwriting agreements."
After Dangdang's shares shot up 87 percent in their first day of trading, CEO Li wrote on a Twitter-like microblogging site popular in China that he should have signed up with another underwriter.
) in 2002 for intentionally underpricing its 1999 IPO and taking kickbacks from its customers, who profited when the shares soared. Executives from online mortgage provider E-loan Inc also expressed frustration with Goldman Sachs over its IPO price.
"I regret not giving the share offer to Goldman Sachs," Dangdang's Li wrote on the microblogging site. "I'm openly criticizing investment banks, including Morgan Stanley."
"You western slave," Li wrote. "Take some Viagra when you have time and do some real work."
Morgan Stanley, which was one of the lead underwriters on Dangdang's $272 million IPO in December, and the target of Li's anger, denied the comments were written by its employees and condemned the behavior, which it said could damage a company's brand and reputation.
Dangdang confirmed the authenticity of Li's comments and said the remarks were meant to reflect Li's personal opinions, reveal the wounds he had suffered and serve as a warning for those wanting to list in the United States.
In terms of all companies making their debut in the United States, half of the top 10 biggest first-day gainers in the last decade have been from China. Dangdang's 87 pct first day pop, which ranks ninth, is the smallest among them, according to data from Ipreo, which provides capital markets data and analytic services.
Morgan Stanley is a lead bank on three of those 10 companies and Goldman Sachs is a lead on four, according to the data.
), which made its debut on the same day as Dangdang, rose 161 percent to become the second-biggest first day pop in the United States in the last decade. Goldman Sachs was the lead underwriter on that IPO.
(Additional reporting by Melanie Lee in Shanghai and Lee Chyen Yee in Hong Kong; editing by Dan Wilchins and Andre Grenon)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
A little different deal then when that Indian fellow sold his countries wares off to other then the big guys who had the deck stacked in their favor only this time a little bird must have whispered in the big guys ears. In a related story; With all the old time bankers, lawyers and doctors in Boston an out of town bunch gets arrested for hedge fund manipulation, they must not have cut their deal at the club.
Jan 21, 201111:20pm EST--
