Slim bank fees seen on Vodafone sale of SFR stake
2011-01-19 11:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Banks competing for a role on Vivendi's (
) buyout of Vodafone's (
) stake in France's SFR can expect only meager fees despite a deal value of up to 9 billion euros ($12.12 billion).
Compensation for the eventual mandate will fall far short of more lucrative deals, such as Sanofi Aventis' (
) $18.5 billion hostile bid for Genzyme GENZ.O, six people close to the SFR process told Reuters.
But the fact the banks would deepen their relationship with two of Europe's biggest telecom, media and technology companies would still make the work attractive.
"We understand there will be very low fees, if any, but there will always be competition to work for these companies on such a big deal," said a senior London banker, who advises media and technology companies and was speaking on condition of anonymity.
"It's about the bragging rights," the banker said. "Would I take this business if asked? You bet."
Also at stake is league table credit, an important barometer for banks looking to show clients they are a growing force in M&A, especially when teams are new or when firms come to allocate bonus pools.
Vivendi Chief Executive Jean-Bernard Levy said recently that talks over Vodafone's 44 percent stake in mobile phone company SFR will start when his group received the final proceeds from its sale of a 20 percent stake in NBC Universal.
U.S. regulatory approval for the NBCU-Comcast deal came through on Tuesday, and Vivendi is expected to get the $5.8 billion soon.
"There is not much scope for banks to add value, there won't be that much work to do," a second London banker said.
A Paris-based banker, a candidate for the SFR deal, added that missing out on the transaction would be a major setback if no other large deals emerged this year.
), Societe Generale (
), Calyon (
) and JP Morgan are among firms in the running to advise Vivendi, although one source backed up a newspaper report that Rothschild had been selected.
Vivendi was likely to hire banks that offered it the most advantageous terms on borrowing the funds to finance the deal, several financial sector sources said.
Vodafone is traditionally close to UBS and Goldman Sachs. Goldman is advising the company on the potential sale of its stake in Poland's Polkomtel.
Telecoms, media and technology companies paid global advisers $5 billion in fees in 2010, according to Thomson Reuters data, and revenue could increase this year as part of the general increase in M&A that bankers are predicting.
), Morgan Stanley (
) earned most from the business, scooping up $386 million, $330 million and $311 million in fees respectively.
) as the top fee payer in the sector in 2010. France Telecom FTE.PA, which paid its banks $65 million, Panasonic (
), spending $55 million, and Telefonica (
) at $53 million, were also lucrative clients for advisers. Vivendi spent $32 million.
Vodafone did not spend anything on M&A advice last year, according to Thomson Reuters data, although banks will receive compensation for selling its stake in China Mobile (
(Writing by Leila Abboud; editing by David Hulmes)
