Lawmakers plan to reintroduce China currency bill
2011-01-26 23:06:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. lawmakers plan to reintroduce China currency legislation that was overwhelmingly approved last year by the House of Representative but failed to become law, congressional aides said on Wednesday.
Former House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Sander Levin is working with the original co-sponsors of the Currency Reform for Fair Trade Act, which cleared the House in September by a wide bipartisan margin of 348-79, they said.
Levin, Representative Tim Ryan and Representative Tim Murphy are expected to reintroduce the bill when the House returns in February from a congressional district work break.
The legislation clears the way for the Commerce Department to treat undervalued currency as a subsidy under U.S. trade law. That would allow companies, on a case-by-case basis, to seek higher countervailing duties against imports from China that compete with U.S. production.
Despite the strong House vote, the Senate failed to take up the measure and it died at the end of the year.
The bill faces tougher going in the House now that Republicans control the chamber. However, supporters remain hopeful Congress will act if China doesn't take steps to allow its currency to rise more quickly against the dollar.
Critics saying China's yuan is undervalued by 15 percent to 40 percent against the dollar, giving Chinese companies an unfair trade advantage.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Kenneth Barry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Republicans must do whatever to contain these Chinese tactics. Why would Reuters report that it will be tougher with the Republicans in control of the House?
Jan 27, 201112:09am EST--
The last sentence is misleading. It isn¡¯t just Chinese companies that benefit from currency manipulation. 60% of goods MADE IN China and then sent to the US are in fact MADE BY US MULTINATIONALS. U.S corporations are incredibly powerful and to think that they would allow an economic environment that gives them a competitive disadvantage is naive.
Jan 27, 201112:43am EST--
Maybe because the Republican constituency stands to lose billions of dollars as a result of this or similar legislation?
Jan 27, 20111:57am EST--
