Green group accuses Apple of lax supplier oversight
2011-01-20 05:57:00.0
(Reuters) - iPhone maker Apple was criticized by Chinese green groups for lax corporate oversight of its suppliers in China, leading to poor environmental and work safety standards that poisoned dozens of factory workers.
Apple, which announced blockbuster profits and a dazzling outlook for iPhone and iPad sales earlier this week, continues to be dogged by accusations of aggressive pricing and secretive supply chain management in Chinese factories where they now assemble most of their products.
"We've found that Apple isn't honoring its commitment in ensuring its supply chain's work safety and environmental responsibility and giving dignity and respect to the workers," said Ma Jun, of the Institute of Public & Environmental Affairs (IPE) which published a detailed report on Apple supply chain malpractice Thursday, in conjunction with other green groups.
"(Apple) only care about the price and quality (of their products) and not the environmental and social responsibility issues. In some ways they drive the suppliers to cut corners to win their contracts," Ma said.
"Our supplier responsibility reports document the progress of our extensive auditing program since 2006," an Apple spokeswoman said.
Last year, Apple's main China supplier Foxconn was hit by over a dozen worker suicides that critics blamed on harsh factory conditions and a militaristic culture. Apple's CEO Steve Jobs has denied the allegations, saying that Foxconn is not a sweatshop.
Many Western multinationals -- including toymaker Mattel which suffered a toxic lead paint scandal in 2007 -- have struggled to regulate product quality across scores of suppliers in knotted Chinese supply chains, but the report said Apple's standards fell far short of its status as a leading global brand.
"It's not easy to control (the supply chain) but peer brands are doing a lot more (than Apple) to deal with this," said Ma.
The nine-month survey "The other face of Apple" found that at least 49 factory workers in eastern China working in factories assembling products for Apple, had fallen ill.
Lianjian Technology in the eastern city of Suzhou which the green group claims is one of Apple's major touchscreen suppliers, was accused of using N-Hexane, a toxic solvent, to clean touch screens, leading to at least 47 factory workers being poisoned.
"Apple's lack of responsiveness eventually made us quite shocked. It's the whole complacency that it doesn't have to be accountable to the NGOs, to the communities, even to the poisoned workers," Ma told Reuters.
(Reporting by James Pomfret and Kelvin Soh; Editing by Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
IPE criticisms are as thoughtful and legitimate as those generally oozing from Green peace. They don¡¯t let cause-and-effect relationships or facts interfere with ideology.
Jan 20, 201110:31am EST--
I seriously doubt Apple will lose any customers, no matter how badly they neglect the health and safety of the people who make their products. All that really matters to most consumers is final product, not how it was made. Those Windows and Linux users technically proficient enough to assemble their own computers are more likely to choose to avoid Foxconn products just because it isn¡¯t all that inconvenient; there are many, many other options to pick from.
Jan 20, 201110:33am EST--
Some thoughts on how the Chinese think. This article assumes that these ¡°Green Chinese¡± are individuals that are supportive of the Green movement. Who (no put intended) is to say that these are not operatives of the Chinese government PR department? Has anyone given any thought to the coincidence of these accusations from Chinese ¡°Green¡± organizations to the visit of the Chinese Premier ¡°Hu¡± to the US where he is facing human right accusations? From their perspective, accusing the second largest corporation in the world of misdeeds against humanity sort of evens the playing field and distracts from the accusations against their government.
Jan 21, 20113:16pm EST--
