China's currency is undervalued, Obama tells Hu
2011-01-19 17:27:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama said he told visiting Chinese President Hu Jintao on Wednesday that China's currency is undervalued and should be increasingly driven by markets.
Obama used his opening statement at a joint news conference to address one of the major disputes between the two countries -- Washington's contention that China's yuan is not fairly valued and is hurting the U.S. economy as a result.
"I told President Hu that we welcome China's increasing the flexibility of its currency. But I also had to say that the renminbi (yuan) remains undervalued, that there needs to be further adjustment in the exchange rate," he said.
"So we'll continue to look for the value of China's currency to be increasingly driven by the market, which will help ensure that no nation has an undue economic advantage," he said.
"The currency is a part of the problem. The renminbi is undervalued. The Chinese government has intervened very forcefully in the currency markets," Obama said, calling that an indication the yuan is undervalued.
He acknowledged Hu's concern about disruption in the export market from overly rapid currency movements but said he was confident of progress toward a market-based yuan.
(Reporting by Steve Holland, David Morgan and Patricia Zengerle; Editing by John O'Callaghan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Hu knows that the yuan is undervalued¡­.it is the chinese mercantilist plan to undermine the global economy. Plus, the world has been telling him that the yuan is undervalued for the past few years¡­.BUT NOTHING EVER HAPPENS. It¡¯s time to stop telling Hu what he already knows, and start implementing laws and trade tarrifs to counter the chinese mercantilism. Enough is Enough!!! Let¡¯s start acting!!!
Jan 19, 20112:22pm EST--
While we wait for the government to solve our problems we will lose sight of the fact that they¡¯re making it worse. The best way to thwart a manipulative business partner is to take your business elsewhere. But most folks here are too careless to flip over an item at the store to see where it¡¯s made before the buy it. You don¡¯t need laws. You just need a consistent message: stop buying stuff made in China and eventually if people listen and they stop buying they¡¯re crap China will quit sending low-quality garbage here and taking your money. Don¡¯t believe me? Try to find me a Peugeot that¡¯s still on the road here in the US.
Jan 19, 20115:36pm EST--
