Kirin, China Resources set up China drinks venture
2011-01-24 07:29:00.0
Kirin, China Resources set up China drinks venture | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Kirin, China Resources set up China drinks venture
Thu, Jan 27 2011
Thu, Jan 27 2011
Thu, Jan 27 2011
Thu, Jan 27 2011
Thu, Jan 27 2011
Mon  EST
) and China's top beer maker China Resources Enterprise (
Kirin is trying to diversify its operations and grow outside its saturated home market in Japan, while China Resources wants to strengthen its mainland China offerings to take advantage of the nation's rapid growth in consumption.
Kirin will invest about $400 million to take a 40 percent stake in the venture, which will produce non-alcoholic drinks such as bottled water and other soft drinks. China Resources will hold the rest, the two firms said on Monday.
The joint venture will enable Kirin to tap the China Resources' sales network of over of 3,000 stores to help the firm's foray into new product categories and increase its presence in China, Kirin President Senji Miyake said at a briefing in Tokyo.
Its sales are expected to reach 6 billion yuan ($911 million) in five years, or three times the sales of China Resources' existing packaged water business, which stood at 1.8 billion yuan in 2010, Frank Lai, chief financial officer of China Resources Enterprise, told a news conference in Hong Kong.
"The talks with the China Resources since the beginning have been about working together in the non-alcoholic segment --talks about beer did not come up," Miyake said.
China Resources, which produces China's top beer brand, Snow, with SABMiller Plc (
), is working to expand its retail network and buy brewery assets in China.
In November, China Resources said it would buy a 45 percent stake in Hangzhou Xihi Beer, as it aims to strengthen its position in China's market where there is growing competition from other brands including Tsingtao Brewery Co Ltd (
Japan's beer market shrank by a little over 15 percent in terms of shipment volumes over the past decade, forcing the brewers like Kirin, which vies for the top spot in Japan with Asahi Breweries (
), to cut costs and look abroad.
Kirin has taken stakes in Singapore's Fraser & Neave (
), San Miguel Brewery SMB.PS of the Philippines and Australia National Foods and Dairy Farmers, as well as Lion Nathan, in hopes of securing overseas growth drivers.
Kirin's shares gained 1.1 percent in Tokyo to 1,107 yen on Monday, while trading of China Resources Enterprise shares was suspended in Hong Kong. The companies made the announcement after the stock markets closed. ($1=6.583 yuan) (Additional reporting by Taiga Uranaka and Tim Kelly in Tokyo, Donny Kwok in Hong Kong; Editing by Chris Gallagher and Jane Merriman)
