Obama presses China's Hu on currency, rights
2011-01-19 17:22:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama pressed Chinese President Hu Jintao on Wednesday to let the value of China's currency rise and delivered a firmer message on U.S. concerns over Beijing's human rights record.
Amid the pomp of a state visit, both leaders spoke glowingly about cooperation but made no major breathroughs on a range of disputes over trade and security that have strained relations over the past year.
"We've shown that the United States and China, when we cooperate, can receive substantial benefits," Obama said with Hu at his side at a White House news conference.
But Obama zeroed in quickly on one of the most sensitive disputes between the world's two biggest economic powers, telling Hu that China's yuan remains undervalued. Beijing's critics say its currency practices hurt the competitiveness of U.S. business by making its exports artificially cheap.
"There needs to be further adjustment in the exchange rate," Obama said bluntly.
Hu listened to Obama's complaints about the yuan during the news conference but pointedly did not comment, giving no clues about China's intentions on the hot-button issue.
Obama took a more assertive stance on human rights than he did during his 2009 visit to Beijing, when critics at home said he was too deferential to his hosts. Still, he was measured in his words to avoid antagonizing China's communist leadership.
"I repeated to President Hu we have some core views as Americans about the universality of certain rights, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom of assembly, that we think are very important and that transcend cultures," he said.
"I have been very candid with President Hu about these issues," he added.
Obama also urged Chinese dialogue with representatives of the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan spiritual leader widely admired internationally but regarded by Beijing as part of an illegitimate separatist cause.
Hu insisted China had made "enormous progress" on human rights but acknowledged "a lot still needs to be done," although he gave no specifics.
Obama said he and Hu agreed that North Korea must avoid "further provocations" and that U.N. sanctions on Iran must be fully enforced. U.S. officials have sometimes chided Beijing for not doing enough to help rein in Tehran and Pyongyang, whose nuclear ambitions worry the United States and its allies.
In a joint statement, Obama and Hu appeared to set aside recent rancor over North Korea, which caused alarm with the shelling of a South Korean island and claims of new nuclear advances. But it offered no new ways to contain Pyongyang.
Obama acknowledged the yuan had edged up against the dollar in recent months but said it was not enough. "So we'll continue to look for the value of China's currency to be increasingly driven by the market, which will help ensure that no nation has an undue economic advantage," he said.
In the joint statement, China said it remained committed to reforming its exchange rate policies and agreed to seek ways to create more balanced trade flows between the two countries.
Beijing has so far resisted demands for faster appreciation of its currency --a move that could help lower China's trade surplus with the United States, which Washington puts at $270 billion.
Congressional pressure is building for legislation to punish Beijing over its trade and currency policies. A group of 84 lawmakers urged Obama in a letter on Wednesday to tell Hu that "America's patience is near an end."
Welcoming Hu in a carefully choreographed ceremony, Obama hailed the event as a chance to demonstrate that the countries "have an enormous stake in each other's success."
Speaking later to a group of U.S. and Chinese business leaders, Obama pressed for a level playing field with China on trade, while Hu made the same appeal for Chinese companies operating in the United States.
The two countries used the summit to unveil a series of deals, including China's purchase of 200 Boeing aircraft. U.S. officials said the $45 billion in deals would support an estimated 235,000 American jobs.
China may hope the deals can help soothe the U.S. public's ire over job losses and trade deficits.
Obama told reporters some progress was made on thorny trade issues. He said China pledged improved U.S. access to bid for Chinese government contracts, estimated at some $80 billion annually, but more work was needed on intellectual property.
Hu was greeted with a 21-gun salute, honor guards and the playing of both national anthems in a show meant to convey recognition of China's growing international stature.
Hu had been expected to raise his worries about U.S. economic and security policies, including arms sales to Taiwan, the self-ruled island that China deems a breakaway province.
Beijing also wants the Obama administration's reassurances that China's big holdings of U.S. government debt are not threatened because of what some critics describe as loose U.S. fiscal policies.
(Additional reporting by Jeff Mason, Ross Colvin, Caren Bohan, David Morgan and Steve Holland in Washington, Ben Blanchard and Sui-Lee Wee in Beijing; Editing by John O'Callaghan and Frances Kerry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The currency and balance of trade issue is ridiculous. The current state of balance of trade is a manifestation of the current economic conditions. The idea of the invisible hand is that we interfere less not more. America is clearly not the believer in capitalism it makes itself out to be. If China is now a large manufacturer (the world¡¯s largest) and America is not (America manufactures very little now), it stands to reason that America will buy more from China than China will from the US. Perhaps America stands for capitalism only when the balance of payments and trade stand in its favor.
Jan 18, 20119:56pm EST--
Decades of trade surpluses in China courtesy of the USA must stop now! The USA may need to pay a little more for things but that¡¯s just a soon-to-be necessary fact of life. There are only two choices: 1. Print more money and punish all of our trading partners (Unfair to most of them) or¡­ 2. Target the actual problem by enacting the same policies against China that they have used against us for decades. We need to start with grossly unreasonable import tariffs on anything coming from China which is the same that they have been doing to the USA for a long, long time. The Chinese and greedy investors that setup in China keep telling us that we will suffer by not continuing to sell our souls to China in giving them all of our money and houses. Ha! Since when does the customer suffer when they stop buying from the vendor? It¡¯s the vendor that goes out of business! There are far too many other places the USA can go to for low cost goods¡­
Jan 18, 201110:20pm EST--
There are clearly rules in the WTO which can be used to balance our trade with China. As 1WorldDone above points out, China has a huge hidden tax on all sales abroad as well. The Government has an exchange rate internally that gives the Chinese business only 1/2 of the dollar¡¯s value in Chinese currency, while the government keeps the other half. Of course the above quoted ¡°invisible hand¡± is punishing China with rapid inflation. Should we add a small (don¡¯t match theirs) tariff on top of that, US purchasing would shift to other countries forcing China to either lay off people and therefore incite riots, or to encourage internal consumption which would then quickly eat up China¡¯s huge production output. On top of that, other third world countries would then start growing their economies and become customers for our products. But you need an economist versed in Capitalistic theory to understand all that, and I am not sure the White House has anyone like that on staff.
Jan 19, 20118:29am EST--
