Senators threaten currency bill ahead of Hu visit
2011-01-17 15:31:00.0
(Reuters) - A group of senators, on the eve of Chinese President Hu Jintao's arrival in the United States, said it was vital that Congress pass legislation to get tough with China over its currency practices.
"There's no bigger step we can take to preserve the American dream and promote job creation, particularly in the manufacturing sector ... than to confront China's manipulation of its currency," Democratic Senator Charles Schumer said.
The message to Hu is "we are fed up with your government's intransigence on currency manipulation. If you refuse to play by the same rules, we will force you to do so," Schumer said in a conference call on a proposed bill to prod China to raise the value of its yuan currency.
Both the Senate and the House of Representatives would have to approve the bill, and President Barack Obama would have to sign it, for it to become law.
Supporters claim wide support for the measure, but previous efforts to pass currency legislation directed at China have failed because of concerns it could trigger retaliation by Beijing, which is the biggest foreign holder of U.S. government debt.
Beijing's undervalued currency gives Chinese companies an unfair price advantage in trade and has acted like "a boot on the throat" of U.S. economic recovery, Schumer said.
In a rare written interview published on Sunday by the Wall Street Journal and the Washington Post, Hu said China had taken steps toward a more flexible exchange rate policy.
In one effort by Beijing to generate goodwill for the trip, representatives of hundreds of Chinese companies will be in the United States this week in conjunction with Hu's visit.
Events are planned in about a half dozen cities including Houston, Boston, Chicago, Minneapolis, Raleigh, North Carolina and Frankfort, Kentucky.
Schumer, who was joined on the call by Senators Debbie Stabenow and Robert Casey, said there was broad bipartisan support in both the Senate and the House of Representatives to pass currency legislation.
However, lawmakers in both chambers have complained for years that China undervalues its currency by as much as 40 percent but have not fully approved legislation that would do something about it.
That was true last year, when the House passed a China currency bill but the Senate failed to act.
The senators' bipartisan bill would require the Treasury Department to investigate "China's manipulation of its currency and actually do something about it," Schumer said.
By also allowing companies to request the Commerce Department impose duties to offset Beijing's exchange rate practices, the bill tells China "we want you to have a level playing field on trade. If you don't we're going to create it ourselves," Stabenow said.
OPEN TRADE, INVESTMENT
But John Frisbie, president of the U.S.-China Business Council, warned passing currency legislation would likely backfire on the United States by inflaming relations and opening the door to retaliation.
"It's counterproductive. It wouldn't help get to the goal of a market-oriented exchange rate," he said.
Chinese companies are interested in investing more in the United States, but many are afraid to dive in because they fear a hostile U.S. reaction even in sectors where there should be no national security problem, Frisbie said.
Meanwhile, U.S. companies remain committed to doing business in China but have growing concerns about a number of Chinese government policies in areas ranging from government procurement to intellectual property rights, he said.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, in a letter to Hu, also urged China to show "a renewed commitment" to move to a more market-oriented exchange rate and to follow through on recent commitments to fight copyright piracy by taking concrete steps to boost use of legal software.
On another issue important to the Montana Democrat, Baucus said he was disappointed that talks aimed at reopening China's market to U.S. beef have not been resolved.
"I urge these negotiations to successfully conclude as quickly as possible. International scientific standards (regarding the safety of U.S. beef) are clear, and there simply is no excuse for China's refusal to abide by them," he said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer and Emily Stephenson; editing by Bill Trott and Sandra Maler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
First note that this comment comes not from a 50 center, but a US citizen. That said, what I¡¯d point out to these senators is that China was not enamored of QE2 by the Fed, but that the process was directed at our economy; not China¡¯s. Likewise, China is managing their currency as carefully as possible to keep their economy from overheating, creating asset bubbles, and disenfranchising large portions of the populace. At that, the yuan is being allowed to appreciate even if incrementally.
Jan 17, 201111:27am EST--
Talk, Talk. I doubt any of these Senators will get up out of their chairs and stand up for anything. Our Congress has a bad case of the sit downs and collect the contributions.
Jan 17, 20112:17pm EST--
Yes, it is time for us to do something about these Manipulators who devalue their currency. It is not just China, India and some other countries does this too to attract foreign investments in their countries. Why would we in America suffer for some countries gaining foreign investments? Why can¡¯t they find their own investments, their own innovations in technology if they are as good as they boast.
Yes, it is time for us to do something about these Manipulators who devalue their currency. It is not just China, India and some other countries does this too to attract foreign investments in their countries. Why would we in America suffer for some countries gaining foreign investments? Why can¡¯t they find their own investments, their own innovations in technology if they are as good as they boast.
This is not a partisan issue, this is an American Issue. The Congress and Senate should unite in this matter and vote unanimously so that China, India and other countries gets the message clear. Stop stealing from America.
Jan 17, 20112:26pm EST--
