Exclusive: GE CEO says equal access in China crucial
2011-01-19 16:32:00.0
(Reuters) - General Electric Co chief executive Jeffrey Immelt said on Wednesday he wants the United States and China to open their borders for truly free trade between the world's top two economies, rather than hiding behind protectionist walls.
"We're not naive or stupid about these things. We really do think a lot about it," the head of the world's largest maker of jet engines and electric turbines said after attending a White House meeting with U.S. President Barack Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao.
"There is a multitude of ways to succeed in China," said Immelt, who this year marks his 10th anniversary at GE's helm.
GE this week signed deals worth some $2 billion to supply electric turbines, railroad locomotives and aircraft components to Chinese companies.
It also agreed to work with Chinese companies on gas and coal-powered turbines in China, on high-speed rail in the United States and formed a joint-venture company with China's AVIC to develop electronics for a new single-aisle commercial jetliner being developed by a Chinese state-owned company.
"We want to make sure we see the evolution of free trade and transparency," Immelt said. "From China, how can they invest more in the United States? How can they grow their companies here? There's a little bit of angst on both sides, but on balance there is comfort that over time a lot of these things will get solved."
Immelt's support of free trade extends to allowing the U.S. government to buy foreign-made goods,
"We don't like 'Buy American' provisions," Immelt said. "We believe in totality of free trade. We think if GE is good enough to compete in China, we should win." He said there should be mutual respect for investment."
(Reporting by Chrystia Freeland and John Crawley in Washington, writing by Scott Malone in Boston, editing by Will Dunham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Nice to see one of our biggest tech and all around corps cozying up to the commies. Add these p%^&*(¡¯s to my ¡°NO BUY LIST¡±. They¡¯ve trashed NBC and now it¡¯s on to the CHICOMS. Adios.
Jan 19, 20118:30pm EST--
10 years at the helm of GE, feels like 100. This man has led the destruction of one of America¡¯s great firms. The brand is completey tarnished. The stock is one of the worst performers in the S&P 500 sine he took over in September 2001. Yet he still is quoted as an authority. Just another tired liberal elitist wrecking ball not unlike his ilk the POTUS.
Jan 19, 20118:41pm EST--
Successfully running GE is like successfully riding a bike with training wheels. Run it without a constant flow of taxpayer subsidies and bailouts, then I¡¯ll be impressed.
Jan 19, 201110:05pm EST--
