List of guests shrinks for Iranian nuclear tour
2011-01-14 13:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia and China will not join a weekend tour of Iranian nuclear sites, the Islamic state's envoy to the U.N. atomic watchdog confirmed on Friday, adding to a growing number of countries which have rejected Tehran's offer.
The news will be welcomed in Western capitals, which had dismissed Iran's invitation to selected ambassadors accredited to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as a bid to divide the major powers ahead of talks in Istanbul next week.
Ali Asghar Soltanieh, Iran's IAEA ambassador, said the trip would go ahead as planned and that he was "very pleased," saying seven ambassadors would fly to Tehran on Friday evening, including those of Egypt, Cuba, Syria, Algeria and Venezuela.
Asked whether the Chinese and Russian ambassadors would go to Iran, Soltanieh told Reuters "They are not coming ... Their decision is respected."
In Geneva earlier in the day, Switzerland's foreign minister said it and all other "like-minded" countries had rejected Iran's invitation to visit its Natanz uranium enrichment site and the Arak heavy water reactor plant on Saturday and Sunday.
The European Union refused Iran's offer last week, saying it was the task of U.N. nuclear inspectors to carry out such visits. Tehran described its invitation as a goodwill gesture before talks with major powers in Istanbul on January 21-22.
On Thursday, China effectively also turned down the invitation while Russia said the visit could not replace IAEA inspections or negotiations between Tehran and the six big powers.
Iran snubbed the United States, Britain, France and Germany by not inviting their envoys, and those taking part in the trip will now be mainly non-aligned developing countries.
Iran has portrayed the tour as a sign of openness about its nuclear activities, saying it has nothing to hide -- though the IAEA has urged Iran to stop limiting access for its inspectors so that they can verify the program is solely peaceful.
Western diplomats have dismissed the tour as an attempt to split the powers -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain, France and Germany -- and distract attention from their concerns about Iran's uranium enrichment and heavy-water program.
Natanz and the incomplete Arak reactor are at the heart of a long-running international dispute over Iran's nuclear program, which Tehran says has peaceful aims but the West suspects is designed to develop a weapons capability.
Soltanieh said the envoys taking the tour represented more than 120 countries, as they included representatives of the Non-Aligned Movement and the G77, both grouping mainly developing nations.
"I wish of course we could have our friends from Europe, Russia, China to join this group," he said. "They should have used this unique opportunity to join us."
Soltanieh did not mention Brazil and Turkey, which diplomats have said were also invited, but which have also apparently turned down the invitation. Cuba and Venezuela are allies of Iran, while Turkey and Brazil have tried to mediate in Tehran's standoff with the big powers.
Iran organized a similar visit in 2007, inviting only developing-nation diplomats.
"We declined the invitation. All the like-minded countries have declined the invitation and that's it," Calmy-Rey said.
A Western diplomat said in Vienna: "Iran's publicity stunt was a big failure. The world will remain steadfast in its demands that Iran comply with its international obligations."
Several U.N. Security Council resolutions have urged Iran to open up fully to the IAEA to defuse mistrust in Tehran's stance that it is enriching uranium only for electricity and other peaceful purposes, not for nuclear weapons.
Expectations of a breakthrough at next week's meeting in Istanbul are low after a first round of talks in Geneva last month failed to make substantial progress.
(Additional reporting by Stephanie Nebehay in Geneva; editing by Tim Pearce)
