China has little choice but to buy U.S. dollar: CIC exec
2011-01-15 06:15:00.0
(Reuters) - China should not worry about being too heavily invested in the dollar and U.S. government debt, because its dependence is not unique in a world with few alternatives, a senior official at China's sovereign fund said.
Wang Jianxi, the chief risk officer at China Investment Corporation (CIC) which manages $300 billion, said on Saturday the market for U.S. Treasuries is the world's most liquid and the U.S. government is a credible borrower.
"We don't have to complain about the risk of buying U.S. dollars and Treasuries and the need to invest in other countries," Wang told an investment forum, adding that the views were his own.
"Investing in other countries does not necessarily make our investment less risky," he said.
China is the world's biggest foreign holder of U.S. Treasuries, with a third of its $2.85 trillion in foreign exchange reserves invested in U.S. government debt.
But Wang argued that China is not the only country reliant on the dollar, listing sovereign wealth funds in Abu Dhabi, Norway and Singapore as other big buyers of dollar-denominated assets.
His remarks come as China President Hu Jintao gets ready for a visit to Washington next week, when the two world powers will try to find common ground in bilateral ties, which are complicated by a sensitive creditor-debtor relationship.
In a bid to limit China's vulnerability to a sharply weaker dollar, senior Chinese officials have campaigned for years for a an alternative reserve currency.
It is also practical for China to invest the bulk of its reserves in the U.S. currency because global trade in commodities, energy and metals are settled in dollars, he said.
"There is little choice but to invest a large portion of foreign reserves in U.S. dollars and Treasuries," Wang said.
(Reporting by Koh Gui Qing, editing by Jane Baird)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
In spite of whatsoever individual view of the author, China will also have compulsorily little choice other than to explore for its investments in sovereign debts of other countries to spread its risk by not repeating the blunder of going on accumulating all its eggs in one basket, till such time an alternative to reserve currency other than US dollar gets evolved in the global arena. Otherwise China must prepare itself for the depreciated return of its funds as the time passes!
Jan 15, 201111:35am EST--
Okay, let¡¯s borrow and print even more!
Jan 16, 20113:41am EST--
China¡¯s investments could still in danger even if they spread the risk by buying the sovereign debt of many countries. When mortgage-backed debt lost its value, people who had their investments spread across more than one mutual fund thought they were more protected from risk than someone who had all their money in one fund. If sovereign debt or municipal debt suddenly goes bad and it becomes fashionable for the debtors to declare insolvency, China may rue the subsequent cascade of unfortunate events.
Jan 16, 20116:15am EST--
