China, Korea moves underscore rising food prices
2011-01-13 09:08:00.0
(Reuters) - China dumped plans to import several million tonnes of expensive corn in 2011 and South Korea unveiled cuts in import tariffs on some products, underscoring the dilemma over how to tackle rising food prices.
In India, where vegetable prices have risen more than 70 percent in the past year, the finance minister said the government would unveil measures later on Thursday to combat inflation.
However, a rally in grains prices after a U.S. report on Wednesday warned of dwindling global supplies suggested further price pressures may be in the pipeline.
World food prices hit a record high in December after adverse weather affected crops, the UN's food agency said in a report last week that raised concerns about inflation, protectionism and social unrest -- factors that contributed to the 2008 food crisis.
While most analysts doubt the world is heading for a crisis similar to 2008, when food prices spiked to fire up inflation and trade deficits blew out, a rise in oil prices is also looking menacing.
London Brent crude at close to $100 a barrel is trading at its highest price since 2008, when oil hit record highs and contributed to the inflation spike.
Wheat prices rose 47 percent last year, corn more than 50 percent and U.S. soybeans by 34 percent. The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) said in its report key grains prices could rise further, a view underlined by a U.S. report published on Wednesday.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture report reduced estimates for U.S. corn and soybean harvests, trimmed its corn and soy output forecast for drought-hit Argentina and cuts its outlook for wheat production in flood-hit Australia.
The rise in food prices so far has led to differing responses from governments, pointing to the difficulty of how to handle the issue.
For China, corn prices are just too high, so it has canned a proposal to import millions of tonnes of the grain in 2011, two industry sources with knowledge of the plan said on Thursday.
The initial Chinese proposal had been drawn up as a way to combat food inflation, a worry for Beijing because China's food inflation is running in double digits.
It has drawn down state food stocks to increase domestic supplies and keep a lid on prices, a measure that had also raised expectations in world food markets of increased Chinese demand.
The country's rising currency is also fuelling expectations in commodity markets of higher import demand.
South Korea, on the other hand, unveiled measures on Thursday to try to calm prices by reducing import tariffs on some items, including fish and powdered milk.
The central bank also raised interest rates on Thursday to combat what it said was a growing inflation threat, following a rate rise in Thailand on Wednesday, and the government froze electricity and rail fares.
In another response, Pakistan signed deals to sell surplus wheat stocks for the first time in three years to take advantage of higher prices.
India also promised to announce anti-inflation measures, which local media said would include a ban on wheat product exports and trading in some commodities.
Data earlier showed that India's food inflation pulled back slightly from a year high of more than 18 percent to just below 17 percent.
India's main price measure, the wholesale price index, showed inflation at 7.48 percent in November, which analysts said would prompt the central bank this month to raise interest rates.
India's food inflation is the highest among major economies in Asia and is an issue particularly sensitive to the government because roughly two out of every five Indians live on less than $1.25 a day, the World Bank's measure of poverty.
Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee called on Thursday for calm, saying: "We have analyzed the situation. We have indicated what further steps we are going to take. We have also indicated there should not be any unnecessary panic."
Relieving some of the pressure in India, onion prices dropped nearly 16 percent on the country's largest wholesale market after new crop arrivals.
However, onions, used widely in Indian cooking, are still more than double the price of a year earlier.
(Additional reporting by Reuters bureaux; Writing by Neil Fullick; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
While increased food prices mean millions of impoverished people in other countries will go hungry this year, these inflated food prices are already priced into western products from the 2008 surge. Manufacturers and distributors of food in the west refused to lower prices after the 2008 spike and have been reaping huge profits during the recession. This is actually a late Christmas present for the west. Increased inflation pressures on ¡°manufacturing countries¡± will force some of them (China) to re-evaluate their currency practices. Another trillion dollar printing bing by the US, oh say around April 1st, will have a huge effect on any country that has been cheating the books. While it will cause the true value of the dollar to drop by 1% or so against a country like Germany, it will be closer to 10% against any book cooking Asian tiger. Expect this to be a record growth year in countries like Vietnam, Bangladesh and the Philippines (if legislators in Manila can keep their hands off profits). While China should be hit the most. Their is no way the government can combat inflation without raising the value of the RMB, importing expensive food, curbing loan rates further and/or establishing rigid socialist price guidelines. Yes Ben Burnake is a genius. Finding ways to impact China¡¯s economy indirectly is wonderful for us.
Jan 13, 201111:02pm EST--
There would be plenty of food if there weren¡¯t so many people ; )
Jan 13, 201111:10pm EST--
I have been living in China for 7 years, and the food inflation is crazy. As an example, a drink you buy in the bottle used to be about 1 rmb per bottle; now it is sometimes up to 5 rmb per bottle. The meat prices are even worse. When people claim the US is declining and China is rising, they fail to see the many different problems China faces. The chinese are the worst at seeing these problems.
Jan 13, 201111:10pm EST--
