China's Xinjiang says terrorist ax, knife and arson attack kills 21
2013-04-24 14:30:00.0
(Reuters) - A confrontation involving axes, knives, at least one gun and ending with the burning down of a house left 21 people dead in China's troubled far-west region of Xinjiang, a government spokeswoman said on Wednesday, calling it a "terrorist attack".
It was the deadliest violence in the region since July 2009, when Xinjiang's capital, Urumqi, was rocked by clashes between majority Han Chinese and minority Uighurs that killed nearly 200 people.
Nine residents, six police and six ethnic Uighurs were killed in Tuesday's drama, said Hou Hanmin, spokeswoman for the Xinjiang government.
Hou did not name any group, but China has blamed previous attacks in energy-rich Xinjiang - strategically located on the borders of Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and Central Asia - on Islamic separatists who want to establish an independent East Turkestan.
Many Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim people native to Xinjiang, chafe at Chinese controls on their religion, language and culture.
Three "community workers" were patrolling a neighborhood of Bachu County, known as Maralbexi by Uighurs, in Kashgar after a tip-off that there were "suspicious people" in a private house, Hou said.
One of the three used a phone to call for help after they found a number of knives, resulting in their being killed by 14 Uighur "rioters" in the house, Hou said.
"The community people were just conducting regular checks, but the action from the rioters was planned and well prepared," Hou said. "It's certainly a terrorist attack."
Several police and other "community workers" came in different groups to the home where the Uighurs used axes and large knives to slash the police officers and workers, Hou said.
Only one police officer was armed with a gun, she said.
The battle ended with the gang members burning down the house, killing the rest of the people there, Hou said. Eight people had been detained.
Dilxat Raxit, spokesman for the exiled World Uyghur Congress, said the violence was sparked by the shooting and killing of a young Uighur by "Chinese armed personnel", prompting the Uighurs to retaliate.
"The information that we've received is that from last night till this morning, the authorities have flooded the streets with armed men," Dilxat Raxit said by phone from Sweden where he is based.
"After the incident, the locals' mobile phone and internet connections were cut off. Today it has recovered slightly, though not completely."
"The current situation in Xinjiang is good, but a small group of terrorist forces is still trying every possible means to disturb and destroy the present stability and trend of development in Xinjiang," Hua told reporters.
(Reporting by Sally Huang, Terril Yue Jones, Sui-Lee Wee, Michael Martina and Beijing newsroom; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
One of bin Laden¡¯s demands was for the US to force China out of Xinjiang in western China. A few months ago, there was an attack in Kashgar by Uighur insurgents from Pakistan, and a few people were killed. This action is similar except that the authorities acted on information and may have disrupted a more serious attack. It will be interesting to learn if today¡¯s insurgents received training in other countries. Recently, China, Russia, and four of the ¡°stans¡± in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization or SCO agreed to watch Afghanistan after the US leaves in 2014. They will spend their renminbis and rubles to deal with the problems, allowing the US and NATO to save dollars and euros. Their may use tactics that are not as ¡°polite¡± as those of the West, but they may be more effective because they must succeed. They live in the region.
Apr 24, 20134:27pm EDT--
This is the system China has and wants for all the current regions it has occupied and continues to occupy. As seen above, their are plenty of apologists for imperialism and the expansion of a fascist state, through coercion, threats and repression. This instance of violence is only the tip of a very large iceberg of ethnic and cultural hatred through governmental thuggery and policy. China needs to abandon it¡¯s colonial possessions, just as the Europeans did in the last century. Instead of continuing it¡¯s policy of racial superiority and hatred.
Apr 24, 201312:43am EDT--
@Free_Pacific As we can see above, the Chinese also fail to mention that the region was independent until 1949 (Eastern Turkestan Republic) so the ¡°terrorists¡± are actually fighting for independence. The friction is caused by hordes of Han Chinese moving in and plundering the regions resources, taking the land, and making the indigenous population a minority in their own land. Much the same policy is being used in Tibet. Get the picture from here -> http://www1.american.edu/ted/ice/xinjiang.htm or from here -> http://www.rferl.org/content/Chinas_Uyghurs__A_Minority_In_Their_Own_Land/1772366.html
Apr 25, 20132:00am EDT--
