Gates plays down any internal China rift
2011-01-12 08:57:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates on Wednesday played down the possibility of any rift between China's civilian leadership and its military about strengthening ties with the U.S. armed forces.
"What came across to me is that both the civilian and the military leadership seem determined to carry this relationship further, and build upon it," Gates told reporters during a visit to China's Great Wall.
China conducted its first-ever test flight of a new stealth fighter jet on Tuesday, a demonstration of the country's growing military might that partly overshadowed the U.S. defense chief's bridge-building visit.
A Pentagon official said China's President Hu Jintao and civilians leaders appeared unaware of the test when Gates brought it up at a meeting on Tuesday. That raised questions about a possible rift within China, where the military is meant to be subordinate to the ruling Communist Party.
Asked about whether he saw a division, Gates said: "I don't think I talked about a rift as much as I did the fact, the simple fact ... the civilian leadership seemed surprised by the test and assured me that it had nothing to do with my visit."
China told the United States on Wednesday the test flight should not be seen as a threat, reiterating it had no intention of challenging U.S. military might in the Pacific.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
hmmm, I wonder what is better ¨C one one-party controlled authoritarian regime or a militarily controlled regime??? Or, is there any difference??? I am guessing, for the world¡¯s sake, China stands a better chance of reforming if the military took over for a period of time and slowly gave the country back to the people though an election. As it stands now, I don¡¯t see the one-party system ever loosening up any kind of political control. In fact, I have been witnessing more and more tightening of controls if anything. So, after 60 years of one-party communist control, I¡¯d be happy to see what the military can do for China in terms of running the country.
Jan 12, 201110:05am EST--
Jan 12, 201110:53am EST--
yes, exactly! Actually, it would be better if the Chinese people themselves demanded more rights, but the PLA might have a better chance. Just, anything other than the CCP would be good. I have this dream of the PLA arresting all the political leaders of China and ushering in democratic reforms. That would be so cool. The Chinese people would rejoice as well when they can cast a ballot for whom they really want to see as representing them. It would be an amazing and world shattering event that would yield long term peace for the planet.
Jan 12, 201111:51am EST--
