China says shares U.S. goals on Korea as hotline reopens
2011-01-12 16:35:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the United States share "broad interests and goals" for the Korean peninsula, a senior Chinese diplomat said on Wednesday as U.S. officials warned that Washington increasingly views North Korea as a direct threat.
The Chinese diplomat, Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai, also repeated calls to restart six-party talks on North Korea's nuclear disarmament. His comments came ahead of President Hu Jintao's state visit to the United States from January 18 to 21.
President Barack Obama is likely to urge Hu to increase pressure on North Korea, which triggered regional security concerns last year after the two attacks against South Korea and revelations of advances in its nuclear program.
"China and the United States share broad interests and goals on issues about the (Korean) peninsula," Cui told a news conference in Beijing. "Both countries believe we must protect the peace and stability of the peninsula."
Gates said because of its nuclear arms and ballistic missile programs, Pyongyang was increasingly becoming a direct threat to the United States, a concern underscored by the top uniformed U.S. military officer on Wednesday.
"This is an evolving threat not just to the region but to the United States specifically," Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters in Washington, noting that North Korea's leader has "not been shy about provocations."
"It's a really dangerous time. ... This capability that he is developing is becoming more and more dangerous so that potential provocations could become more and more catastrophic," Mullen said, adding that China had a "great responsibility" to help calm the situation.
Beijing sees the resumption of six-party talks, last held in 2009, as a key to resolving the latest standoff between the two Koreas, which are still technically at war after signing only a truce in 1953.
The rival Koreas engaged on Wednesday for the first time in weeks via a reopened border hotline. The North, which has appealed almost daily for talks since the start of the year, proposed discussions about reopening tourist links, severed after the shooting of a South Korean tourist in 2008.
Seoul says its impoverished neighbor is only reaching out for talks in order to win aid and financial support, and that it will only hold "real talks" about last year's two deadly attacks against the South.
Relations between the two plummeted to their lowest level in years after the sinking of a South Korean warship and the shelling of a South Korean island last year, which killed a total of 50 people.
The North denies the South's claim it torpedoed the ship, and said it attacked the island only after South Korean shells landed in its waters.
President Lee Myung-bak's government, under pressure over its perceived weak response, has vowed to hit back hard the next time it is attacked, promising to retaliate with air power and bombs. Washington and Beijing have urged restraint on both sides, worried the situation could spiral out of control.
Since the start of the year, the secretive North has reached out to its neighbor, substituting its war-like rhetoric from December with a series of peaceful overtures.
Seoul, however, views Pyongyang's offer for talks as insincere, and says the North must first take actions that account for last year's attacks and show sincerity in following through on its denuclearization pledges.
North Korea has previously rejected discussions on its nuclear arms development in dialogue with South Korea, saying the activity is aimed at deterring a U.S. invasion.
On Wednesday, the South gave some ground by agreeing to reopen a Red Cross communications hotline at the border, shut down after the sinking of the Cheonan corvette last year.
(Additional reporting by Danbee Moon in Seoul and David Alexander in Washington; Editing by Miral Fahmy and Todd Eastham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Bottom line North Korea has lots of cash but won¡¯t feed its kids. The North is like a crack addict only its hooked on the A bomb so it can go back to demanding stuff. Maybe its a Viagra thing the Iron willed old man has for missiles. Would anyone in their right mind actually believe a promises from someone who is willing to starve a nation in order gain respect. The ancient Chinese secret is that Pyongyang threw in the Tao years ago. It is interesting that the Kim ona¡¯s have dropped out of the spotlight and that the faceless ¡°Pyongyang¡± is talking for the military actions that caused them to lose much face. Want to bet that it is so the press disassociates the die damn it duo from the political rhetoric aimed at getting something for throwing a tantrum.
Jan 12, 20116:44pm EST--
