Treasury's Geithner says China needs faster yuan rise
2011-01-12 16:11:00.0
Treasury's Geithner says China needs faster yuan rise | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Treasury's Geithner says China needs faster yuan rise
Wed, Jan 12 2011
Wed, Jan 12 2011
Wed, Jan 12 2011
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner speaks about the future of the U.S.-China economic relationship at the School of Advanced International Studies in Washington, January 12, 2011. Credit: Reuters/Kevin Lamarque
Wed  EST
Offering a carrot-and-stick approach ahead of a state visit by Chinese President Hu Jintao, Geithner laid out his view of each sides' priorities and said a failure by Beijing to allow for more currency appreciation could damage China's economy.
"China still closely manages the level of its exchange rate and restricts the ability of capital to move in and out of the country," Geithner said. "These policies have the effect of keeping the Chinese currency substantially undervalued."
He described China as focused on taking greater advantage of U.S. investment opportunities, gaining easier terms of market access and being able to buy U.S.-made high tech goods.
"We are willing to make progress on these issues, but our ability to move on these issues will depend of course on how much progress we see from China," Geithner said in an address delivered at Johns Hopkins' School of Advanced International Studies.
Since unshackling the yuan from a peg to the U.S. dollar in June, China's currency has risen about 3 percent. But Geithner pointed out that because inflation is higher in China than in the United States, the yuan is rising even more rapidly on an inflation-adjusted basis.
For that reason, Beijing would be better off letting its currency rise in value now to cap inflation since its real value was already rising in a readjustment that Geithner posed as inevitable.
"The most important thing to understand is it is going to happen. There is no alternative path," Geithner said. "The only choice for China is how it happens, and what mix happens through inflation and through the exchange rate itself."
Washington wants Beijing to allow the yuan to rise more rapidly to cool its exports, narrow its large trade surplus with the United States, and shrink its foreign exchange reserves.
China counters that U.S. policy is to blame for economic imbalances, and has voiced concern that Washington's staggering $1.3 trillion budget deficit poses a risk that could destabilize the global economy.
Beijing laid down its own marker on Wednesday ahead of the January 19 talks between Hu and U.S. President Barack Obama, voicing concern about China's investments in U.S. debt. China tops the list of U.S. foreign creditors.
Beijing would like to see a "positive" statement from the United States about the security of its dollar-denominated assets, Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai said, offering a reminder that the United States relies on borrowing from China to finance its day-to-day operations.
He conceded, though, that the U.S. government must "restore fiscal responsibility" and said that includes cutting spending and reforming the tax system to encourage more investment.
Geithner stressed the value to the United States of its dealings with China's fast-growing economy, pointing out that exports to China will top $100 billion this year -- twice the rate of exports to the rest of the world.
But he complained that theft of U.S. intellectual property was rampant in China and said U.S. companies face unfair barriers that Beijing must dismantle to ensure "a more level playing field for U.S. companies that compete with Chinese companies in China, in the United States and around the world."
(Additional reporting by David Lawder, Paul Eckert, Emily Kaiser and Rachelle Younglai, Editing by Leslie Adler
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Little Timmy wants China to devalue the dollar for him so Obama can continue to spend worthless Fed ※money§. Ponzi Scheme doesn＊t even begin to describe the fraud.Communist Chinese have better financial solvency and money than the USA! And Timmy is in a jam but took everyone else down the rat hole with him.
Jan 12, 201111:12am EST--
Geithner is as wrong about the yuan as he was about TARP and monetary policy 每 probably because he studied how to extract money from deals at Goldman Sachs instead macroeconomics at a reputable university. That＊s why he advocates the common knowledge that a Yuan revalued upwards against the dollar would somehow help the United States economy. What would happen depends of the elasticity of demand 每 economist speak for the effect of a changed relationship wherein the Yuan revalues upwards so it takes more dollars to buy each Yuan 每 thus making the chinese products cost more dollars. The common knowledge view is that this would cause Americans to buy more at home instead of from China. But think about, for example, what would happen if Walmart had to pay 25% more dollars to buy what it now buys in China. Walmart would then have to raise its prices by 25% to keep covering its costs. What if Americans only cut their Walmart purchases of Chines goods by 10%? That is the likely outcome 每 so as a result of Geithner＊s ※help§ prices would be 25% higher at Walmart and our balance of trade deficit would grow by another 15%. In other words, Geithner screws the public once again. Moreover, it is highly unlikely that in the long run that the 10% reduction in chinese production would move to the United States. Instead Walmart would probably buy from Thailand or India or whereever 每 leaving us to permanently pay higher prices for the same stuff. Higher prices for some items while the prices for the rest of the stuff we buy remain the same means the average price people pay for goods and service (the cost of living) will rise. Higher general price levels is otherwise known as inflation. So Geithner in his uneducated naivete is advocating a policy of increased trade deficits and a higher cost of living. Obama should have promoted him to the Supreme Court wherein he would be equally qualified to serve since he also did not study law.
Jan 12, 201111:54am EST--
It is impossible to overemphasize that companies and corporations are not ※American§ or not. They have behaved in predatory but rational ways in responding to our grossly overvalued currency. It is the responsibility of the Government to look after the interests of the American people. Those are human beings, flesh and blood rather than paper charters of any kind, who supposedly have self-rule and freedom. Not small, single digit sub-populations, however favored by a past generation, but the majority of American people. Devalue the currency and devalue it now. We do not need Chinese permission to do so. Crank up the printing presses until they let our people go. Get out of the Middle East. We have proved ourselves inept and incompetent and subject to gross manipulation by foreign governments which have more influence on American foreign policy than the American people do. Who cares if we cannot borrow money to invade other remote countries? So much the better.
Jan 12, 201111:55am EST--
