U.S. business group urges gradual change in China yuan
2011-01-11 17:07:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States should not press China for an immediate sharp rise in the value of its yuan currency because that could be bad for both countries, the leader of a top U.S. business group said on Tuesday.
"While the currency thing is a real challenge, if we were to force the Chinese to adjust, they would simply drop the price of the products and that would have a more negative effect," U.S. Chamber of Commerce President Thomas Donohue said in an interview with Reuters Insider.
"The issue on the currency should be done in an evolutionary way. It should continue to happen, but a revolutionary change in currency will probably not help either party," Donohue said.
U.S. concern over China's currency practices are expected to be high on the agenda when Chinese President Hu Jintao visits Washington next week.
Beijing has argued that a rapid rise in the value of the yuan could create economic instability without having a major effect toward reducing the huge U.S. trade deficit with China. It has urged patience, while letting the yuan rise about 3 percent in value since mid-June.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has opposed efforts in the U.S. Congress to pass legislation to deal with the issue, fearing it could spur Chinese retaliation.
In a speech earlier on Tuesday, Donohue said China needed to make more progress soon on the currency issue and a number of other trade concerns.
"But starting a trade war with one of our fastest growing exports markets is not the answer," Dohohue said.
Donohue said other trade concerns are "in many ways more important" than China's currency practices.
Those include China's lax intellectual property protections and discriminatory indigenous innovation policies that favor domestic companies at the expense of foreign ones, he said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Of course, if you have bet your company on a strong dollar and closed all your US facilities, you would lose a lot of money if the dollar became cheap. How sad. Those who invested in the USA will do just fine, as will the American people. Devalue the dollar immediately! How about 50% ??
Jan 11, 201111:33pm EST--
txgadfly¡­ AMEN! The only people against pushing China for a fair exchange rate are the ones directly invested in China because they have a lot to lose. Some patriots THEY are! Doing the math is very simple¡­ The US in no way can continue to send billions of dollars out of the country without having it come back. There MUST be a realignment of currencies to get trade back into balance and it would be even better if the US devalued enough to start running a surplus due to renewed interest in investing in OUR emerging market. With everyone in the US in hock up to their eyeballs owing to the rest of the world that won¡¯t buy our manufactured goods, we deserve a chance to reverse this losing game. Please Mr. Bernanke! Print lots more money and just deposit equal amounts into every American taxpayer¡¯s bank account so we can pay off our bills to these no good foreigners once and for all!!!
Jan 12, 201112:48am EST--
America has to be careful what they wish for because the consequences of the action could cause other unintended effects, like for example Chinese yuan becoming strong and replacing the US dollars as the world reserve currency and making it more expensive for US borrowings that have been getting a free ride on US dollar being the reserve currency to borrow cheaply thus far. To date America is sitting on a US$14 trillion government debt paying an annual interest of just US$200 billions or more, on ultra low interest rates. If the interest rates were to rise to match what the PIIGS countries in Europe are paying, then the interest payment could easily balloon to US$800 billion. This does not include the projected annual budget deficit of US$1 trillion or more adding into the already huge debt burden, naturally the interest payments will increase. Needless to say the consequences will be devastating, as the total government tax receipts annually is only US$2 trillion.
America has to be careful what they wish for because the consequences of the action could cause other unintended effects, like for example Chinese yuan becoming strong and replacing the US dollars as the world reserve currency and making it more expensive for US borrowings that have been getting a free ride on US dollar being the reserve currency to borrow cheaply thus far. To date America is sitting on a US$14 trillion government debt paying an annual interest of just US$200 billions or more, on ultra low interest rates. If the interest rates were to rise to match what the PIIGS countries in Europe are paying, then the interest payment could easily balloon to US$800 billion. This does not include the projected annual budget deficit of US$1 trillion or more adding into the already huge debt burden, naturally the interest payments will increase. Needless to say the consequences will be devastating, as the total government tax receipts annually is only US$2 trillion.
A better way to solve the problem is to introduce austerity and restore fiscal discipline in government spending. Increase savings to channel back into much needed spending in key areas such as education, infrastructure, research and development to compete. Drastically reduce military spendings, and initiate a program to win back the hearts and minds of the Muslim population in the world to reduce incidences of terrorism, and focus on the economy.
Jan 12, 201110:51am EST--
