China seen to be cool on U.S. trade-for-yuan deal
2011-01-13 07:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China will cast a sceptical eye over a U.S. offer to free up trade in high-tech goods and will refuse to be drawn into a bargain to speed up appreciation of its yuan currency, Chinese government advisers and economists said on Thursday.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said on Wednesday that Washington was "willing to make progress" in giving China greater access to the American market and high-tech goods, provided that it saw some give from Beijing on its tightly controlled exchange rate regime.
Chinese officials declined to comment on Geithner's idea, made ahead of Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit next week to the United States, but a series of advisers and analysts said that it was unlikely to jump at a trade-for-currency deal.
"China has never thought about yuan appreciation from such a perspective," said Ding Yifan, deputy head of the World Institute in the Development Research Center, a think-tank under the State Council, or cabinet.
"The Chinese yuan will not rise in a way designed by the United States. Yuan appreciation is a general trend. It is not because the United States wants it," he said.
Washington may, in fact, be too slow in opening the door to American technology, said Tao Xie, an expert on U.S.-China relations at the Beijing Foreign Studies University.
"That means we may not need to make major concessions to Washington about the currency," he said. "If China can get the same level of technology and equipment from Western Europe, why should it bother with the United States?"
China has guided the yuan up by 0.4 percent against the dollar this week, following a well-established pattern of nudging up the currency's value before important political meetings.
With China's trade surplus hitting nearly $200 billion last year and inflation running at its fastest in more than two years, economists believe that more yuan appreciation is needed over the coming year.
"We know that the government has pledged to put the task of fighting inflation at the top of its agenda this year," said Lu Zhengwei, senior economist at Industrial Bank in Shanghai.
"As more and more Chinese households own cars, the impact from higher international crude oil on inflation expectations has increased sharply. I think this is the most important factor behind the sharp appreciation in recent days," he said.
Politics aside, Stephen King, chief economist at HSBC, said China may not want the yuan to strengthen too much as that would be financially costly, shrinking the value of its $2.85 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, the world's largest stockpile.
"A renminbi revaluation is also, by definition, a dollar devaluation," King told reporters at a briefing in Beijing, using the official name for the yuan.
"As the dollar falls a long way against the renminbi, that means that China's foreign exchange reserves in renminbi terms will be worth a lot less."
(Additional reporting by Koh Gui Qing; Writing by Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Kim Coghill)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Just put higher tarrifs on imports from China and use it to pay down the debt to China. It will also bring back jobs to America where goods can be produced here at home again!
Jan 13, 20114:44am EST--
That won¡¯t work Yes China has to trade with us, but as for building they will along with corporation go to the most profitable area to do so. That is not the US
Jan 13, 20119:51am EST--
@C4LCNCPLS While your idea is good and may work a little it would quickly fail and I will tell you why. I deal with many big exporters myself so I am very up to date with this and tell you the honest truth. The Chinese for the last few years have been hearing the threats of import tariffs and calls to boycott Made in China they know these things. What they have been doing the last few years is setting up businesses in places like Thailand, Indonesia, Canada, Mexico etc. so that even if the US put tariffs on Made in China their products would look like they would come from these countries even though they are Made in China. The other thing is that as the Chinese have profited heavily after many years of American consumerism and huge trade deficits their country has developed which has lead to inflation in their country and wage increases, just in the last 6 months alone Beijing increased the minimum wage another 20% so many Chinese factories and businesses are being encouraged to go out to invest in other countries, including the US where many local politicians are giving taxpayer funded breaks, cheap land and other benefits to bring jobs to their community. The buy American act only requires that 50% of a product needs to be from the USA to be labeled made in USA. Furthermore the question arises, how is it that Americans are forced to go overseas to manufacture because it is cheaper but Chinese are now saying it is cheaper in the USA to manufacture? Something isn¡¯t right here? At the core is that there is great corruption in our government one that wants open borders and a global system. What we really need is that the people get educated start electing the right people into congress and senate and most importantly get Obama out in 2012. The only person left that is qualified that may consider running and could save our country is Dr. Ron Paul. Please everyone contact him and encourage him to run in 2012.
Jan 13, 201110:48am EST--
