Factbox: Stealth fighters in operation and development
2011-01-12 04:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China confirmed its first test flight of a stealth fighter jet on January 11, and though its J-20 is still several years from deployment, it has raised the stakes in a field dominated by the United States, the only operator of radar-evading planes.
While leaked photos and video show a potentially advanced exterior design, the aircraft's status, sophistication and capabilities are still unclear, think-tank Stratfor said.
As China develops the J-20, India and Russia have also launched a venture to produce stealth fighters. They concluded an agreement in December for the design and development of what is expected to be 250-300 jets over 10 years, reported to be worth around $35 billion.
The agreement, which will see state-run India's Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd work alongside Russia's Rosoboronexport and Sukhoi, is expected to begin delivery of the fighter by 2017.
Here are some facts about stealth jets, including those under development.
IN OPERATION: > B-2 'Spirit' bomber
The U.S. Air Force operates 20 B-2s, built by Northrop Grumman. A product of the Cold War, the boomerang-shaped bombers were first used in combat during the Kosovo War in 1999, and have seen action in Iraq and Afghanistan.
> F-22 'Raptor' fighter
In operation since 2005, the jets produced by Lockheed Martin and Boeing, are the USAF's spearhead. High costs, export bans, and the development of the cheaper and more versatile F-35 have resulted in calls to end F-22 production.
China's first fifth-generation fighter aircraft, but still years away from deployment after Tuesday's maiden test flight.
The "fifth-generation" design generally entails not only stealth but also advanced radar and other sensors, avionics and powerful engines, something China appears to continue to struggle with in terms of indigenous design and manufacture, Stratfor said.
"These 'under the hood' design aspects are, at the very least, still under development in China and may not be nearly as advanced as the outer appearance of the airframe might suggest," Stratfor said.
Russia will build more than 1,000 stealth fighter jets within four decades, including at least 200 for its traditional weapons buyer India, the head of plane maker Sukhoi said last March.
Sukhoi test-flew its long-delayed fifth-generation fighter aircraft (FGFA) at the end of January 2010, and Moscow said it would be able to compete with its U.S. F-22 Raptor rival first built more than a decade ago.
The JSF, expected to enter service in 2016, is funded by the United States, Canada, Turkey, Britain, Italy, Norway, Denmark, Australia and the Netherlands. Lockheed, the main contractor supported by Northrop, BAE Systems, pipped Boeing for the world's costliest arms acquisition programme.
