Obama and Hu will seek to re-set ties at state visit
2011-01-09 10:46:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama and China's Hu Jintao will strive to put a rocky 2010 behind them and cast themselves as partners rather than rivals at a state visit this month between the world's two biggest powers.
But a trust deficit as big as the trade gap between Beijing and Washington may hover over the visit, even as Obama fetes Hu with a black-tie dinner and a 21-gun salute and holds talks with him on issues like North Korea and the global economy.
With the world still struggling with economic woes and wrestling with grave environmental and security threats, the significance of the Chinese president's visit cannot be overstated. The January 19 event is being billed as the most important state visit in 30 years.
"The goal of these meetings isn't tied to some watershed moment but toward the long-term process of deepening the relationship," said David Rothkopf, a foreign policy expert and former Clinton administration official. "Necessarily, the meeting between the heads of the two most important countries is as significant a summit as can happen."
Obama has said he believes the U.S.-China relationship will shape the 21st century. One long-term challenge is navigating the transition to a relationship of equals, and some experts are skeptical this can be done smoothly.
One immediate aim will be to set a better tone after Washington and Beijing locked horns last year over deadly North Korean attacks on South Korea, exchange-rate policy, Internet censorship, human rights, South China Sea navigation, climate change and valuable rare earth minerals.
"We had a drift downward in the relationship since President Obama visited Beijing in 2009," said the Brookings Institution's Kenneth Lieberthal. "Both sides see this as really setting the parameters for how to think about the relationship in both governments from now for the next several years."
Obama's decision to accord Hu the pomp and circumstance of a full state visit could be a step in that direction. China views formalities like the state dinner and cannon salute as acknowledgments of its growing stature.
But there are risks. U.S. officials are taking pains to avoid the glitches of Hu's 2006 visit to Washington when a shouting protester from the Falun Gong spiritual movement interrupted the Chinese president's remarks on the South Lawn.
Under Obama's tenure in 2009, the Group of 20, which includes fast-growing economies like China and India, replaced the Group of 8 as the global economic steering committee.
Twenty years after the end of the Cold War and almost a decade since September 11, the United States must "make adjustments for the G20 world and this is a very important visit in terms of setting the ground rules for that," said Douglas Paal of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
"Deliverables best are seen in the perspective of two or three years from now -- what really got settled," he said.
It seems to have paved the way for the 5 percent rise in the value of China's yuan currency as well as a resumption of long-frozen U.S.-China military ties and a pause in bellicose actions and words from North Korea.
In the clearest sign that military-to-military ties are back on track, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates is heading to Beijing on Sunday.
One big question ahead of Hu's visit is whether stalled six-party talks over North Korea's nuclear program could restart but U.S. officials emphasized they do not view that as a measure of the success or failure of the U.S.-China summit.
On trade, where the U.S. chafes at an ever-widening annual trade deficit approaching $270 billion, China made proposals last month on purchases of U.S. beef and intellectual property rights.
Still, Washington would be wrong to expect a "big gift basket" from China on exchange rates, North Korea or Iran, said Sun Zhe, an expert at Beijing's Tsinghua University. "China hopes that such visits can help achieve overall stability in relations, not necessarily specific outcomes," Sun said.
As China racks up world-beating economic growth, the United States is fretting about lackluster growth and weak job creation after the 2008-2009 financial meltdown.
Indeed, two weeks before the summit, Sen. Charles Schumer, a top proponent in Obama's Democratic Party of pressing China to revalue its yuan, vowed in an interview with Reuters to revive legislation that would punish Chinese exports if the yuan did not rise. Beijing loathes the bill.
Beyond specific bilateral issues, one obstacle to deepening ties is wariness on both sides about each other's intentions.
Chinese nationalism is rising as rapidly as Beijing's global clout, but Paal said Hu would try to convey to the United States that Beijing is "comfortable with America's lead in the world" and is not trying to displace it.
Obama has work to do in allaying China's worries, too.
"They have a very hard time believing that number one will not try to keep number two from catching up, because they know that's what they would do if they were number one," Lieberthal said.
(Additional reporting by Thomas Ferraro and David Alexander in Washington, Chris Buckley in Beijing; Editing by Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Anyone who cares about honoring our war dead and bringing solace to their families by returning their remains should vehemently protest Chinese President Hu¡¯s upcoming state visit to the US. Due to pressure from his government, as reported by a leader of the BJP recently, the US and Indian Governments were forced to cancel the only US MIA remains recovery operation in India scheduled for 2010. The location of this operation is a US Army Air Force B-24 crash site in the Northeast Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, which borders on China and which China has been claiming as its own. Notwithstanding the fact that the Singh Government and the Obama Administration (in the person of Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Michelle Flournoy) have displayed amazing timidity by kowtowing to this Chinese pressure, the Chinese Government¡¯s attitude toward this purely humanitarian operation is hardly conducive to fostering amicable relations between China and the United States. ?Gary Zaetz
Anyone who cares about honoring our war dead and bringing solace to their families by returning their remains should vehemently protest Chinese President Hu¡¯s upcoming state visit to the US. Due to pressure from his government, as reported by a leader of the BJP recently, the US and Indian Governments were forced to cancel the only US MIA remains recovery operation in India scheduled for 2010. The location of this operation is a US Army Air Force B-24 crash site in the Northeast Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, which borders on China and which China has been claiming as its own. Notwithstanding the fact that the Singh Government and the Obama Administration (in the person of Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Michelle Flournoy) have displayed amazing timidity by kowtowing to this Chinese pressure, the Chinese Government¡¯s attitude toward this purely humanitarian operation is hardly conducive to fostering amicable relations between China and the United States. ?Gary Zaetz
Jan 09, 20116:53pm EST--
You all feel that invisible hand, you all can cough now.
Jan 09, 20118:51pm EST--
Nationalism is rising up here too! Americans are quite fed up with seeing job after job, and factory after factory shut down, and shipped to China! No country would have got this far, if the jobs in the USA, the UK and others, hadn¡¯t been snatched from us! How about every country making what they purchase and stop this global nonsense?
Jan 10, 201110:33am EST--
