Factbox: Issues to watch on Gates' China trip
2011-01-07 18:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense Secretary Robert Gates will attempt to ease Sino-U.S. military tensions during a visit to China from Sunday to Wednesday, but mistrust runs deep between the U.S. armed forces and the People's Liberation Army.
Here are some of the top issues Gates will be grappling with in Beijing, just days before a high-profile visit by Chinese President Hu Jintao to Washington.
China cut off ties with the U.S. military for most of 2010 and turned down a proposed fence-mending visit by Gates last summer -- all because of the Obama administration's proposed $6.4 billion arms package to Taiwan, announced a year ago. China considers Taiwan a renegade province.
Gates is expected to make another effort to convince the People's Liberation Army that the U.S. and Chinese militaries need to ensure stable communication -- despite differences over Taiwan -- to prevent misunderstandings that could trigger a confrontation.
China has never renounced the use of force to bring Taiwan under its control, and the Pentagon warned last year that Beijing had expanded its military edge over the island. The United States is Taiwan's top arms supplier and is obliged by the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act to aid the island's defense.
U.S. officials, including Gates, believe China is best positioned to avert a future conflict on the Korean peninsula by using its influence to rein in North Korea's reclusive leader, Kim Jong-il. China is Pyongyang's strongest economic and diplomatic partner.
China has opposed U.S. and South Korean military drills which, so far at least, have been the strongest military response Washington and Seoul have mustered following provocative actions by North Korea. Those include North Korea's attack on a South Korean island in November and the sinking of a South Korean warship in March. Beijing wants dialogue.
Gates, who travels to South Korea and Japan after China, will likely press Chinese officials about North Korea, including about Pyongyang's nuclear ambitions.
The Obama administration has made a point of bolstering ties with Asian allies since taking office in 2009, sometimes irritating Beijing in the process.
One flashpoint is the South China Sea, where Beijing is wary of perceived meddling by Washington in China's territorial disputes with Southeast Asian nations over an area rich in energy and key to shipping.
Beijing has long accused the U.S. military of illegal trespass into its Exclusive Economic Zones, or EEZs, defined by a U.N. treaty as waters within 200 nautical miles of its coast. The United States says it has the right to conduct intelligence-gathering activities in EEZs.
With its economy booming, China has significantly increased its military expenditures, developing capabilities that expand its reach and increase the chance of friction with U.S. forces in the Pacific.
Already boasting the largest army in the world, China is upgrading its combat aircraft, missile capabilities and naval forces. Photos published on websites and other media in recent weeks appear to show that China has a prototype of a stealth fighter jet [ID:nN05270761].
China may be ready to launch its first aircraft carrier in 2011, according to Chinese military and political sources. [ID:nTOE6BE01S]. It has also made advances in its anti-ship ballistic missile program, according to the U.S. military.
Also, the Pentagon has been plain-spoken about its belief that many of the cyber attacks on U.S. government computer systems are believed to originate in China.
"It remains unclear if these intrusions were conducted by, or with the endorsement of, the (Peoples' Liberation Army) or other elements of the ... government," it warned in a report to Congress.
Chinese officials point out their defense spending is still far lower than that of the United States and that China is not seeking confrontation. But U.S. defense officials are openly wary of China's strategic intentions.
The Pentagon is due to release a report in coming weeks on rare earth minerals, vital in a slew of high-tech products that are used in some U.S. weapons systems.
China produces about 97 percent of the global supply of rare earths, and at the end of December cut its export quotas by 35 percent for the first half of 2011 versus a year ago, saying it wanted to preserve ample reserves.
Another longtime irritant in U.S.-China military relations are restrictions, imposed by Congress more than decade ago, on military-to-military exchanges.
Current legislation prohibits military exchanges that could "create a national security risk" by exposing PLA representatives to certain U.S. capabilities including nuclear operations, military space operations and reconnaissance operations. The PLA strongly opposes such restrictions.
(Reporting by Phil Stewart; Editing by Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
There are no military secrets in China, they have copied all they need from the West. Their arms might be outdated by ten years, but it is enough to make them a first class contender.
Jan 07, 20119:18pm EST--
¡°all because of the Obama administration¡¯s proposed $6.4 billion arms package to Taiwan¡± ¡­ as if $6.4 billion in arms is an insignificant provocation. Just imagine the outcry if China sent $6.4 billion worth of arms to Cuba.
Jan 07, 20119:54pm EST--
Jan 08, 201112:52pm EST--
