ChemChina signs deal to buy 60 percent of MA Industries
2011-01-09 10:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China National Chemical Corp (ChemChina) has now signed the deal to buy 60 percent of Israel's MA Industries MAIN.TA, it was announced on Sunday, China's latest move to expand in the global agricultural chemicals market.
The deal, which values the world's biggest maker of generic crop protection chemicals at $2.4 billion, will see MA's parent Koor Industries (
) retain 40 percent of the maker of fungicides, pesticides and herbicides, Koor said on Sunday.
As announced last month, ChemChina will buy the 53 percent of MA held by the public for $1.272 billion and pay Koor $168 million for another 7 percent. The price per share is $5.57 or 19.93 shekels a share at the present exchange rate.
MA's shares closed up 1.3 percent at 18.28 shekels while Koor lost 0.3 percent to 89.24 shekels.
As part of the deal, ChemChina will arrange a seven-year non-recourse loan of $960 million to Koor, which will be secured by Koor's shares in MA.
Analysts have said the loan guarantees for Koor a minimum price for the valuation of MA, since in seven years it can choose not to pay back the loan and forfeit the shares.
Koor, which also owns 3.24 percent of Credit Suisse (
), is part of conglomerate IDB Holding Corp (
), which is controlled by businessman Nochi Dankner.
ChemChina President Jianxin Ren said on Sunday he and Dankner believed that together they can develop business opportunities in Israel, China and around the world.
"Our partnership has added significance because it can strengthen the economic ties between the State of Israel and the People's Republic of China in the fields of agriculture, chemical science and beyond," he said in a statement.
The deal, which is subject to various approvals, is expected to close in the second or third quarter.
"I am sure that the partnership between ChemChina and IDB will strengthen MA's global competitiveness and enable MA's manufacturing activity to remain in (the Israeli cities of) Be'er Sheva and Ashdod," Dankner said.
MA, which competes with Monsanto (
), Bayer BAYG.DE and Syngenta (
), will become private.
ChemChina and Koor signed a shareholders' agreement under which ChemChina will appoint a chairman for MA and Koor will name the vice chairman. The companies also undertook to work toward a public offering of MA's shares.
The deal is the latest in a hungry China's search for global agricultural chemical production and distribution capabilities.
New York-based Compass Advisers served as financial advisor to ChemChina, a state-run company with sales of $23 billion in 2010 and assets of $29 billion.
MA, also known as Makhteshim Agan, posted a wider net loss of $56.2 million in the third quarter, hit by a writedown at its Brazilian unit, rising costs and a one-off tax charge.
