White House: China must act to rebalance currency
2011-01-05 13:55:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama will press China on its currency policy during his upcoming meetings in Washington with Chinese President Hu Jintao, the White House said on Wednesday.
"China plays an enormously important role in our global economy and China has to take steps to rebalance its currency, and the president will continue to make that point when President Hu is here," White House spokesman Robert Gibbs told a news briefing.
Economic issues are the single biggest source of tension between the world's two largest economies.
Facing a trade deficit with China up 20 percent in the first 10 months of 2010, Washington complains that Beijing keeps its yuan currency too low, giving it an unfair advantage, and Obama has repeatedly warned China against relying too much on exports for growth.
Chinese officials say U.S. easy-money policy is aimed at weakening the dollar to boost exports, and have said yuan appreciation would have little impact on reducing the trade surplus, which is expected to hit $270 billion for 2010.
Human rights, the global economy, the Chinese currency and the situation in North Korea are among items on the list of issues the two leaders will discuss, Gibbs said.
(Reporting by Patricia Zengerle, Editing by Sandra Maler)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s difficult to comprehend the depths to which the US has fallen. Why should the Chinese help the US, a country that is responsible for three occupations [Iraq,Afghanistan,Palestine]and the loss of millions of peoples money/future/retirement through their unregulated Wall Street thieves.
Jan 05, 20113:21pm EST--
An America Lost in Squanderville The United States¡¯ trade gap is the proverbial ¡°leak-in the-dike¡± with its de-simulative effect on our recovery. In November 2003, Warren Buffett in his Fortune, Squanderville versus Thriftville article recommended that America adopt a balanced trade model. The fact that advice advocating balance and sustainability, from a sage the caliber of Warren Buffett, could be virtually ignored for over seven years is unfathomable. Media coverage that China has kept it currency undervalued is a gross understatement, it has actually been keeping the U.S. dollar over-valued; which adversely affects all our trade with all our trading partners, not just trade with China. Until action is taken on Buffett¡¯s or a similar balanced trade model, by the powers that be, America will continue to squander time, treasure and talent in pursuit of an illusionary recovery.
Jan 06, 20117:50pm EST--
An America Lost in Squanderville The United States¡¯ trade gap is the proverbial ¡°leak-in the-dike¡± with its de-simulative effect on our recovery. In November 2003, Warren Buffett in his Fortune, Squanderville versus Thriftville article recommended that America adopt a balanced trade model. The fact that advice advocating balance and sustainability, from a sage the caliber of Warren Buffett, could be virtually ignored for over seven years is unfathomable. Media coverage that China has kept it currency undervalued is a gross understatement, it has actually been keeping the U.S. dollar over-valued; which adversely affects all our trade with all our trading partners, not just trade with China. Until action is taken on Buffett¡¯s or a similar balanced trade model, by the powers that be, America will continue to squander time, treasure and talent in pursuit of an illusionary recovery.
Jan 06, 20118:38pm EST--
