China's BlueStar to buy Orkla's Elkem: source
2011-01-10 02:36:00.0
China's BlueStar to buy Orkla's Elkem: source | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
China's BlueStar to buy Orkla's Elkem: source
Mon, Jan 10 2011
Tue, Dec 21 2010
Mon, Dec 13 2010
Mon  EST
) is on track to finally sell its Elkem metals and specialty chemicals unit to China National BlueStar, newspaper Dagens Naeringsliv reported on Monday, citing unnamed sources.
Elkem, a high-tech company which produces silicon for the solar industry and specialised metals used in computers among other things, could be worth up to 15 billion Norwegian crowns ($2.5 billion), analysts have said.
Dagens Naeringsliv did not disclose a price for the Elkem deal. It is not clear if BlueStar is buying all of Elkem, which includes power assets and other divisions.
The deal was delayed by Chinese fury at the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to a Chinese dissident by the Norwegian Nobel Committee late last year, the newspaper said.
Norway's pizza-to-metals conglomerate Orkla has said that it aimed to streamline its portfolio and the sale of Elkem has been widely expected.
Last October, Reuters reported that Elkem was in talks to be bought by China National BlueStar, a state-run specialty chemicals company backed by U.S. private equity firm Blackstone Group (
) and South Korea's POSCO (
) have also been mentioned as suitors for Elkem, whose main products are solar grade silicon, silicon, special alloys for the foundry industry, carbon, microsilica and energy.
Elkem has production facilities in Europe, North and South America, Africa and Asia and employs about 2,500 people.
(Reporting by Terje Solsvik and Wojciech Moskwa; Editing by Mike Nesbit)
