Sinovel IPO priced at top of range, raises $1.4 billion
2011-01-06 08:11:00.0
Sinovel IPO priced at top of range, raises $1.4 billion | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sinovel IPO priced at top of range, raises $1.4 billion
Thu, Jan 6 2011
Thu, Jan 6 2011
Tue, Jan 4 2011
Tue, Jan 4 2011
Mon, Jan 3 2011
Thu  EST
) raised 9.5 billion yuan ($1.43 billion) in China's first major IPO this year after fixing the offer price for its shares at the top end of an indicative range.
Sinovel set the offer price for its initial public offering in Shanghai at 90 yuan a share compared with an indicative range of 80-90 yuan a share, it said in a statement to the stock exchange late on Thursday.
Sinovel, which competes with Denmark's Vestas Wind (
), is selling up to 105.1 million shares in its IPO, hoping to bank on investors' demand for Chinese renewable energy stocks as the country invests heavily in the sector.
China is pouring $1.5 trillion over the next five years into developing strategic industries, such as the renewables energy sector where the country is trying to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as its economy roars ahead.
The offer price values Sinovel shares at a forward price-to-earnings ratio of 25.21 times, based on Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S consensus earnings forecast of 3.57 yuan a share.
Denmark's Vestas Wind, the world's biggest maker of wind turbines, was traded at around 15 times, Spain's Gamesa Corporacion Tecnologica (
China became the top wind turbine market in 2009, installing a record 13.75 gigawatts (GW) of new capacity, and three Chinese suppliers made it to the list of global top-10 turbine manufacturers.
Among Chinese players, Sinovel has experienced remarkably strong growth, displacing domestic rival Xinjiang Goldwind as the top Chinese wind turbine company in just three years.
Sinovel Chairman and President Han Junliang, a low profile engineer who spearheaded the company's aggressive expansions in the past few years, has said Sinovel, currently ranked No.3 globally by installed capacity, aims to clinch the global top spot in five years' time.
Sinovel said this week it would use the proceeds of its IPO to expand wind power installed capacity and beef up its research and development capability for larger turbines, such as the 6-megawatt (MW) turbines.
The company expects its business to grow at a more than 30 percent compound annual rate over the next five years as it aims to expand its business to global markets including the United States, Canada, Australia, Europe, Brazil and India.
Falling wind turbine prices could pose a risk to the fast-growing sector, analysts said. Prices have fallen to below 4,000 yuan per kilowatt from about 6,000 yuan per kilowatt in the past few years as the Chinese makers flooded the market with cheaper offerings.
Turbine prices are expected to stabilize at around 3,800 yuan per kilowatt for now and steep falls seen in the past few years are unlikely to repeat, Sinovel's Chairman Han told investors this week.
