U.S. downplays Chinese stealth fighter status
2011-01-05 11:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China is still years away from being able to field a stealth aircraft, despite the disclosure of images indicating that it appears to have a working prototype, a U.S. Navy official said on Wednesday.
The images have been posted on a number of websites and were published Wednesday on the front page of The Wall Street Journal, which said they appeared to show a Chinese J-20 stealth fighter prototype making a high-speed taxi test.
The pictures are likely to heighten U.S. concerns about China's military buildup, including possible deployment in 2011 of its first aircraft carrier and a new anti-ship ballistic missile seen as a threat to U.S. aircraft carriers.
The Journal said many experts believed the J-20 photos were authentic and a strong indicator that China is making faster-than-expected progress in developing a rival to Lockheed Martin's F-22 Raptor, the world's only operational stealth fighter.
But U.S. Vice Admiral David Dorsett, director of naval intelligence, said deployment of the J-20 was years away.
"It's still not clear to me when it's going to become operational," he said. "Developing a stealth capability with a prototype and then integrating that into a combat environment is going to take some time."
The Raptor is the premier U.S. fighter, with cutting-edge "fifth-generation" features, including shapes, materials and propulsion systems designed to make it appear as small as a swallow on enemy radar screens.
"We're anticipating China to have a fifth-generation fighter ... operational right around 2018," Wayne Ulman of the National Air and Space Intelligence Center testified in May before a congressionally mandated group.
Ulman said there were a lot of unknowns about China's next-generation fighter, which would be a follow-up to nearly 500 fourth-generation fighters considered at a technical parity to older U.S. fighters.
"It's yet to be seen exactly how (the fifth-generation) will compare one-on-one with, say, an F-22," Ulman said.
(Additional reporting by David Alexander; Editing by Doina Chiacu)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Don¡¯t underestimate the Chinese ability to get things done in record time. They are not hindered by the shuddering & quaking bureaucratic pile of obstructionists and red tape that is America today. We won WWII in less than 4 years and could build a full sized cargo ship in a day not to mention the myriad of new fighter aircraft and bombers that were developed and into production within 6 months or less of conception. We are a lost cause with bloated govfernment and stagnant minds¡­don¡¯t worry about China, worry about the USA
Jan 05, 201110:52am EST--
Another factor to keep in mind is that the Chinese military learned from the errors of others. They train all their forces constantly, and just might be spending more on training alone than the USA, by GDP per capita. They won¡¯t be caught unprepared, if they ever do need to defend their territory from an aggressor.
Jan 05, 201111:15am EST--
We spent decades wildly exaggerating the Soviet Union¡¯s military capabilities to justify feeding hundreds of billions of dollars to the military-industrial complex. Looks like the beast is getting hungry again!
Jan 05, 201111:55am EST--
