Iran nuclear invitation draws Western skepticism
2011-01-04 14:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran invited Russia, China, the European Union and others on Tuesday to visit key nuclear plants, but left out Britain, France, Germany and the United States -- the countries most opposed to its nuclear program.
Iran's surprise invitation to ambassadors accredited to the U.N. nuclear watchdog in Vienna was a bid to show openness before Tehran and six world powers are due to meet in Istanbul later this month to discuss its disputed atomic activities.
The West suspects Iran's uranium enrichment program aims to make nuclear bombs while Tehran says it is for peaceful ends.
None of the four major Western powers in diplomatic efforts to resolve the long-running dispute -- the United States, Britain, Germany and France -- received invitations.
The United States and Britain dismissed the Iranian move, as did Western analysts who viewed Tehran's gesture as a public relations exercise and said Iran would be more transparent if it gave international inspectors greater access to its sites.
"This is pretend transparency," said George Perkovich of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace think tank in Washington. "Taking a bunch of diplomats ... to see what you want them to see is not meaningful transparency."
Hungary, the current EU president, said it was invited. EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton has represented the bloc in negotiations so far, not the EU presidency holders.
"We are still trying to determine who is on Iran's invite list. We aren't," U.S. State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told Reuters.
A U.S. official who spoke on condition of anonymity said neither the United States nor the EU3 -- European Union members Britain, France and Germany -- have been invited.
"A fair number of invitations have been issued. The pattern is clearer regarding who is not invited -- the U.S. and E3 -- than who is invited," said the U.S. official. "Hungary, invited as the EU presidency, has already declined."
Britain said "a tightly controlled visit of selected facilities was unlikely to provide the assurances needed by the international community" about Iran's nuclear plans.
China said it had been invited while a Vienna-based diplomat said Russia, the sixth big power involved in talks with Iran, was also believed to have received an invitation.
Egypt appeared to be the first to officially confirm it would accept Iran's invitation, with Hossam Zaki, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, saying it would take part.
Iran's ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Vienna-based U.N. nuclear body, said the plan was for the group to travel to the Natanz uranium enrichment facility and the Arak heavy water reactor.
The two sites are at the heart of Iran's nuclear dispute with the West, which suspects the Islamic Republic is seeking to develop nuclear weapons. Iran denies this.
"Ambassadors ... are invited to visit our nuclear sites, particularly in Natanz and Arak," Ali Asghar Soltanieh told Reuters in Vienna. "This is in the line of our transparent nuclear policy," he said, adding that meetings with high-ranking Iranian officials would also be organized.
Tehran and the powers agreed in Geneva last month to meet again in Istanbul in late January. The Geneva talks were the first in more than a year and also the first since tougher U.N., U.S., and EU sanctions were imposed on Iran in mid-2010.
(Additional reporting by Parisa Hafezi and Ramin Mostafavi in Tehran, Alistair Lyon in Beirut, Krisztina Than in Budapest, Marwa Awad in Cairo; Andrew Quinn in Washington, Paris and Berlin bureaux; Writing by Fredrik Dahl; Editing by Cynthia Osterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Complying with common sense measures isn¡¯t enough for Iran; it¡¯s detractors want extraordinary proof, far beyond the ordinary, to prove to them their conspiracy theories about Iran aren¡¯t true. But even if Iran does manage to prove that their nuclear program is peaceful, rabid nuts like American Republicans are still going to hold to their prejudices. Iran is far from a good country; it¡¯s human rights record is atrocious, and its freedoms are almost non-existent. If you want protest against Iran for those reasons, then go ahead, but suspecting it of making nuclear weapons? That¡¯s just plain paranoia. What would Iran do if it was developing nuclear weapons? Their constitution forbids them to make any first strikes against any other nation, so they only way they would use them is to defend themselves against Israeli aggression. If Israel behaves itself (for a change), then there¡¯s no need to fear Iran using nuclear weapons, even if they had them. Let¡¯s just look at the reality behind the calls to invade Iran; if Republicans keep paranoia about Iran hyped up, they can sell the phony safety measures their companies produce, and the weapons their companies produce; and pretty much anything else a survivalist nut or overequipped soldier could ever want. All this phony fear about Iran going nuclear is about conservatives creating a market for their overpriced goods. Recognize companies creating their own markets when you see it, and don¡¯t buy into the fear.
Jan 04, 20113:57am EST--
Well said McBob08, you hit all the nails on the head.
Jan 04, 20111:26pm EST--
@ McBob08 -Not that I¡¯m a war mongerer but if Iran wants to provide ¡°common Sense measures¡±, wouldn¡¯t it be better to give unlimited access to experts from UN Nuclear watch dog people than some diplomats? To end the dispute they should invite UN, give them a car, a gas card and the keys to all the sites and let them go where they please for a couple months. That should put everyones mind to ease. Not invite Arab Nations and east European countries diplomat for a lunch meeting.
Jan 04, 20113:13pm EST--
