China will continue to buy Spanish debt: vice premier
2011-01-03 08:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese officials have faith in Spain's financial system and will continue to take part in government debt auctions, China's Vice Premier Li Keqiang wrote in an editorial in El Pais on Monday.
"China is a responsible, long-term investor in the European financial market and particularly in Spain, and we have confidence in the Spanish financial market, which has meant the acquisition of its public debt, something which we will continue to do in the future," Li wrote.
Spain has come under increasing pressure from international debt markets on concerns it may be forced to follow Greece and Ireland and seek an EU/IMF bailout, but while bond yields have risen, demand for Spanish debt remains solid.
Around 60 percent of demand for Spanish debt has come from non-resident investors, according to a Reuters source, and Asian interest has risen to a reported 9 percent at recent auctions.
Li said China applauded austerity measures and structural reforms passed by Spain's Socialist government last year aimed at calming market concerns over its public deficit.
"China supports the measures adopted by Spain to readjust its economy, with a strong conviction that it will achieve general economic recovery," he wrote.
(Reporting by Paul Day; Editing by Louise Ireland and Carlos Castellano)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°we have confidence in the Spanish financial market¡±. The Party will literally hold the balls of some western countries. The Party, you have confidence in a strategy where you pressure others through any mean you do not have confidence in people, in their potential, in their ideas¡­ How would you be confident in the Spanish people when you do not have confidence in your own people, when you control them every day. I hope European leaders are not that lazy to let the debt go into the hand of the Party, the same way this happened for the US. Even if the currency depreciate, this is not a relevant strategy.
Jan 03, 201111:36am EST--
China is very smart ¨C Congrats!
Jan 03, 20113:11pm EST--
Jan 03, 201111:17pm EST--
