U.S. downplays Chinese stealth fighter status
2011-01-05 17:22:00.0
(Reuters) - China is still years away from being able to field a stealth aircraft, despite the disclosure of images indicating that it appears to have a working prototype, Pentagon officials said on Wednesday.
The disclosure of the photographs comes just days before U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates is due to travel to Beijing on Sunday, and analysts could only speculate about the motives for their sudden appearance.
"This might be just a way of demonstrating that whatever obstacles there might have been (to China developing these technologies), they've overcome them," said Randy Schriver, a China expert and former State Department official for Asia.
The pictures are likely to heighten concerns about China's military buildup, including possible deployment in 2011 of its first aircraft carrier and a new anti-ship ballistic missile seen as a threat to U.S. aircraft carriers.
Some analysts say that the J-20 photos, if authentic, are a strong indicator that China is making faster-than-expected progress in developing a rival to Lockheed Martin's F-22 Raptor, the world's only operational stealth fighter designed to evade detection by enemy radar.
But U.S. Vice Admiral David Dorsett, director of naval intelligence, said deployment of the J-20 was years away.
"It's still not clear to me when it's going to become operational," he said. "Developing a stealth capability with a prototype and then integrating that into a combat environment is going to take some time."
He dismissed any suggestions that the Pentagon had underestimated China's stealth capability.
"Our assessment of when China might have an operational fifth generation fighter puts it at some point in the future, close to the end of this decade," Lapan said.
The Raptor is the premier U.S. fighter, with cutting-edge "fifth-generation" features, including shapes, materials and propulsion systems designed to make it appear as small as a swallow on enemy radar screens.
The United States hopes to field a successor to the F-22, known as the F-35, in the coming years, and news of faster-than-expected Chinese stealth technology could add pressure on Lockheed Martin and the Pentagon to speed development.
The revelation comes on the heels of warnings from the head of U.S. forces in the Pacific about China's new anti-ship ballistic missile, which could target U.S. aircraft carriers.
Dorsett said it would be a mistake to underestimate China's military advances, fueled by its fast-growing economy. At the same time, their military capabilities were only a shadow of the U.S. armed forces, he said.
"We see them progressing rather dramatically across a variety of areas, but no, I don't view them as 10-feet tall," he said.
(Additional reporting by David Alexander; editing by Anthony Boadle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
And I suppose people are surprised? Just keep sending our jobs and technology over there¡­
Jan 05, 20115:40pm EST--
So, um, how many times have Western nations been invaded by China versus Middle East/Asian nations invaded by the United States? And please, don¡¯t let history get in the way of your fear and trepidation.
Jan 06, 20119:40am EST--
The skill to operate a fighter jet matters more than how modernized it is built. Out there, it¡¯s not pure competition of hardware.
Jan 06, 20119:52am EST--
