Gates hopes to bolster U.S.-China military dialogue
2011-01-07 08:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense Secretary Robert Gates said on Thursday he hoped to deepen U.S.-China military cooperation on issues like North Korea and Iran when he visits Beijing next week, which could help ease Pentagon concerns about Chinese military intentions.
"I am eager to explore where we can further develop and deepen a dialogue on a number of issues of mutual concern where we both have interests," Gates told a Pentagon news conference. "I think expanding that dialogue is really important."
He said later the United States and China could cooperate on "issues where we have common strategic interests, whether it's instability or provocative behavior on the part of North Korea, whether it's Iran developing weapons of mass destruction, nuclear weapons, piracy, terrorism."
Finding ways for the U.S. and Chinese militaries to work together and get to know each other would create an opportunity to do constructive things and also help build a stronger relationship between the two sides, Gates told the PBS "NewsHour" television program.
Gates' trip to China, which begins on Sunday, is the clearest sign yet that U.S.-China military-to-military ties are back on track after Beijing severed them nearly a year ago in reaction to Washington's decision to sell more than $6 billion in arms to Taiwan.
Michael Schiffer, deputy assistant secretary of defense for East Asia, said U.S. officials hoped the trip could be used to cement the idea of a continuous military dialogue that would not be cut in times of tension or crisis.
"The on-again, off-again cycle that has all too often characterized the military-to-military relationship increases the risks and dangers of an incident or an accident that could derail the overall bilateral relationship," Schiffer said in a speech to the International Institute for Strategic Studies.
Schiffer described the rise of Asia as the "central geostrategic factor of the 21st century," noting that the region has five of the world's largest standing armies and 15 of the world's 20 most important ports.
China is the largest trading partner of Japan, India, South Korea, Taiwan and Australia, some of the most important U.S. allies in the Asia-Pacific region, he said.
Friction over trade and exchange rates, North Korea's nuclear program and China's military assertiveness marked U.S.-China relations last year.
The United States has watched China's rapid military growth with concern. China is expected to deploy its first aircraft carrier this year and is developing anti-ship ballistic missiles that could threaten U.S. aircraft carriers operating in the region.
China also may be moving more rapidly than previously believed to field a cutting-edge, radar-evading stealth fighter. Photos of a prototype evidently undergoing a high-speed taxi test were posted on websites and published on Wednesday on the front page of the Wall Street Journal.
"Why are you developing these capabilities other than thinking that we're the enemy and we're the ones you're going to get in a fight with?" Admiral Mike Mullen, the top uniformed U.S. military officer, said recently.
"These are the kinds of discussions I can't have right now because I'm not sitting down with them," Mullen said, adding that deep, broad and continuous engagement would help to ease concerns about each other's strategic intent.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
When the USA announces to the world that they have signed an agreement to stop threatening China with military aggression, intervention, and interference, then the world might start paying attention to anything an American says. When the USA signs an agreement to stop blaming China for their own economic failures, and to stop restricting their trade in high-tech equipment and machinery to China and other nations, and to stop encouraging their finance and insurance firms from trying to take over and control the domestic Chinese market, and to open their market to Chinese companies, without senseless political obstructions, and spent the next 10 or 20 years keeping their word, then other countries might start to take anything any American says seriously, as if the American actually meant what he said. In the meantime, for any American to expect anyone in the rest of the world to believe him, and trust what he says, is just living in a fairytale fantasy world. The Americans have spent the last 60 years proving over and over again that their word is worse than worthless. Pretending that the rest of the world can trust them now, after their financial firms have almost destroyed the global finance system, is not a rational or reasonable expecation.
Jan 07, 20112:59am EST--
