Europe shares end lower on China rate rise
2010-12-27 00:49:00.0
(Reuters) - European stocks closed lower in extremely thin trading on Monday after China's interest rate rise over the weekend fueled concerns about the outlook for economic growth.
ended down 0.9 percent at 1,137.49, with German carmakers Volkswagen (
) the worst hit, both down more than 5.5 percent.
Volumes were thin, however, at just 29 percent of the index's 30-day average volume, with Britain on holiday until Wednesday and many institutional trading books closed ahead of year-end.
The pan-European index has gained 6.6 percent in December and, in spite of the Monday's hefty fall, is still on track to record its biggest monthly gain since March.
However, "whatever view markets take in the short term, growth in China will still be well above the norm," said Howard Wheeldon, an equity strategist at BGC Capital Partners. "There's a slowing down, but China is not going into a reverse."
The STOXX Europe 600 Automobiles & Parts index .SXAP was the worst-hit sector, down 3.9 percent on concern the rate hike could hit demand for cars from consumers in China, a key export market for many automakers.
Adding to sector woes was last Friday's news Beijing aims to tackle congestion in China's capital by limiting new-car registrations.
"They may do the same in other cities in China, and it will hurt the German makes like Daimler," said Heino Ruland, a strategist at Ruland Research, in Frankfurt.
In addition to the falls for BMW and VW, shares in Daimler (
) also ended sharply lower, down 4.6 percent and 4.3 percent, respectively.
Regional index losses could be extended in the coming days, said a trader at a leading U.S. bank, as many firms in the STOXX Europe 600 Basic Resources index .SXPP are listed in London and have yet to price in the China rate hike.
"I still think the market may not have fully factored the rate rise in yet. Investors need to fully digest this, and there's not been enough commentary released yet," he added.
In the heavyweight banking sector, a combination of the China rate hike and ongoing sovereign debt woes pushed shares lower, said Ruland, with peripheral euro zone banks particularly weak.
Spain's Banco Santander (
) closed down 2.9 percent and 2.3 percent, respectively, while Greek lenders Alpha Bank (
Across Europe, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
ended down 1.2 and 1 percent, respectively, while Spain's IBEX 35
(Additional reporting by Brian Gorman; editing by Dan Grebler)
