Blackstone boss backs $300 million Chinese university fund
2013-04-21 10:01:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Apr 19 2013
Sun, Mar 24 2013
Sun, Mar 24 2013
Stephen Schwarzman, chairman and CEO of the Blackstone Group, gives a speech at a news conference for the launch of the Schwarzman Scholars at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, April 21, 2013. Credit: Reuters/China Daily
Sun  EDT
) founder Stephen Schwarzman will personally donate $100 million to a scholarship fund at China's Tsinghua University as part of the largest internationally funded philanthropic project in the country's history.
), Boeing Co. (
), General Electric Co. (
He's working to raise a further $100 million to fill out the program's planned $300 million endowment.
"The goal is to build the most prestigious and well-funded international scholarship program in the most populous country in the world," Schwarzman said.
Classes of 200 students recruited from the United States, China and other countries will study a specially designed curriculum in a one-year master's program.
Schwarzman unveiled the project, along with a scale model of a Qing Dynasty-style building to be built for students on the east side of Tsinghua's campus, in a ceremony on Sunday.
It was held in Beijing's Great Hall of the People, where the Chinese government typically holds legislative sessions, and representatives read personal statements from U.S. President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Tsinghua University has trained many of China's top technocrats including Xi, who graduated with a degree in chemical engineering.
The planned amenities, which include a sunken garden, pub and fitness area, are a far cry from facilities at most Chinese universities, where students sleep six or eight to a room and eat in austere canteens where many meals cost less than a dollar.
Schwarzman said Tsinghua approached him with the idea for the project and spent years cajoling him. He called Tsinghua University's President Chen Jining "very persistent and very convincing".
In an interview with Reuters, Schwarzman said he recognized the possibility of restricted academic discourse because of political sensitivity.
"There ought to be a robust dialogue expected to occur," he said. "To the extent that there's not, that would be an instructive part of a student's education in China."
(Reporting by Megha Rajagopalan; editing by Jason Neely)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
50% of Chinese students major in science, engineering, and technology compared to 13% in the US. Based of population differences, China produces 17 times as many graduates in the profit making professions as the US. Recent international test scores showed China was 1st and 1st in math and science; Hong Kong tested separately and was 3rd and 3rd; and the US was 31st in math and 23rd in science. Although they were middle school students, these will provide the college, graduate, and doctoral students of the future. In 2011, Premier Wen Jiabao told the Chinese Academy of Science and Technology that there would be democracy and freedom in academic pursuits, so the West¡¯s democratic arguments are not valid. Stephen Schwartzman of Blackstone is probably preparing to recruit Chinese talent for the future.
Apr 21, 20134:37pm EDT--
Apr 21, 20136:14pm EDT--
Recruit Western students to the reddest university under a heavily polluted sky They will inhale polluted air for sure, and we will see if they will be able to escape brainwashing.
Apr 21, 20136:23pm EDT--
