U.S. threatens WTO action on China rare earth curbs
2010-12-23 15:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China has refused repeated U.S. requests to eliminate export restraints on rare earths that have rattled its trading partners, the U.S. Trade Representative's office said on Thursday.
"Going forward, the United States will continue to pursue vigorous engagement with China on this issue and will not hesitate to take further action, including WTO dispute settlement, if appropriate," the trade representative's office said in an annual report on how well China has complied with commitments made when it joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.
The warning came one day after the U.S. trade representative's office said it had begun a legal challenge at the WTO against certain Chinese subsidies for wind power equipment manufacturers.
U.S. officials said on Wednesday they could file additional cases against questionable China policies in the clean energy sector, and the new report amplifies U.S. concerns about China's export restrictions on rare earths.
"But to date China has not been willing to change its policies," the U.S. trade office said.
The 17 rare earth elements are used in high-tech electronics, magnets and batteries, with applications in hybrid cars, renewable energy, computer monitors and weapons.
China's export restrictions have caused "world prices for some of the rare earths to rise dramatically higher than China's domestic prices," which has hindered efforts in other countries to develop expertise in the manufacturing of clean technology products, USTR said.
"In September 2010, China reportedly imposed a de facto ban on all exports of rare earths to Japan, causing even more concern among China's trading partners," USTR said.
The U.S. Trade Representative's annual report, which is required under U.S. law and runs 124 pages, also said China still has not fully implemented some important market-opening commitments it made when it joined the WTO in 2001.
"Frequently, these problems can be traced to China's pursuit of industrial policies that rely on excessive, trade-distorting government intervention intended to promote or protect China's domestic industries and state-owned enterprises," the trade office said.
China's "serious problem" with intellectual property rights enforcement, its slow movement toward joining the WTO's government procurement pact and its indigenous innovation policies that discriminate against foreign companies are all major concerns, the trade office said.
However, the report also said progress had been made on several issues during this month's U.S.-China talks.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Eric Beech and Bill Trott)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Whoops,this may do in many/most electric vehicles for the mass market!! Too late, we¡¯re already spending billions preparing for mass market electric! Check out the new 2011 elantra, cruze etc-40 mpg! Just need to make them sleaker, lighter, geared taller with samller engines!! KISS! Also, lowering the national freeway limit would leap frog us a few years on emission reductions!! Na, let¡¯s spend billions of deficit dollars chasing a dream!
Dec 23, 20104:32pm EST--
Let¡¯s punish China for embracing capitalism and spend our way into slavery! Will the real country with best practices please stand up! A vision without a way to pay for it, is a dangerous fanatsy in todays monster budget deficit world! Smaller vehicles are the answer- ethanol all electric, etc consume more energy to produce than they save-do your homework! If we drilled all our own oil we¡¯d stimulate OUR economy to the tune of most of a trillion dollars we give others!
Dec 23, 20104:41pm EST--
Dec 23, 20107:14pm EST--
