Euro helped by report China will buy Portugal's debt
2010-12-22 07:54:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro gained against the dollar and bounced from all-time lows against the Swiss franc on Wednesday, boosted by a news report that China was ready to buy significant amounts of Portuguese sovereign debt.
The Jornal de Negocios daily reported China is looking to buy between 4 billion euros ($5.26 billion) and 5 billion euros of Portuguese sovereign debt to help the country ward off pressure in debt markets, though it gave no details of its sources.
China's central bank declined to comment on the report which said the deal reached between the two governments will lead to China buying Portuguese debt in auctions or in the secondary markets during the first quarter of 2011.
"This is a small positive for the euro," said Valentin Marinov, currency strategist at CitiFX.
The euro was up 0.4 percent against the dollar at $1.3148, having hit a session high of $1.3181 on the news and well above its near three-week trough of $1.3073 set on Tuesday.
Traders said news that the ECB had allocated 149.5 billion euros in its three-month tender dented sentiment slightly, as it showed a greater-than-expected reliance by European banks on cheap funding.
Blows this week to the euro zone's struggling, heavily-indebted economies have come from Moody's, which warned it might cut Portugal's rating, and Fitch, which said the same about Greece.
"The rating agencies are not saying anything new but the question is how does this market want to take it," said Geoffrey Yu, currency strategist at UBS. "Clearly these are terrible market conditions and the speed at which the euro is losing ground against the Swiss franc is a bit disconcerting."
The euro was down 0.2 percent at 1.2525 Swiss francs, having fallen to an all-time low of 1.2493 on trading platform EBS. It took out option barriers at 1.2500 francs en-route to fresh all-time lows, traders said.
It also fared badly against the high-yielding Australian dollar,, falling to a multi-year low just under A$1.3100.
With liquidity drying up ahead of the Christmas holiday, Citi's Marinov expected the euro to underperform against riskier currencies like the Australian dollar and the Scandinavian currencies.
The Australian currency was underpinned by further gains in equities and commodities, suggesting improving risk appetite as analysts revise up forecasts for growth in 2011.
finally recovered all the ground lost since the Lehman debacle, while the CRB commodities index .CRB reached a two-year peak.
The U.S. dollar was at 83.57 yen, down 0.2 percent for the day, with a significant drop in U.S. yields in recent sessions weighing on the pair.
In the near term dealers expect range-bound trade, with one-month implied volatility on dollar/yen falling below 9.5 percent, the lowest since late 2007.
The dollar index .DXY slipped 0.3 percent to 80.45, which still marks a gain of more than 3 percent for the year.
The United States is due to release its latest estimates of gross domestic product (GDP) for the third quarter. U.S. growth is expected to be revised up to an annualized 2.8 percent, from 2.5 percent previously. (Additional reporting by Neal Armstrong in Tokyo; Editing by Stephen Nisbet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Dec 22, 201012:54pm EST--
