China boasts breakthrough in nuclear technology
2011-01-03 14:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese scientists have made a breakthrough in spent fuel reprocessing technology that could potentially solve China's uranium supply problem, state television reported on Monday.
The technology, developed and tested at the No.404 Factory of China National Nuclear Corp in the Gobi desert in remote Gansu province, enables the re-use of irradiated fuel and is able to boost the usage rate of uranium materials at nuclear plants by 60 folds.
"With the new technology, China's existing detected uranium resources can be used for 3,000 years," Chinese Central Television reported.
China, as well as France, the United Kingdom and Russia, actively supports reprocessing as a means for the management of highly radioactive spent fuel and as a source of fissile material for future nuclear fuel supply.
But independent scientists argued that commercial application of nuclear fuel reprocessing has always been hindered by cost, technology, proliferation risk and safety challenges.
China has 171,400 tons of proven uranium resources spread mainly in eight provinces -- Jiangxi, Guangdong, Hunan, Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Shaanxi, Liaoning and Yunnan.
China is planning a massive push into nuclear power in an effort to wean itself off coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel. It now has 12 working reactors with 10.15 gigawatt of total generating capacity.
China has set an official target of 40 gigawatts (GW) of installed nuclear generating capacity by 2020, but the government indicated it could double the goal to about 80 GW as faster expansion was one of the more feasible solutions for achieving emissions reduction goals.
As such, China will need to source more than 60 percent of the uranium needed for its nuclear power plants from overseas by 2020, even if the country moves forward with a modest nuclear expansion plan, Chinese researchers say.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Benjamin Kang Lim; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Creativity and ingenuity, so much for free enterprise answers to the problem of used fuel rods, I hope it works and that they share the technology. We have lots of spent fuel here.
Jan 03, 20114:24am EST--
I¡¯m worried that China will be the next country to suffer a melt down. I don¡¯t mean social or economical this time¡­ I mean nuclear. They have a track record of disregard for safety in the work place and contamination issues. Their desire to compete and overcompensation for the occupation they suffered through will be their undoing. I LOVE the Chinese culture. I love the people and I respect them as well¡­ but they are pushing their people too hard. I don¡¯t think they need a democracy or anything so ¡°west,¡± but I think they need to loosen up a little. (or a lot) Their people are killing themselves and each other and even foreigners in a frantic bid to become a dominant super power of business and government. America is no better in other ways¡­ but China will poison us all when one or more of their reactors blows.
Jan 03, 20114:35am EST--
China made a commitment to invest in public technology research in the late 60¡¯s led by the efforts by then minister Deng Xiapeng. The U.S. made a concerted effort to shift technology research policy from public to private sources during the Reagan years. Which approach is more likely to lead to the biggest breakthroughs of national importance?
Jan 03, 20112:26pm EST--
