Turkey becomes partner of China, Russia-led security bloc
2013-04-26 15:31:00.0
(Reuters) - NATO member Turkey signed up on Friday to became a "dialogue partner" of a security bloc dominated by China and Russia, and declared that its destiny is in Asia.
"This is really a historic day for us," Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said in Kazakhstan's commercial capital Almaty after signing a memorandum of understanding with Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Secretary General Dmitry Mezentsev.
"Now, with this choice, Turkey is declaring that our destiny is the same as the destiny of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) countries."
China, Russia and four Central Asian nations - Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan - formed the SCO in 2001 as a regional security bloc to fight threats posed by radical Islam and drug trafficking from neighboring Afghanistan.
Since then, Central Asia's former imperial master Russia has watched with unease China's economic expansion in the resource-rich region, with Beijing investing billions of dollars in oil and gas and issuing large loans to local governments.
Ankara began talks on joining the EU in 2005 but has only completed one of the 35 policy areas, or "chapters", every candidate must conclude to be allowed entry due to disagreements largely over the divided island of Cyprus.
Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan has called Turkey's wait to join the bloc "unforgivable" and has accused Brussels of not being a fair or genuine negotiating partner.
While China vies with Russia and the West for access to Central Asia's vast natural resources, some analysts view the SCO as a potential counter-balance to NATO.
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan speak Turkic languages, and while pledging to cooperate with the SCO economically and in fighting terrorist threats and drug trade together, Davutoglu stressed common historic roots.
"Turkey will be part of a family, which is composed of the countries which lived together not for centuries - for millennia," he said.
Turkey's "dialogue partner" status, also granted to Sri Lanka and ex-Soviet state Belarus, is below that of observer status held by India, Pakistan, Mongolia, Iran and Afghanistan which participate in SCO meetings but have no right to vote.
Davutoglu, upbeat and smiling, stressed however that this status was "just the beginning".
"I hope at the next summit in (the Kyrgyz capital) Bishkek we will be present, as well as at ministerial meetings," Davutoglu said. "This is the beginning of a long way, walking together, hand in hand and shoulder to shoulder."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Practically unnoticed, the geopolitical action center of gravity is shifting towards the east (beyond the ME) steadfast. While the US is busy getting itself bogged down in senseless, costly, self-destructing ME proxy wars, in navel gazing, the rest of the world is chugging on. Wake up US!
Apr 26, 20134:03pm EDT--
Bombings in Chechnya are closer to Ankara than Turkey is to Brussels. Also, Iraq and Syria are next door. Despite the author¡¯s bizarre views of Moscow¡¯s leaders, Russia doesn¡¯t mind China¡¯s economic development of former territories because CHINA PAYS for the infrastructure that makes Russia¡¯s neighbors more prosperous and stable customers for any country, including Russia, with goods to sell. Russia has its own oil, gas, and raw materials to sell to China, so Moscow should prosper for decades or centuries from the development of Siberia. The author omits the self-inflicted economic crises of the US and EU while China advances at 4 times the pace of the West. Three economic disasters and numerous badly fought wars and interventions have made others unwilling to follow the West in the 21st Century. The cowardly and dishonorable unwillingness of the West to prosecute its corporate and political criminals cause honest people to loathe, detest, and despise the US and the EU. All of the lies and propaganda in the world will not change global attitudes until western criminals are in prison or executed. I served in the US Army Special Forces, and some of my posts are difficult for me to write, but someone must tell the truth. During the Vietnam War in which I served with most of my partners, there was a slogan, ¡°America, love it or leave it,¡± but there was another slogan, ¡°America, improve it or lose it.¡± The second slogan applies today. I encourage improvement in the US, but the US must DO those things that bring improvements.
Apr 26, 20135:01pm EDT--
MikeBarnett, your post is very true. What I find very interesting is that the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) was formed in 2001 and it is rarely even mentioned in the news. Corruption in the U.S. is wasting a ton of money and preventing good individuals from acting. The U.S. needs to purge itself of its corporate and political corruption because when schools care more about loosing Chinese students/money than their country¡¯s failing educational system, you know that there is a problem. (corporate/political corruption go hand to hand (super pacs,lobbying ect, which causes a trickle down effect) Regardless, Turkey seems annoyed by the initiation procedures set up by the E.U.. Instead, Turkey is happily joining the SCO in which it states¡­¡­¡­.. ¡°Turkey will be part of a family, which is composed of the countries which lived together not for centuries ¨C for millennia,¡± he said. Will Turkey eventually end its affiliation with N.A.T.O and join China and Russia completely? If you visit Yahoo News, look at the ¡°trending now¡± section and take note of the top ten ¡°stories¡± people are reading.Most of it is not even real news.(That practically summarizes what the local majority of my generation reads as news) The question is not when, but ¡°how¡± will my generation learn about important news?
Apr 27, 20132:40am EDT--
