China's Wen confident on inflation after rate rise
2010-12-26 18:09:00.0
(Reuters) - China's government will be able to keep inflation in check, Premier Wen Jiabao said on Sunday, a day after the central bank raised interest rates, and he pledged to speed up efforts to rein in house price surges.
Steps taken in the past month, including administrative controls to curb speculation and monetary tightening, had started to produce results, Wen said.
The People's Bank of China raised interest rates on Christmas Day for a second time in just over two months as Beijing strengthened its battle against stubbornly high inflation.
Analysts said the latest rise showed that measures such as increasing banks' required reserve requirements to rein in liquidity were not enough on their own, and that the Chinese authorities were determined to keep inflation under control.
"We have raised reserve requirement ratio for six consecutive times and increased interest rates twice to absorb excess liquidity in the market to keep it at a reasonable level to support economic development," Wen said in a state radio broadcast a day after the rate rise.
"I believe we can keep prices at a reasonable level through our efforts. As a major leader of the government, I have the responsibility and I have the confidence, too," he said in remarks published on www.cnr.cn.
The rate rise came after Beijing said earlier in December it was switching to a "prudent" monetary policy, from its earlier "moderately loose" stance.
"The rate rise shows China is quickening its pace to normalize monetary policies," said Ba Shusong, a senior economist with the Development Research Center, under the State Council, the country's cabinet.
"The front-loaded tightening, before the peak of consumer inflation in the first half of 2011, is helpful to curb inflationary expectations," Ba was quoted as saying on the financial website www.caing.com.
"Inflationary expectation is worse than inflation itself," Wen said in the radio broadcast.
"When there is inflation, we must establish confidence, know our vantage points and take forceful and decisive measures in a timely manner to curb price rises."
"Until now, the measures are not implemented well enough, and we will reinforce our efforts in two ways," Wen said.
The government plans to build 10 million units of affordable housing in 2011, up from this year's target of 5.8 million.
China will also increase efforts to curb speculation in the real estate market, mainly through monetary policies and stricter use of land, Wen said, without giving details.
Property transactions as well as land costs, a major contributor to high housing prices, have shown signs of a rebound in recent weeks, triggering concerns of more tightening.
Despite all the challenges, Wen said: "I believe property prices will return to reasonable levels through our efforts. I have the confidence."
However, analysts suggested China's share market could push higher on Monday on optimism about the overall outlook for shares in 2011.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Can you imagine what the conversation was like before Wen made the statement? ¡°You know, guys, we have runaway inflation, but we¡¯ll just tell everybody we can handle it. That¡¯s what we always do.¡± What I have noticed about China is that the truth is always the opposite of what they publicly say. People in the know understand that when China says, ¡°We can control inflation¡±, what they are really saying is, ¡°Wow, inflation is out of control and we¡¯re not sure we know how to fix it¡±. For example, I like when China says, ¡°China¡¯s peaceful rise¡± ¨C hahaha, we all know that is very far from the truth, and that¡¯s why Japan is now pointing more missiles at them and other China neighbors are siding with the US militarily. So, folks, when China declares something, just turn it around and that is closer to the real picture. China¡¯s leaders are chronic liars, and if ever they admit that, then I¡¯ll start to believe them.
Dec 26, 20106:48am EST--
to marisa70394, why do you think the people should believe what you said? how much you are being paied for these comments?
Dec 26, 20107:02am EST--
Increasing rates hurts people who have already borrowed when the object is to slow new borrowings. I think increasing interest rates actually stimulates inflation because money flows into banks from other low interest nations and banks have to lend the money they have on deposit or lose money. The US is a perfect example of this in action, the US Government lends US banks money at virtually zero interest to stimulate the US economy but the Banks lend the money to other countries who have high interest rates. This is how the banks are getting back all the money they lost. @marisa70394 I am not going to rebut all of your gibberish but just one point who has China invaded, name one country.
Dec 26, 20109:24am EST--
