China to gear up fight against inflation
2010-12-24 06:29:00.0
(Reuters) - China's central bank kept up its rhetoric against inflation and excess liquidity on Friday, saying it will deploy a range of policy tools to head off inflationary pressure and asset bubbles.
Hu Xiaolian, a deputy governor at the People's Bank of China, said monetary policy in the world's second-largest economy needs to be prudent to tame inflation, which hit a 28-month high of 5.1 percent in November.
"The most important task of our monetary policy next year is to steer overall money supply back to normal," Hu said at a meeting with Chinese bankers.
"Bank credit expansion must be in step with main economic targets, especially when it comes to the targets for economic growth and inflation," she said.
Earlier this month, Chinese leaders said fighting inflation will be a priority for 2011 and reaffirmed a shift to a prudent monetary policy, from the previous "appropriately loose" stance.
Hu said the central bank will use a combination of policy tools, including interest rates, reserve requirements, and open market operations to steer policy back to normal.
"The basic tone is consistent with market expectations," said David Cohen, an economist at Action Economics in Singapore. "They are part of a toolkit they have been using in a multi-dimensional approach with the aim of constraining liquidity and inflation."
"The central bank will use differentiated reserve ratios in a dynamic way to supplement regular monetary tools, such as interest rates, reserve requirement ratios and open market operations."
The reserve requirement ratio has reached a record high of 19 percent for some of the country's biggest banks.
The remarks will likely reinforce market speculation that an imminent rise in China's interest rates or reserve requirements is on the cards.
Many investors believe China is set to tighten policy soon in a strike against inflation, but investors are divided over whether the move will come before the end of the year.
Bank of Communications, China's fifth-largest lender, said on Friday that it expects the central bank to increase reserve requirements by at least 200 basis points next year.
The central bank's policy stance is a vote of confidence on the country's strong economic growth, which Hu acknowledged.
"Overall, external demand has improved and China's economic growth momentum is on a solid ground. We will be able to maintain stable and relatively fast economic growth by implementing prudent monetary policy."
(Reporting by Zhou Xin, Kevin Yao, Langi Chiang and Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Benjamin Kang Lim, Ron Askew)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
pop goes the bubble, i wonder when the riots will start
Dec 24, 20109:58am EST--
What¡¯s Obama and Bernanke going to do when the Chinese finally let their currency rise against the Dollar,to stop inflation.A falling Dollar will cause major inflation in the U.S.That should result in a major bear market in bonds and higher interest rates.
Dec 24, 201011:39am EST--
The correct solution to their inflation problem is to allow a faster rise in the exchange rate of their currency to balance world trade. But, China has no wish to be fair about balancing world trade. Rather, they want to control the entire world¡¯s money by continuing to lock up more money instead of allowing a market driven revaluation of their currency, the renminbi, to its true value. They may succeed in lowering their inflation through greater removal of currency from circulation but when they decide it¡¯s in their best interest to reintroduce additional currency, they can do it on a massive scale which is certain to disrupt other world markets. China not only works in their own interests but a major part of their intentions manifests itself through enriching themselves by dominating and impoverishing competitors. This is certainly not any type of win-win situation whereby everyone can be rich together. The Chinese Communist Party is fast becoming the world¡¯s new dictators through economics. It¡¯s high time the rest of the world realize and dismantle this dangerous exercise before it¡¯s too late.
Dec 25, 20101:49am EST--
