Analysis: N.Korea's enrichment to complicate any nuclear talks
2010-12-23 01:05:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea's uranium enrichment work could complicate any future international talks on dismantling its nuclear program, especially if ally China backs Pyongyang in saying that it is for peaceful purposes only.
The reclusive state, which carried out nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009, has had a separate plutonium program for decades.
"The enrichment plant certainly presents a complication," said Mark Fitzpatrick at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
He said its implications for denuclearisation and how it fits into a 2005 nuclear-disarmament-for-aid deal with five regional powers would need to be negotiated "which is precisely Pyongyang's objective."
"Their obligation to denuclearize means no uranium enrichment, a Western diplomat versed in nuclear issues said, pointing out that Pyongyang had previously denied it was pursuing enrichment. "Enrichment definitely muddies the waters."
Seoul, Washington, Tokyo and Moscow, involved in the so-called six-party talks with North Korea and China, are likely to insist enrichment be included in any denuclearisation talks.
"Few want to accept a North Korean enrichment plant, regardless of North Korea's statement on its declared purpose," said David Albright, a former U.N. arms inspector and head of the Institute for Science and International Security in Washington.
"North Korea's gamble is that some, such as China and various NGOs, will accept an enrichment plant under International Atomic Energy Agency (monitoring) and declared as dedicated to producing only low-enriched uranium."
"You can't outright disallow (North Korea) the right to civilian nuclear activities, so they're creating a new issue to complicate things," said Shen Dingli, Director of the Center for American Studies at Fudan University in Shanghai.
"Like Iran, they're using this right to uranium enrichment as leverage." Iran says it wants a civilian power program, but the West suspects it is seeking atomic weapons capability.
DENUCLEARISATION REDEFINED?
China said on Tuesday that North Korea has the right to use nuclear power for peaceful purposes, but that it must allow IAEA inspectors back into the country to help ease tensions.
Pyongyang expelled the IAEA in April 2009 when it exited the six-party talks, but has recently suggested they could come back.
"The next six-party talks will be the grand bargain. That means we would need to agree on the target year (for the North's dismantlement) and the whole picture, not partial elements such as Yongbyon," said a South Korean government official who is close to nuclear negotiations with the North.
Russia has expressed "deep concern" over North Korea's uranium enrichment work and has urged it to abide by the 2005 pledge to abandon its atomic program.
Brian Myers at South Korea's Dongseo University said the North could not take enrichment off the table for talks as it would show it had no desire to return to them. It would use it to demand greater compensation for denuclearisation instead.
"Needless to say, I don't believe they are interested in negotiating disarmament in good faith. North Korea can no sooner give up its nuclear potential than the Vatican can give up Catholicism," he said, explaining that the atomic capacity protected the North and gave it a reason to exist.
Siegfried Hecker, the U.S. nuclear expert who was shown the uranium enrichment facility said earlier this month North Korea had already redefined what is meant by "denuclearisation."
"Shutting down the plutonium program was within reach, but the same is not likely for the uranium program, because the justification for its peaceful nature is more credible than for the plutonium program, even though it is no less problematic."
(Additional reporting by Jack Kim in Seoul, Chris Buckley in Beijing, Steve Gutterman in Moscow and Fredrik Dahl in Vienna; Editing by John Chalmers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As long as the KEDO program aren¡¯t resumed and they are not offered civilian light water reactors they will and will have no choice but to continue their current nuclear program, which doesn¡¯t include the plutonium reprocessing or plutonium producing Yongbyong reactor. But with that, they have probably already reprocessed all plutonium so there¡¯s no reason for it to continue either, the reactor are probably to far gone now any how. And they have all the plutonium they need, even though it isn¡¯t fully weapons grade, and even though they have no means of delivery it¡¯s still a military program with deterrence. They don¡¯t need more, and it doesn¡¯t look like they strive for more. And really the only none-declared nuclear state that has ICBM capability is Israel, not even India is there yet. India on the other hand would have it easier to sail out nuclear armed submarines or ships. But NK isn¡¯t at the state where it has warheads to mount to anything yet. You could probably stop North Korea from further developing it¡¯s nuclear weapons capability but you can not remove it. NK simply has nothing to gain from a world that won¡¯t normalize their relations with NK WHEN they fallow to the letter what the international community wants. There¡¯s simply no chance of better relations and NK being no threat if they are going to hope for NK to collapse. And you have to remember that stuff like selling Scud-based missiles are a big income earner for the country you can¡¯t expect them to stop if they have no possibility to export anything else. They don¡¯t have their program for the production of ICBMs, they will probably never have that capability as they are so set of exporting the tech/know how. Simply it¡¯s not about appeasing Pyongyang or give them anything for free, what NK wants and needs is simply relations with the world, trade! And the KEDO-program would have been excellent if the US wasn¡¯t so schizo as they would pay for it and it would be operated under full supervision and be built by the KEDO program. NK can¡¯t invest in anything else then stuff like weapons export if they don¡¯t have and cant see way to access markets, they have tried with different trade zones, but those needs markets even if it¡¯s foreign companies that has set up shop there. If they can¡¯t ship it to Japan it¡¯s pretty worthless, they have a much better capability of shipping stuff by sea then drive them to China. Simply NK can¡¯t stop being hostile if they will be as punished and isolated any way. NK doesn¡¯t really demand anything unreasonable like hundreds of billions. If you don¡¯t respect the people living their enough for them to have access to markets and food, then how are you any better then repressive policies in that country or any other country. It¡¯s a UN member with the same rights as everyone else and the conflict is very much created by the international community and actually very much by the west that saw so many ghosts and had no problem oppressing and killing communists in South Korea even before the war. The truth commission in the south sets the figure to hundreds of thousands of civilians killed by the Souths regime. All by the system the west helped set up while they banned the peoples own initiative to organize a new system under the soviet/US stewardship and break with the colonial japanease system. There¡¯s lots of retards on both side, but you don¡¯t have to deal with them, mostly the NK officials aren¡¯t extremists like it¡¯s supporters outside the country. Theres still a lot of opportunity and space for change without forcing out the elite by force. It¡¯s still the same people that needs to manage the country in the future, (changing chairs will of course happen, but you can¡¯t replace people with people that don¡¯t exist), if you don¡¯t want it to get even worse there that is. If the world would deal with the issue instead off hoping for a collapse that neither SK or China wants it could change so much. Of course investments would need to be made but isn¡¯t trade better then letting a big part of the country starve and send food aid when it gets to be an emergency. It could actually be apart of the manufacturing and shipping, and in that part of the world it would actually be very beneficial for their partners. You could pretty much have the control you need in the industrial zones.
Dec 22, 201011:20pm EST--
