South Korean, Chinese defense chiefs to meet in February
2010-12-26 06:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense ministers from South Korea and China will hold talks in Beijing in February amid growing regional tension sparked by North Korea's nuclear programmes and hostile acts, South Korea's defense ministry said on Sunday.
"South Korea's Defense Minister Kim Kwan-jin and his Chinese counterpart Liang Guanglie plan to meet in Beijing in February. Details of the meeting agenda have not been discussed yet," a spokesperson for South Korea's ministry said.
Tensions have risen to their highest in decades on the divided Korean peninsula after the North bombarded a South Korean island last month, and revealed major advances in its nuclear programme.
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak in November appointed Kim as new defense minister after Kim's predecessor resigned after criticism of what was perceived as a weak response to aggression from the North, including a submarine attack in March and the shelling of Yeonpyeong island last month.
Pyongyang has offered to re-admit U.N. inspectors concerned about its nuclear weapons programme, prompting speculation that six-party talks including the North may resume, and the worst of the most recent crisis may be over.
(Reporting by Hyunjoo Jin; Editing by Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China surely had much to do with North Korea changing its mind about reacting to training maneuvers near its border. In that instance, China served the cause of peace. The current meetings between China¡¯s and Korea¡¯s military experts could be to further encourage developments that are favorable from America¡¯s point of view. However, America must always remember that China also has its own agenda regarding their side of the Pacific Rim, an agenda in which Taiwan figures prominently.
Dec 26, 20107:10pm EST--
