Fog may delay South Korean drill, after North's threat
2010-12-18 16:17:00.0
Fog may delay South Korean drill, after North's threat | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fog may delay South Korean drill, after North's threat
Fri, Dec 17 2010
Sat, Dec 18 2010
Sat, Dec 18 2010
South Korean marines patrol on Yeonpyeong Island December 18, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Lee Sang-hak/Yonhap
YEONPYEONG, South Korea
Sat  EST
YEONPYEONG, South Korea
The South Korean military had planned the exercise for December 18-21 off the small island of Yeonpyeong, hit by a North Korean bombardment last month.
However, military officials quoted by Yonhap news agency said the drills were likely to be delayed by fog and wind.
Analysts were skeptical the North would carry out the threat it issued on Friday, which rattled financial markets and brought a vow by the South to retaliate against any attack by Pyongyang.
But tensions on the peninsula remained high, with a U.S. troubleshooter, Governor Bill Richardson of New Mexico, calling the situation "a tinderbox" and urging the North to let the rival South conduct exercises.
China, the North's main backer, urged both nations to refrain from acts that would inflame an already "extremely precarious" situation.
"The serious tension on the peninsula must not be allowed to escalate," Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Zhijun said on Saturday. "China is firmly against any behavior that may result in the situation deteriorating or damaging regional stability."
The U.N. Security Council called an emergency session for Sunday at 11 a.m. (1600 GMT) to discuss the escalating tensions, council diplomats said on Saturday.
Many of the 1,600 residents, who live alongside 1,000 military personnel, are uneasy about the prospect of a new barrage and have chosen to leave for the mainland for a while.
A marine corps officer, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the military would only announce plans for the drills a few hours in advance, and only to media on the island.
North Korea said on Friday it would retaliate against the drills with a stronger strike than last month's bombardment, in which it rained 170 rounds of artillery down on Yeonpyeong, killing four people. South Korea hit back with 80 rounds.
On Saturday, the North's state media launched a blistering assault on the South's pledge to cooperate with the United States and retaliate in the event of another bombardment. They suggested any such move could trigger a nuclear conflict.
"It is a suicidal move akin to digging one's own grave for the South's conservative forces to gang up with outside elements to try to harm compatriots," the official publication of the North's cabinet, Minju Joson, said in an editorial.
The North's foreign ministry spokesman was quoted as saying by the official KCNA news agency: "We will be sure to settle scores with the U.S. for the extreme situation on the Korean peninsula." He added: "Our military does not speak empty words."
Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Zhang said Beijing recently summoned the ambassadors of both Koreas to remind them of China's "position and proposals."
Russia called on South Korea to halt plans for the drill, summoning the ambassadors from Seoul and Washington to express "extreme concern" over the exercise.
In Pyongyang, Governor Richardson, on a private mission to cool tensions, told CNN in a telephone interview: "There's enormous potential for miscalculation."
He added: "I'm urging (on the North) extreme restraint ... Let's cool things down."
The U.S. State Department underscored the U.S. stance that South Korea had every right to conduct the exercises, but indicated that it, too, was worried.
"We trust that South Korea will be very cautious in terms of what it does, but that said, let's put the responsibility squarely where it lies," a State Department spokesman said.
North Korea is seeking the resumption of six-party talks with the United States, China, South Korea, Japan and Russia aimed at persuading Pyongyang to abandon its nuclear program.
It wants the talks to resume without preconditions, something Washington and South Korea have ruled out because they do not want to reward Pyongyang for hostile actions.
At the same time as the poor, reclusive country is pushing for aid, the North is also in the throes of a potential leadership succession as ailing leader Kim Jong-il grooms his youngest son Kim Jong-un as the next ruler.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing and Louis Charbonneau at the United Nations; Writing by Jack Kim; Editing by Miral Fahmy, Andrew Roche and Eric Walsh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a good time for Russia to get behind the effort to support the recognition of everyone¡¯s sea boundaries and not just one whose historical hegemony has been turned back more than once by divine winds. It is also a good time for the North¡¯s praetorian guards to come to the aide of their countrymen since the Great drinker has had to much lead in his boiled wine. Let¡¯s hope the troops near the Yalu have removed just enough brush so that the Dynamic Kim duo can take their Il gotten gains and Un prepared as they are make a midnight snow mobile trip to Nepal were they can party hardy with the prince, before one of the gals at the North Korean Playboy Mansion goes postal on the pair. I¡¯ll Capone didn¡¯t have scars for brain surgery when he quietly retired. Time for the error apparent and Ill dad to report to Cheng and visit the ancestors of the Duke Ting of Cheng and the ancestors of Tzu-ch¡¯an. Let¡¯s all save a little face and start a joint project to bring peace to these warring states.
Dec 17, 201010:42pm EST--
Isn¡¯t it about time that we stop encouraging North Korean¡¯s violent and aggressive behavior? Time and time again we go through this little charade of North Korea acting out with some display of aggression or harsh rhetoric, then we start some kind of passive negotiation process with the US, North Korean, South Korea, China and Russia. It leads to some limited agreement that eventually falls apart, it¡¯s the most dysfunctional bizarre world political relationship ever. I agree with the first comment regarding bringing peace in the area, but not at the price of responding to North Koreas violent actions and threats. Its time North Korea extend an olive branch and act like mature world citizens. At that point the rest of the civilized world can start a realistic dialog that brings North Korea into a productive membership with the rest of the world. After North Korea proves they are walking a path of reform through good and positive behaviors, the rest of the world can start to help with direct aid, trade agreements and other forms of social and economic assistance. Until North Korea starts acting like mature adults, we need to treat them like the war mongering attention seeking hooligan¡¯s they are. If that means economics sanctions, political censorship or summoning the North Korean regime to the Hague for perpetuating war crimes, then so be it. While South Korea has not been a perfect neighbor, they have never threatened war, like the North Korean regime does on a persistent basis. Why do we put up with such behavior, if China wasn¡¯t a close ally of North Korea would we be so passive in our approach?
Dec 18, 201012:32am EST--
how convenient that the weather is delaying the artillery, you watch, the drills will be ¡°postponed¡± due to weather. ROK might as well sign over the islands to Kim Jong IL.
Dec 18, 201010:08am EST--
