China's Xinmao pushes ahead with Draka cable bid
2010-12-20 05:44:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Xinmao Group will press ahead with a 1 billion-euro ($1.3 billion) bid for Dutch cable maker Draka DRAK.AS, but warned that the timing of a competing offer from Italy's Prysmian could yet derail its takeover plan.
Draka dismissed the Chinese group's latest overture as unofficial and said it was sticking to Prysmian's (
) cash and share bid. Draka has already endorsed this deal, valuing the Dutch cable maker at around 830 million euros ($1.1 billion).
But Xinmao's persistence could yet force a higher offer from the Italian company, which declined to comment on Xinmao's move.
"I think they will have to increase their bid...All cash may be part of the deal. Everyone would be happy if it raises its bid a little," a Milan broker said.
Xinmao said in a statement it would submit an offer request to the Dutch stock market regulator by February 14, adding it was convinced it would get the backing of key Draka investor Flint Beheer, a family-controlled fund which has a 48.5 percent stake.
However, Xinmao, attracted by Draka's leading position in optical fiber -- No.1 in China and Europe and No.4 in the United States -- conceded that a lot depended on the length of the tender period for Prysmian's agreed deal with Draka.
"After our constructive discussions with Draka's management, l am even more convinced that Draka will thrive as part of the Xinmao group, backed by the expertise of Draka's management and Xinmao 's management," Xinmao chairman Du Kerong said on Monday.
In a move that could prove crucial for its bid, Xinmao said financing from China Minsheng Banking Corporation no longer depended on a merger protocol with Draka, but that the bank would still need to be satisfied with the due diligence.
In an Amsterdam press conference presentation Xinmao repeated it had a 1.1 billion euro commitment from Minsheng, adding it did not expect to run into any competition issues and that it expected no lay-offs at Draka if it was successful.
But in a nod to critics who have been skeptical of its credentials, Xinmao also said it had appointed Rabobank International RABN.UL as an M&A advisor and debt co-ordinator alongside little-known Amsterdam-based Catalyst Advisors.
Xinmao gatecrashed Prysmian's agreed cash and share takeover of Draka in November with its own cash bid, highlighting the growing influence and ambition of Chinese companies.
"Is it likely that Xinmao obtains all approvals before January 26 (when Draka holds its EGM) and is able to change the articles of association at the EGM? It is possible but not very likely," SNS Securities analysts wrote in a note.
Draka has accepted Prysmian's 833 million euro ($1.1 billion) offer to form the world's largest supplier of steel cables used in elevators, manufacturing and construction.
Xinmao said its offer was conditional on 75 percent of Draka's ordinary shares being tendered and on Draka shareholders allowing it to appoint and remove Draka management and supervisory board members.
Prysmian said last week its offer would start early in January, as soon as it has Dutch market approval, but gave no timing for the close of the offer.
Draka expressed doubts last week about reaching a deal with Xinmao, citing concerns over financing and a lack of progress the Chinese company had made in securing approvals in Beijing, sparking a rebuke from Xinmao's Dutch adviser.
A spokeswoman at the State Council, China's cabinet, told Reuters on Monday she had no information on Xinmao's bid. Chinese companies, however, frequently wait until after a deal meets approval on all sides before seeking government approval.
In October Draka had rejected a 15 euro per share bid from France's Nexans (
Draka shares were slightly higher at 19.26 euros at 0902 GMT, still below Draka's 20.5 euros per share offer but above Prysmian's valuation of 17.10 euros per share.
China has ramped up its presence on the global M&A stage. Last year Chinese companies spent $42.6 billion abroad, third among foreign M&A investor nations after the United States and France. Ten years ago, China ranked 12th.
The push was fueled by China's cash rich and state-backed institutions' desire to grow business beyond the domestic market and has been mainly focused in energy and mining.
(Additional reporting by Sara Webb in Amsterdam and Shengnan Zhang in Beijing; writing by Alexander Smith; Editing by Jane Merriman)
