Miners lead FTSE higher, buoyed by China growth
2010-12-13 07:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares gained ground by midday on Monday, lifted by miners after data from China showed there was no let up in its booming growth.
By 1149 GMT, the FTSE 100
was up 46.24 points, or 0.8 percent at 5,859.19, having notched up a 1.2 percent rise over the course of the previous week, albeit in light volumes as the UK market began its last full week of trading before the Christmas holiday period.
"The need for stronger momentum is required if the rally is to sustain itself," Sandy Jadeja, chief technical analyst at City Index, said.
"As long as momentum remains positive the upside targets for December could see the index reach for 6,050 to 6,117. It is essential that the FTSE now holds 5,770 as short term key pivots in order to maintain the bullish stance."
Miners .FTNMX1770 provided the main support for Britain's blue chip index, gaining on the back of strong Chinese industrial output numbers which topped forecasts and sent copper in London to a record high.
Banks .FTNMX8350, which have struggled against the backdrop of worries over sovereign debt problems in the euro zone, were back on the front foot as risk appetite among investors improved. Barclays (
Concerns remained over China's soaring inflation, which sped to a 28-month high, and showed signs of spreading beyond food prices, putting pressure on the government to ratchet up its monetary tightening policy.
"There's something of a short-term relief that China decided not to raise interest rates this time round," said Richard Hunter, head of equities at Hargreaves Lansdown.
On the macroeconomic front in the UK, British manufacturers' input costs rose last month at their fastest annual rate since July, ahead of consumer price inflation due on Tuesday.
Meanwhile, M&A talk was the main driver in the oil services sector. Petrofac (
) rose 1.7 percent with traders citing a read across from mid cap peer Wellstream WSML.L, which is the subject of an 800 million pounds ($1.3 billion) bid from U.S. firm General Electric Co (
) was also in demand, up 6.7 percent after agreeing to buy unlisted Scotland-based rival PSN for $995 million.
Companies that have been the subject of recent vague bid talk, however, were on the backfoot with security firm G4S (
) among the top fallers down 0.6 and 0.9 percent, respectively.
Elsewhere, British Airways BAY.L climbed 1.1 percent after the Financial Times reported the airline is discussing changes to its pension scheme rules that would enable it to slash its pension shortfall almost in half.
