Oil up on China data amid caution about inflation
2010-12-13 16:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil prices rose on Monday, surging early with commodities lifted by strong Chinese economic data before oil met resistance above $89 a barrel amid investor concern that China may yet take more action to cool its inflation.
Saudi Arabia said it still favored oil prices between $70 and $80 per barrel, stoking investor caution even as the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries on Saturday kept production policy unchanged as expected, despite oil's recent rise above $90 a barrel.
U.S. crude for January delivery rose 82 cents to settle at $88.61 a barrel, after posting a session peak of $89.49. U.S. crude hit a 26-month peak at $90.76 on December 7.
"Thursday's high was $89.42, so the market is showing there is decent resistance in that area," said Tom Bentz, broker at BNP Paribas Commodity Futures Inc in New York.
Total U.S. crude trading volume was at 579,373 lots, below the 30-day average of 667,478 lots with about 1-1/2 hour of post-settlement trading left.
ICE Brent crude for January rose 71 cents to settle at $91.19 a barrel, off an early $92.30 peak. The January Brent contract expires on Thursday.
Investor optimism was fueled by data from China's National Bureau of Statistics showing industrial output in November topped expectations, while headline inflation rose to a 28-month high to 5.1 percent.
But China's implied oil demand in November rose 13.7 percent from the year-ago period to a record of nearly 9.3 million barrels per day, Reuters calculations based on preliminary official data showed.
"Over the weekend the Saudis came out and said $70 to $80 is optimal," said Stephen Schork, president at the Schork Group, commenting on investor caution when prices near $90.
"And given the weekend's news regarding China's rampant inflation, my assumption is they will move to lower consumption, and that is all weighing upon the market," he said.
OPEC's top producer Saudi Arabia said on Saturday it still favored a $70-$80 oil price range as OPEC left its production targets unchanged at an oil ministers' meeting in Quito.
Saudi Oil Minister Ali al-Naimi told reporters on Saturday that, "$70-$80 is a good price," seemingly restating a two-year-old policy.
The dollar's weakness also was supportive to oil prices as the concerns about the U.S. deficit pushed the dollar lower after rating agency Moody's said a tax-cut deal reached last week by the White House and Republicans could shift its outlook on the United States' top credit rating.
U.S. heating oil futures managed to end higher on Monday after also seesawing. While heating oil demand will average 4.8 percent above normal this week, according to the National Weather Service, that is well below last week when demand was 23.7 percent above normal.
Northern Europe remains cold, with forecasts expecting them to remain below normal.
U.S. crude oil inventories were expected to have fallen last week, according to a Reuters survey of analysts on Monday. Crude stocks were estimated to be lower by 2.2 million barrels, with distillate stockpiles seen down 500,000 barrels.
The American Petroleum Institute's inventory report is due on Tuesday at 4:30 p.m. EST, with the U.S. Energy Information Administration's report following on Wednesday.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos in New York, Una Galani and Christopher Johnson in London and Rebekah Kebede in Perth; Editing by Marguerita Choy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
the reason is too much green papers are printed out,the world is suffering a high inflation and it will last for a long time.
Dec 13, 20102:23am EST--
