Graduate schools stung by drop in Chinese applications
2013-04-19 13:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Slowing graduate-school enrollments, including a 5 percent decline in applications from China for fall 2013, are hurting the revenues of many U.S. universities, Moody's Investors Service said on Friday.
In a commentary, Moody's said graduate school enrollments for the coming autumn term increased by just 1 percent, or the smallest increase in 11 years, according to data from the Council of Graduate Schools.
Private universities took the biggest blow, with applications from typically higher-paying international students off 4 percent. Public universities saw international applications go up 3 percent, Moody's said.
Applications from China, the largest exporter of graduate students to the United States, were off 5 percent.
"Falling applications from China is credit negative for many U.S. universities because Chinese students account for approximately one third of international graduate enrollments, and they tend to pay higher net tuition than domestic students," Moody's said.
"Another soft year of graduate enrollment in the fall of 2013 is likely to further weaken net tuition revenue growth in fiscal year 2014, especially at graduate-intensive private universities," Moody's said.
The turndown comes as other sources of revenue gains, including tuition increases, are thinning. But, Moody's said, it did not expect the fall-off in overseas graduate applications to materially affect U.S. universities in the short term.
(Reporting by Michael Connor in Miami; Editing by James Dalgleish and Vicki Allen)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Falling applications from China is credit negative for many U.S. universities because Chinese students account for approximately one third of international graduate enrollments, and they tend to pay higher net tuition than domestic students,¡± Moody¡¯s said. Glad to see that the primary concern of universities is that profit over education. Education is not important. What really matters is that universities with several thousand students (each paying tuition equivalent to a car payment) need more money, and I agree. It shouldn¡¯t matter that the U.S. needs an educated population to establish new ideas or resolve current issues (Because with money we can BUY a workforce fro the international community and BUY ourselves out of problems). If these universities are having financial problems because they are loosing their international cash cows, then I believe that they SHOULD complain to the government so that the local residents can pay a justified tax increase. (The local residents OWE the universities, after all). It is paramount that our universities succeed in their intended purpose, to make money. Focusing on less-profitable (local entities) will not yield as much of a profit when compared to Chinese imported students (who pay more). Any ethical,country supporting business would understand it¡¯s responsibility to the community and do the same. ¡°Falling applications from China is credit negative for many U.S. universities because Chinese students account for approximately one third of international graduate enrollments, and they tend to pay higher net tuition than domestic students,¡± Moody¡¯s said.
Apr 20, 20139:36pm EDT--
China¡¯s universities improve with each international assessment, and western institutions decline. In 2010, international tests showed that China scored 1st and 1st in math and science; Hong Kong took the test seperately and scored 3rd and 3rd; the US was 31st in math and 23rd in science. Although these were middle school students, they are the future college students, graduate students, and professors. In addition, 50% of Chinese major in the sciences, the money-making professions, compared to 13% in the US. Given the differences in populations, China produces 17 times as many students in the sciences as the US. In 2011, Premier Wen Jiabao told the Chinese Academy of Science and Technology that there would be freedom and democracy in academic pursuits, so the West¡¯s democracy arguments for education are not valid. Staying with more intelligent peers in China may be better the futures of Chinese students than hanging out with US frat rats and party animals. The US has been bringing its decline for decades.
Apr 21, 20134:09pm EDT--
