Taiwan calls on China to release Nobel winner
2010-12-10 03:38:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Dec 10 2010
Fri, Dec 10 2010
Fri, Dec 10 2010
Thu, Dec 9 2010
Thu, Dec 9 2010
Fri  EST
"The Republic of China welcomes the Nobel award for Liu Xiaobo and calls on China to release him," Ma said, using the island's formal name. "Concern for human rights does not distinguish between nationalities and borders."
Democracy campaigner Liu, who was jailed late last year for 11 years for subversion, will be represented at the award ceremony in the Norwegian capital, Oslo, by an empty chair after China prevented friends and family from attending.
After decades of hostilities, relations have improved rapidly following Ma's election in 2008, and the two sides have since signed a series of landmark economic and trade ties.
But there has been no sign of political talks starting, and Ma has consistently called on China to improve its human rights record and move toward democracy, as the island has.
Taiwan's opposition Democratic Progressive Party, which has angered China with its support for the island's formal independence, denounced Beijing's refusal to allow Liu out of jail and to attend the prize's formal award ceremony on Friday.
Spokesman Lin You-chang said China's reaction to the Nobel prize and the actions it has since taken are "extremely regrettable".
"The award is great recognition of Liu Xiaobo and of China's democracy reformers. His imprisonment and inability to attend the ceremony will only serve to increase the international community's attention on the state of human rights in China," Lin said.
China has denounced Liu, a man it calls a subversive and a criminal, as an unworthy winner of the prize. (Reporting by Jonathan Standing; Writing by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
How can China become a world leader; if they continue to behave, like a world dictator?
How can China become a world leader; if they continue to behave, like a world dictator?
Until and unless they put personal freedoms and accomplishments, over archaic dictatorial rule, they will remain an outside to democracy and freedom. Free people of the world aren¡¯t going to give in to Chinese rule, no matter how big an economic power they become and this attitude of ¡®CHina knows best¡¯ and rule by force, will end in war.
That we may never recover from and all the economic power and good will, China has done on the world¡¯s stage, will be forever loss and forgotten. One world Government
will emerge some day soon, but it won¡¯t be one world Chinese government. They have to decide if they want to have a place in the world of the future or be left behind and forgotten. China should be proud that one of their very own, was awarded a Nobel prize and stand as an equal among other Nations of the world. It China going to reward all Chinese Nobel winners, with jail or punish them for being a global leader in their field? This practice will force brilliant thinkers, to flee China and give their genius to other Nations of the world. China has the best educated people on the planet, but to do what?
Go to jail if they become world leaders and punish them for having done so?
Dec 10, 20102:39pm EST--
