Defense chief Gates to visit China next month
2010-12-09 12:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense Secretary Robert Gates will visit China next month, as the world's two largest economies try to repair a relationship that has been battered by arguments about military exercises and Taiwan.
Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, made the long-expected announcement about the visit at a news conference in Tokyo on Thursday.
"One of the very difficult parts of the United States' and China's relationship right now is we have no military-to-military contacts, no military-to-military relationship," Mullen said.
"Secretary Gates will visit China next month from the U.S.," he added. "I would hope that we can sustain that military-to-military relationship as opposed to what it has been, which has been on-and-off over the years, which just doesn't do either one of us very, any good."
At the same time, China announced that a Chinese military delegation headed by a senior general left for the United States on Thursday for what state media said were regular defense talks.
General Ma Xiaotian, deputy chief of general staff of the People's Liberation Army, will attend the 11th annual round of bilateral defense consultations, Xinhua news agency said.
The two sides will "exchange views on military ties, maritime military security and other international and regional security issues," Xinhua said, citing a Chinese Defense Ministry statement. It gave no further details.
U.S. and Chinese defense chiefs in October met for the first time since Beijing lifted a freeze on U.S. military ties, imposed after Washington unveiled a new arms sales package to self-ruled Taiwan.
A Pentagon report released in August said Beijing was expanding its military edge over Taiwan, increasing the lethal capability of its short-range ballistic missiles.
"While they talk about peaceful rise, and I think a peaceful rise of China would be a positive outcome for everybody, there are certainly investments that are very focused on the United States ... that don't necessary match up to a peaceful rise," Mullen said.
"I'm hopeful that we can get a relationship established between our militaries, where we can have much more fruitful conversations that are much more transparent than has been in the past. Historically, our relationship has been far too opaque."
(Reporting by Yoko Kubota in Tokyo and Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Editing by Robert Birsel)
