Nobel Peace Prize given to Liu Xiaobo in absentia
2010-12-10 07:09:00.0
(Reuters) - China could face economic and social crises if it fails to embrace full civil rights, with consequences for the whole world, the Nobel Committee said in prepared remarks for a ceremony awarding the Peace Prize to Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo.
The awarding of the prize to Liu, serving an 11-year sentence for subversion, has infuriated Beijing as the rising Asian power becomes more assertive on the world stage. It has attempted to use diplomatic pressure to discourage countries from attending the ceremony in Oslo.
"We can to a certain degree say that China, with its 1.3 billion people, is carrying mankind's fate on its shoulders," Jagland said in the prepared speech.
"If the country proves capable of developing a social market economy with full civil rights, this will have a huge favorable impact on the world. If not, there is a danger of social and economic crisis arising... with consequences for all."
An empty chair at the ceremony symbolized Liu's imprisonment. It was the first occasion that no representative of a detained laureate had been allowed to the ceremony since 1935, when pacifist Carl von Ossietzky was jailed by Adolf Hitler's Nazi regime.
Jagland called on China to release Liu and said Beijing's reaction had showed the award was "necessary and appropriate".
In Liu's absence, Norwegian actress Liv Ullmann was due to read out the laureate's speech from his court trial a year ago.
"I have no enemies and no hatred. None of the police who monitored, arrested, and interrogated me, none of the prosecutors who indicted me, and none of the judges who judged me are my enemies," Liu told a Chinese court on December 23, 2009.
"I, filled with optimism, look forward to the advent of a future free China. For there is no force that can put an end to the human quest for freedom, and China will in the end become a nation ruled by law, where human rights reign supreme."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The free world can not allowed China to disregard human rights as if were a puppet.The whole world can not be silent to the abuse China is inflicting on Liu Xiaobo and millions of others who had spoken about China¡¯s stance of humans rights. Those nations that have boycotted the ceremony are the nations that are the joke of the Planet. We cant stand alone just looking around to see who will arise in the world and stand against China in the conduct of human decency and whats right. China have millions of people, a strong nation but is easily defeated by the voice of Liu Xiaobo. We cant allowed China to enslave millions they way they did with Liu Xiaobo. a single voice, a single chair is stronger than the millions of China, because freedom carried a stronger voice. Long live Liu Xiaobo.
Dec 10, 20108:32am EST--
Place the Nobel Peace Medal around the neck of one of those Damn propaganda Panda Bears. That way the communists will no longer be able to associate something that looks warm and caudally with their morally bankrupt and brutal regime, I mean a society with different values. Or Burn Propaganda Panda Bears in effigy outside their consulates until they see Liu as less of a threat and more of an asset then Kim J Ill advised and Kim J Un the error apparent. As far as the Confucius prize Yu confuse us do you have to have your que lopped off, buy some unisex PJ¡¯s, have hour wife sterilized, go to reeducation camp or just have your toes run over by your own armies tanks to be eligible?
Dec 10, 20106:04pm EST--
