Slim majority see China rate rise before end 2010
2010-12-13 07:14:00.0
(Reuters) - China is poised to raise interest rates before the end of this year, but will then increase them just twice more in 2011, relying instead on using lending controls as its weapon of choice in the fight against inflation, a Reuters poll shows.
A narrow majority of 55 percent said an increase of 25 basis points was likely before the end of 2010, while the remaining 45 percent saw the next rate rise in the first quarter of 2011.
One-year benchmark deposit rates currently stand at 2.5 percent, putting real rates well into negative territory after consumer inflation sped to a 28-month high of 5.1 percent in the year to November.
"Consumer price inflation is going to be about 3 percent in the medium to long term, so it is quite necessary for deposit rate to follow that and return to the 3 percent level," Wang Han, an economist at CEBM in Shanghai, said.
One-year lending rates were seen following deposit rates in lock-step. Currently 5.56 percent, they will rise to 6.31 percent around the middle of next year, the poll suggests.
LENDING CONTROLS, RESERVE REQUIREMENTS
China has raised interest rates just once over the past year, but has officially increased banks' required reserves six times, preferring to use this quantitative control as a way of limiting the amount of cash in the economy.
"Any reluctance to avoid using more potent policy tools looks increasingly untenable given the speed with which price pressures are building," said Brian Jackson, an economist with Royal Bank of Canada in Hong Kong.
But rather than relying on interest rates alone, China will weigh on its state-owned banking system, an essential arm of its monetary policy, to cap the flow of credit into the economy.
Beijing will order banks to restrict new loans to 7 trillion yuan next year, down about 7 percent from this year's credit target, according to the median forecast.
Chinese leaders gave greater prominence to the fight against inflation in their statement on Sunday at the end of the Central Economic Work Conference, an annual meeting at which they chart policy for the coming year.
But at the same time as vowing to focus on price stability, they also said that they will strike a balance between controlling inflation and maintaining growth. Some analysts have read this as relatively soft language, indicating that officials believe inflation is under control and harsh tightening will not be necessary.
