China says hopes WikiLeaks will not affect U.S. ties
2010-12-07 05:40:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Dec 7 2010
Tue, Dec 7 2010
Mon, Dec 6 2010
Mon, Dec 6 2010
Sat, Dec 4 2010
Tue  EST
Among the leaked cables is one in which an unidentified Chinese contact alleged that the hacking of Google Inc, that led the Internet company briefly to pull out of China, was orchestrated by two members of China's Politburo, the nation's top ruling body.
"It is ridiculous and not worth mentioning," Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu said at a regular news conference. "We hope they will not affect bilateral ties with the United States."
Citing the cables, the New York Times said China made repeated and often successful hacking attacks on the U.S. government, private enterprises and Western allies as far back as 2002.
Alan Eustace, Google's senior vice president for engineering, declined to comment on the reports, when asked about it on Tuesday at a Google forum in Beijing.
"We have no first-hand knowledge of any of the information contained in any of those cables. I have nothing to add," he said.
Google, the world's top Internet search engine, closed its China-based search service in March, two months after it had said it would stop censoring search results in response to what it said was a sophisticated cyber attack that it traced to China and increasing limits on freedom of expression.
WikiLeaks started publishing last weekend what it said were more than 250,000 U.S. diplomatic cables, some of them about China.
According to one cable released this week, the man who is expected to be China's next head of government, Li Keqiang, told a U.S. diplomat in 2007 China's GDP figures were "man-made" and therefore unreliable.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee, Sabrina Mao and Terrill Jones; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It is ridiculous and not worth mentioning,that the hacking of Google Inc, that led the Internet company briefly to pull out of China, was orchestrated by two members of China¡¯s Politburo, the nation¡¯s top ruling body.
Dec 07, 20107:49am EST--
Wikileaks, it is a failure; if they ever intended good of it. But still a failure in any case. Now, all governments want to see them ¡°personally¡±, who knows what they will want from them. They have done nothing but made themselves targets to fierce countries such as china, russia, sweden, and including many others besides the united states of america. Only tyrants can benefit from the releases of wikileaks. They have no true references or way of proving their information. Instigation. I am sure some of it will bring countries closer together to prevent this from happening ever again. As for freedom to information and speech. This kind of ¡°freedom¡± is what destroys freedom. Now, I am sure democracy and human rights will now be set back 100 years in its global development and acceptance. Way to go nerds.
Dec 07, 201010:34am EST--
Actually¡­ If you understand the concept of threatening stability on such a massive scale, you are lucky you could post that message. War, missles, Nukes¡­ Its not as simple as some guy saying hack google. There is a rather disgusting true story to it that wikileaks does not present, because it has such a massive, untraceable , build of information it can in no way prove or cite in its true origin. Wikileaks could never get a true and 100% story out in any case. Information adapts.
Dec 07, 201010:48am EST--
