China says does not want to replace U.S. as world power
2010-12-07 05:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China does not want to "replace" the United States from its dominant role in the world, and the world should not fear China's rise, the country's top diplomat wrote in an essay.
State Councilor Dai Bingguo said that China would not engage in an arms race, as the country's resources were better spent on development and ensuring its people had enough to eat.
"The notion that China wants to replace the United States and dominate the world is a myth," Dai wrote in the essay carried on the Foreign Ministry's website (www.mfa.gov.cn) late on Monday.
"Politically, we ... respect the social systems and development path of the different peoples of the world," he added.
"Economically, we wholeheartedly want to continue to develop," Dai wrote. "Militarily, we are not engaged in an arms race."
China's growing military clout and rising defense spending have raised concern in Asia, especially in Japan and Taiwan, as well as in Washington. China says its military expenditure is purely for defensive purposes.
"The international community should welcome and not fear China's peaceful development, help it and not hinder it, support it and not hold it back," he wrote.
But the world also needed to "understand and respect China's reasonable interests and concerns."
Such issues included China's territorial integrity and foreign arms sales to Taiwan, the self-ruled island China claims as its own, Dai said.
China will also be "actively involved" in global issues relating to the North Korean and Iranian nuclear programs, the Arab-Israeli conflict and Sudan's Darfur, and "a responsible participant in the international system," Dai said.
The United States, Japan and South Korea have pressed China to bring its old ally North Korea to heel following renewed tension on the Korean peninsula, though Beijing has refrained from doing so, calling instead for multilateral talks.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee and Ben Blanchard; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Communist China is not a strategic partner but a concealed strategic enemy of the United States. China will join in the Soviet offensive to bring about ¡®restructuring¡¯ in the United States and worldwide. Through penetration, Chinese Communist intelligence destroyed the CIA¡¯s sources in China during the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s and prevented the Agency developing reliable sources on the strategic intention of the Chinese leaders. The National Security Agency cannot help because information on secret Sino-Soviet strategic coordination is not carried on accessible communications channels.¡± ¡ª KGB Defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn, The Perestroika Deception, March 1989, p. 35. KGB Defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn defected to the West in 1961 with a warning that the Soviets and Chinese (and all other Communist nations) had signed onto a new ¡®long-range deception strategy¡¯ to lull the West into complacency. He predicted the peaceful collapse of the Berlin Wall; the peaceful collapse of the Warsaw Pact; the ¡®collapse¡¯ of the USSR; the rise of Solidarity; etc. Because Golitsyn¡¯s predictions concerning Soviet/East Bloc behavior are so accurate, the sincerity of his defection is untouchable. Not so with those KGB/GRU defectors who followed Golitsyn, whose collective predictions on Soviet/East Bloc behavior were abysmal. Ask yourself this question: Why didn¡¯t Golitsyn go on the lecture circuit to capitalize on his clairvoyance? Other KGB/GRU defectors are on the lecture circuit making a living for themselves even though their track records back in the 1970s and 1980s were laughable.
Dec 07, 20104:42am EST--
The problem is not what China says, it is what China does. Between the two there is consistently a discrepancy which by the standards of the West is shameful. Intelligent Westerners know that the threat from China isn¡¯t military, they know that the threat is of another kind, far more subtle and, arguably, more dangerous. The threat from China could be a redefinition of human life along the principle of extreme collectivization, and just by maintaining a relationship with China, the West can find itself infected with a degenerate way of life. China can indeed acheive its true agenda without the help of a powerful military. China¡¯s elite has already figured out that through economic might and corrupt incentivizing, it can control and farm its own lower cast of people. With consistence, it is developping systems which would help it take advantage of other misfortunate populations around the world.
Dec 07, 20105:27am EST--
The Reuters article reads, ¡°China will also be ¡°actively involved¡± in global issues relating to the North Korean and Iranian nuclear programs, the Arab-Israeli conflict and Sudan¡¯s Darfur, and ¡°a responsible participant in the international system,¡± Dai said.¡± Here is what KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn wrote in 1989: ¡°U.S. policy for dealing with the North Korean situation is inadequate because it focuses on North Korea in isolation as a rogue state, and naively seeks help from the Russians and Chinese to solve the problem. The North Korea situation and any future nuclear incident, wherever it occurs, must be seen against the background of Sino-Soviet ¡®convergence¡¯ strategy: the interaction of Russian and Chinese policy and the moves they make to derive strategic gains from critical situations should be closely studied.¡± ¨C KGB Defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn, The Perestroika Deception, March 1989, p. 46.
Dec 07, 20105:37am EST--
