At least three to bid for AIG Taiwan unit: sources
2010-12-02 02:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's Fubon Financial (
), Chinatrust (
) and the chairman of conglomerate Ruentex will bid for AIG's (
) Taiwan unit after completing due diligence, four sources with direct knowledge of the situation said on Thursday.
A fourth party to the due diligence, Cathay Financial (
), will make a decision on whether to bid on Friday, one of the sources said.
All four had been invited by American International Group (AIG) to do due diligence on the Nan Shan unit, which the bailed-out insurer is trying to sell for a second time as it looks to repay the U.S. government.
The sources, who asked for anonymity due to the sensitivity of the matter, declined to say how much each would bid or give an estimate of the possible price.
"Everybody wants to buy Nan Shan," said one of the sources. "Yes, Nan Shan has suffered losses, but it is its unrealized investment gains that matter."
The first three parties will submit their bids on Friday, the sources said.
Nan Shan is Taiwan's No.3 insurer by market share after the insurance arms of Cathay and Fubon and has assets of T$1.7 trillion ($56.5 billion). Cathay has about T$2 trillion in assets. Nan Shan lost T$12.7 billion in the second quarter and T$12.5 billion in the third.
Taiwan regulators rejected in August AIG's plan to sell the unit for $2.15 billion to a Hong Kong-based buyer group of China Strategic (
) and Primus Financial, citing concerns about their future ability to raise funds and lacking of experience in running an insurance business.
Chinatrust, which has long publicly stated its desire to buy Nan Shan, is raising about T$60 billion via a rights issue as part of its bid.
Ruentex Chairman Samuel Yin, who is well known for Ruentex's successful retail chain store operations in mainland China, is bidding as an individual and has asked Citigroup (
) to arrange a syndicated loan for him, one of the sources added.
"Citi has approached several banks about their interest in participating in a loan," said the source.
