Top U.S. military officer presses China over North Korea
2010-12-01 18:43:00.0
(Reuters) - China's push for new talks with North Korea is no substitute for action after Pyongyang's deadly attack on a South Korean island, and Beijing should use its influence to calm the situation, the top U.S. military officer said on Wednesday.
Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said North Korea's "lethal and unprovoked" artillery attack on the South Korean island of Yeonpyeong last week was "unacceptable" and threatened the stability of the region.
The attack, the heaviest North Korean bombardment of the South since the 1950-53 Korean War, killed two civilians and two marines and destroyed dozens of houses. South Korean troops fired back minutes afterwards, causing unknown damage.
China has called for a resumption of six-party talks with North Korea over its nuclear program as a way of easing tensions. The foreign ministers of the United States, Japan and South Korea are expected to meet in Washington on Monday to discuss North Korea, U.S. officials said on Wednesday.
The officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Monday's meeting was expected to touch upon North Korea and other regional security issues and to include U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara and South Korean Foreign Kim Sung-hwan.
Mullen, speaking at a forum on the resumption U.S.-China military-to-military ties, said the United States looked forward to China "assuming its responsibilities for global problem-solving commensurate with its growing capabilities."
"China shares a relationship with the North that is not matched anywhere else in the world. They have much influence and therefore responsibility," he said in a speech at the Center for American Progress think tank.
"Beijing's call for consultations will not substitute for action and I do not believe we should continue to reward North Korea's provocative and destabilizing behavior with bargaining or new incentives," Mullen said. "China is uniquely placed to guide North Korea to a less dangerous place."
Analysts have pointed to several possible motivations for the attack by North Korea, which came months after Pyongyang sank a South Korean navy ship killing 46 sailors and days after it unveiled a new uranium enrichment facility to a visiting U.S. nuclear scientist.
Some analysts say the attack was Pyongyang's attempt to force the resumption of international negotiations that could bring it aid. Others saw it as an attempt to boost the military credentials of the country's leader-in-waiting, Kim Jong-un, the youngest son of ailing leader Kim Jong-il.
Six-party talks aimed at ending North Korea's nuclear program were suspended in December 2008 and have been on hold since then. Pyongyang has indicated it was willing to resume the dialogue, but Washington and Seoul have pressed for it to first take steps to demonstrate a change of behavior.
Mullen said they were aimed at sending a "very powerful signal" of both deterrence and solidarity, adding "we stand strongly with South Korea and remain strongly committed to support South Korea in defense of their territory."
U.S.-China relations have been strained throughout much of 2010, with the two sides clashing over issues from trade and currency to human rights and climate change.
Mullen said he hoped the resumption of military ties with China would help the two sides better judge each other's intentions "through deep, broad and continuous military-to-military engagement."
"Why are you developing these capabilities other than thinking that we're the enemy and we're the ones you're going to get in a fight with?" he asked.
"Those are the kinds of discussions I can't have right now because I'm not sitting down with them."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a far better approach to figuring out how to fix the N Korea problem. china has proven too many times that it is unreliable, and unwilling to act responsibly in the face of N Korea¡¯s acts of war. The world needs to abandon the UN and adopt a ¡°League of Democracies.¡± Why allow dictators like china to hold the world hostage and prevent global peace?!?!
Dec 01, 20101:16pm EST--
China can complain and moan all they like about Carriers in their economic zone and escalating tensions. The FACT is at the end of the day the U.S is the only player in this game that has the ability and desire to change this situation for the better of the Korean people, South & North. People can complain about the U.S starting wars and sticking their fingers into everyone¡¯s pies, but at the end of the day this is NOT a friendly world full of people who wanna leave each other alone and mind their own business. It¡¯s filled with jerks who opress, kill and exploit. I don¡¯t see anyone else in the world saying ¡°no more¡± to terrorism, psycho dictators & corrupt world leaders. The U.S has always taken care of it¡¯s friends, and it¡¯s doing no less here. If North Korea wanna keep up their brinkmanship, I say the U.S straps on it¡¯s big boy boots and goes and force feeds them a nice freedom sandwich.
Dec 01, 20106:57pm EST--
Let¡¯s see, if you have someone who is constantly haranguing and trying to browbeat you all the time ¨C would you be in the mood to co-operate? With the US and its media constantly demonising China (and anybody else that doesn¡¯t ¡°get with the program¡±), it will end up creating blowbacks such as this when help is truly needed. The US has drained goodwill in many places and the law of unintended consequences have now come home to roost. The suggestion of a League of democracies can not come at a worse time to form, since it will be interpreted as an anti-China alliance. And then you want China to co-operate (or should it be to be subservient)? Can you see the cognitive dissonance in this train of thought? As with every other country, China acts for its self-interest (so too does the US but it pretends to be altruistic). A way to make China come round is to have it see that reining in the DPRK is also in its self-interest by having a stable environment for its economic development. And one more thing, the US should refrain from megaphone diplomacy since it not only strengthens the position of the hardliners in the Central Committee, it also makes negotiations harder as it will be more difficult to climb down. Then again, if the US won¡¯t listen, what makes it think others will?
Dec 01, 20108:01pm EST--
