Top Chinese officials led Google hacking: WikiLeaks
2010-12-04 18:55:00.0
(Reuters) - The hacking of Google Inc that led the Internet company to briefly pull out of China was orchestrated by two members of China's top ruling body, according to U.S. diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks and cited by The New York Times on Saturday.
Citing the cables, the Times said China made repeated and often successful hacking attacks on the U.S. government, private enterprises and Western allies as far back as 2002.
Google, the world's top Internet search engine, closed its China-based search service in March, two months after it had said it would stop censoring search results in response to what it said was a sophisticated cyber attack that it traced to China and increasing limits on freedom of expression.
The Times quoted one cable dated earlier this year as saying: "A well-placed contact claims that the Chinese government coordinated the recent intrusions of Google systems. According to our contact, the closely held operations were directed at the Politburo Standing Committee level."
The paper added that the cable quoted the contact as saying the hacking of Google "had been coordinated out of the State Council Information Office with the oversight" of two members of the Communist Party's Politburo: Li Changchun and Zhou Yongkang. It said Zhou is China's top security official.
But the Times said that in an interview with the paper, the contact cited in the cable, "a Chinese person with family connections to the elite," denied knowing who directed the attack.
The person said it was one of Li's subordinates who orchestrated a campaign to force Google to abide by censorship regulations, and Li and Zhou signed off on the plan at several points, the Times said, "But the person did not know whether senior leaders directed the attack."
The cables did not make clear how the cyber attacks blamed on China were coordinated, the Times said, and "the cables also appear to contain some suppositions by Chinese and Americans passed along by diplomats."
According to the cables, at least one previously unreported 2008 attack, which U.S. investigators code-named Byzantine Candor, yielded more than 50 megabytes of e-mail messages along with a complete list of user names and passwords from a U.S. government agency.
WikiLeaks started publishing last weekend what it said were more than 250,000 U.S. diplomatic cables, giving advance access to the Times and several other publications. Some of the revelations provide embarrassing insights into U.S. foreign policy, while others lend support to the U.S. diplomatic position.
(Reporting by Chris Michaud; Editing by Mohammad Zargham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Lots of ..A well-placed words, Not much real info.
Lots of ..A well-placed words, Not much real info.
It will be nice if reuter provide ¡®actual¡¯ cable (link or copy/paste all document), so people can read, what you are talking about.
¡°I can believe anything provided it is incredible¡±-Oscar Wilde
Dec 04, 20107:54pm EST--
Typical china! I guess I¡¯m not surprised, given the fact that china¡¯s government is so corrupt. If china is willing to harbor and protect N Korea¡¯s acts of war, then it shouldn¡¯t surprise anybody that their highest leaders are directing economic theft and espionage. This is just another line item in the list of chinese irresponsibility. -chinese support for the the genocide in Darfur
Typical china! I guess I¡¯m not surprised, given the fact that china¡¯s government is so corrupt. If china is willing to harbor and protect N Korea¡¯s acts of war, then it shouldn¡¯t surprise anybody that their highest leaders are directing economic theft and espionage. This is just another line item in the list of chinese irresponsibility. -chinese support for the the genocide in Darfur
-chinese human rights abuses (Liu Xiao Bo, Tibet, Xinjiang)
-chinese land-grabbing (Senkaku Islands, Spratley Islands, India)
-chinese economic mercantilism (pegged currency, un-opened markets despite WTO obligations)
-chinese occupation of Tibet It¡¯s time for china to stop SAYING they are a responsible power, and start ACTING like a responsible power.
Dec 04, 20107:56pm EST--
Ultimately, every major naughty thing that China does goes back to the notorious Politburo. It is really time the world understands that the 9 member Politburo wields ultimate power in China. They are also the ones who hold the people back from freedom as spelled out in China¡¯s constitution. I personally consider the Politburo to be among the most dangerous people in the world, and I hope that one day the good people of China can get rid of them and throw them in jail.
Dec 04, 20108:15pm EST--
