Oil leaps above $86 on positive data
2010-12-01 13:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil prices shot up to a two-week high above $86 a barrel on Wednesday as positive data from the United States and China, the world's top two oil consumers, lifted investor confidence about economic recovery.
Jobs in the U.S. private sector rose by the biggest margin in three years and manufacturing posted its 16th consecutive month of expansion, though the pace tapered off slightly in November.
In China, the official purchasing managers' index (PMI), a gauge of factory activity, climbed to a seven-month high in November.
The upbeat economic data countered, for the moment, concerns about Europe's sovereign debt problems and a U.S. government report showing a surprise increase in domestic crude inventories last week.
The day's rally was led by U.S. gasoline futures, which surged nearly 5 percent, on reports of tight supplies in the U.S. East Coast and a snag at the 300,000 barrels-per-day refinery of Irving Oil Ltd in Saint John, New Brunswick, which delivers gasoline to the New York Harbor.
U.S. crude for January delivery gained $2.21, or 2.6 percent, to $86.32 a barrel by 12:35 p.m. EDT (1735 GMT) having surged to $86.47 earlier, the highest since November 12. It rebounded from a 2 percent slide on Tuesday.
ICE Brent crude rose $2.35, or 2.7 percent, to $88.27.
"From the depths of despair yesterday that resulted in a sell-off, there is a rash of positive economic data everywhere you look today, and that pulled prices up," said Phil Flynn, an analyst at PFGBest Research in Chicago.
U.S. crude oil inventories rose 1.1 million barrels last week, the U.S. Energy Information Administration said, against the forecast for a 900,000 drawdown in a Reuters poll.
Crude initially rose earlier, guided by data released on Tuesday by the industry group American Petroleum Institute which showed crude stockpiles fell 1.1 million barrels last week.
(Additional reporting by Robert Gibbons in New York; By Alex Lawler in London; Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; editing by Sofina Mirza-Reid)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jobs and the economy are slowly coming back after being devastated by years of Republican policies, and what do the people do? Put more Republicans back into power. People want Republicans and Democrats to work together, and yet the Republicans are threatening to block all legislation unless they get their tax cuts for the rich, which we can¡¯t afford and no serious economists are advocating. Only Republican lawmakers are insisting on those tax cuts because they promised 2% of Americans that they would be willing to sacrifice the other 98% so that the richest 2% can have their tax cuts. And then they turn around and complain about the deficit, making it a campaign issue, the same party that just a few short years ago preached ¡®deficits don¡¯t matter¡¯. The same party that was handed a budget surplus which they immediately turned into a record deficit. And yet the American people vote Republicans back into a majority in the House. And people wonder why America is in decline.
Dec 01, 20101:32pm EST--
The markets are responding to the Republican gains in the mid-term elections and the perception that things will get better and that tax cuts will be extended. But Obama and the Dems could still mess things up by continuing to push their job killing agenda during the lame duck session. The ¡°Dream Act¡± amnesty for votes give away fill must be stopped.
Dec 01, 20107:54pm EST--
The related article tag above is ¡°Gold retreats but euro zone debt woes underpin¡± but when you actually click on the link the article heading is ¡°Gold rises for third day on eurozone debt fears¡±. So just what kind of ¡°spin¡± is Reuters trying to do here? Make us think that Gold is dropping when it is actually still rising?
Dec 01, 20108:52pm EST--
