Manufacturing growth seen despite euro crisis
2010-12-01 11:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Manufacturing in China and India accelerated last month even as a debt crisis caused turmoil in Europe, while U.S. factory output growth slowed slightly but still posted a 16th straight month of expansion.
Two Chinese purchasing managers' indexes registered their strongest readings in seven months, and the story was similar in India, where the HSBC Markit PMI climbed to a six-month high.
European manufacturing was a tale of two regions, with German output accelerating and French growth hitting a level not seen in 10 years.
But the sector lagged in Italy and Spain and contracted in Greece for a 15th straight month. Ireland, which accepted an emergency 85-billion-euro European Union aid package this week to stave off a debt crisis, saw a slight rise in factory activity, though it remained too slow to drive a recovery.
"It is worrying to see Italian activity lose momentum in addition to ongoing weak activity in Spain, Ireland and, especially, Greece," said Howard Archer at IHS Global Insight.
The Irish bailout has failed to reassure investors, who have since set their sights on Portugal, Spain and Italy, all of which suffer from high debt levels and slow growth.
Outside the euro zone, British manufacturing activity leapt unexpectedly to a 16-year high in November.
ASIAN GROWTH ... AND INFLATION?
There was little sign that Europe's trouble was hurting global economic growth, driven by Asia's powerhouse economies.
That, rather than Europe's debt troubles, could pose the biggest threat to global economic growth.
"Good news from the economy may not be that good for the market as it is concerned about more tightening," said Ting Lu, an economist with Bank of America-Merrill Lynch. "The high PMI reading could convince Beijing to tighten a bit more."
India has already raised interest rates six times this year, and its strong PMI followed data on Tuesday that showed its economy grew by 8.9 percent in the September quarter compared to a year earlier. Traders for now do not expect another rate hike until early next year.
Thailand's central bank surprised financial markets on Wednesday by raising its benchmark interest rate, while the Reserve Bank of Australia raised rates earlier this month.
Attempts to rein in growth in Asia could be a bitter pill to swallow, with Europe teetering on the brink of more serious debt troubles and U.S. growth that still seems fragile.
In Japan, the picture is bleak.
Prolonged economic weakness may keep Japan in deflation longer than the Bank of Japan's current forecast, a member of its policy board said on Wednesday, offering the bleakest view to date by a central bank policymaker.
Board member Miyako Suda said there was a strong chance Japan's economy would contract in the final quarter of this year after strong growth in July-September.
(Reporting by Reuters bureau worldwide;)
