Disparities abound in global economic data
2010-12-03 00:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Fri, Dec 3 2010
Fri, Dec 3 2010
Fri, Dec 3 2010
Fri, Dec 3 2010
Fri, Dec 3 2010
Fri  EST
The U.S. unemployment rate jumped to 9.8 percent in November, a troubling sign for the country's economy that is struggling to bounce back from recession. Analysts had expected the jobless rate to hold steady at 9.6 percent.
"There definitely continues to be this two-track global economic scenario," said Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Pierpont Securities in Stamford, Connecticut.
A number of emerging market policymakers have complained that the Fed's easy money policy makes life more difficult for them, as investors pile into higher-yielding markets, pushing up asset prices and currencies.
Brazil raised bank reserve requirements on Friday, looking to cool a credit boom that is fueling inflation as the country's economy expands at its fastest pace in almost three decades.
China decided to announce a switch to a "prudent monetary policy" from a moderately loose stance, a change that could pave the way for more interest rate increases and lending controls.
Not all the U.S. data made for gloomy reading, however.
A report from the Institute for Supply Management on Friday was more in line with a raft of recent U.S. data, including solid retail sales, that have raised optimism the recovery was picking up after hitting a soft patch in the summer.
The report "offers some encouragement that we are indeed seeing a bit of the economy regaining momentum despite the fact that the (broader) employment data was pretty disappointing," said Ward McCarthy, chief financial economist at Jefferies & Co in New York.
The purchasing managers indexes -- taking in more than 2,000 businesses ranging from banks to hotels -- rose to 55.4 from 53.3 in October, easily above the 50 mark separating growth from contraction.
But that strengthening recovery was dominated by France and Germany as debt-laden members showed scant sign of progress. In fact, the data looked grim for two of the countries caught in the middle of the euro zone debt crisis.
In Ireland, service sector growth was sluggish. Spain, tipped by a small minority of economists as next in line to follow Ireland for an EU/IMF bailout, saw its service sector contract for the fourth month in a row in November.
"The risk of a double-dip is perhaps receding based on the recent activity numbers we've been getting," said James Knightley, senior economist at ING Commercial Banking.
"We'd still suggest the recovery is going to be pretty soft relative to previous instances because of fiscal austerity, and the sovereign debt story in the euro area."
Better-than-expected euro zone sales figures on Friday, which showed 0.5 percent growth month-on-month in October, were similarly powered by Germany, while the UK services PMI showed a slight slowdown in what has so far been a strong recovery.
(Additional reporting by Zhou Xin and Simon Rabinovitch in Beijing, and Lucia Mutikani in Washington, Editing by Patrick Graham)
