Factbox: Key political risks to watch in China
2010-11-30 11:16:00.0
(Reuters) - China has pulled through the global economic downturn with robust growth and enhanced international sway, but that is now creating strains of its own at home and abroad.
The United States and China have been wrestling over the level of the yuan, and the G20 summit in Seoul did little to resolve currency pressures, now compounded by Beijing officials' misgivings about Washington's fresh round of easy-money policies.
Before it adjourned, the U.S. House of Representatives had passed a bill that treats the "undervalued" yuan as an export subsidy and allows the U.S. Commerce Department to impose countervailing duties on Chinese products. That bill is considered unlikely to become law, however.
Chinese President Hu Jintao is due to visit the United States in January, a symbolically important trip for him. That could give the White House a little more leverage in seeking commitments from China, and will probably discourage any sharp public bickering in the run-up to the visit.
China has made clear it resents pressure to allow the currency to appreciate, but political considerations play an important role in its management of the yuan.
The recent settings of the yuan exchange rate against the dollar suggest that Beijing may feel the worst of the recent pressure has passed. The yuan's appreciation has ground to a halt following a spike from September to early November.
-- The speed of the yuan's climb -- or lack thereof.
-- The debate in China. A top-down political system limits outright clashes between officials with rival views on the currency, but tracking public comments can provide useful hints on the direction of policy and there have been signs of discord among officials.
TENSIONS OVER NORTH KOREA STRAIN CHINA'S REGIONAL INFLUENCE
Tensions between China and Japan have eased, but a confrontation between North and South Korea is proving troublesome for Beijing, under pressure to rein in Pyongyang, which relies on China for economic and political support.
The latest confrontation is unlikely to unravel into a wider military confrontation, but it could fester and add to discord with Washington, which has urged China to use its economic and political sway to bring its ally North Korea to heel.
Another worry for China is that the dispute will intensify unease in South Korea and Japan, already seeking to shore up ties with Washington.
Seoul was already displeased by Beijing's non-committal response after a South Korea concluded that the North was responsible for torpedoing one of the South's navy ships in March. Chinese diplomacy appears to be moving faster this time in an effort to mollify Seoul without offending Pyongyang.
Because both countries claim the waters around East China Sea islets -- called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China -- the case inflamed their broader dispute over the area, which has plentiful fish and may be near valuable oil and gas reserves.
Both governments are now trying to put the dispute behind them but don't want to be seen as giving ground over territorial claims. Tensions could flare up again.
But Beijing and Tokyo will try to calibrate their sparring to avoid turning the quarrel into an outright rift, which could unsettle regional markets. A serious falling-out could unnerve some investors, especially Japanese companies seeking access to Chinese markets and infrastructure spending.
-- China's diplomatic footwork, attempting to ease tensions between North and South Korea without becoming embroiled in the standoff between the two countries, both of which Beijing would like to keep as friends.
JITTERS OVER CHINA'S RARE EARTH EXPORT POLICIES
China's dominance of rare earths used in high-tech products has prompted growing anxieties after evidence the government has curbed shipments, possibly out of political pique or because sharply reduced export quotas are petering out.
Japanese companies have borne the brunt of these disruptions, while customers elsewhere have mainly reported jumps in prices. Some firms say they have stopped output because of the problems.
The Japanese government has repeatedly expressed concern and other governments of consumer countries have also voices worries, especially Germany and the United States.
China produces about 97 percent of the world's rare earths. That means its policies in the sector ripple across the world, and companies and governments will be eager for clarity on the direction of policy. Delays could escalate the issue into a more volatile trade dispute, with the possibility of a complaint to the World Trade Organization.
-- Chinese policy announcements that could signal the outlook for export supplies; in particular, quota volumes and rules for next year and beyond.
-- Indications from companies, especially in Japan, of the state of supplies, which could vary for different types of rare earth minerals. So far, companies appear to be reporting strains in supplies, but not outright exhaustion which could lead to serious production disruption. That could change.
-- Signals that other governments are ratcheting up pressure over the issue beyond expressions of concern. That could turn the rare earths issue into a more contentious political dispute, or a trade row that could end up before the World Trade Organization.
After worries about a housing bubble and unsustainable levels of local government debt in the first half of the year, some investors began to worry that government efforts to take the market off the boil could have a chilling impact on economy.
But after slowing over the summer, the economy appears to be humming again and now food price rises have jumped to the forefront of government worries.
Inflation is far from out of control. Consumer inflation, which rose 4.4 percent in the year to October, remains well below levels in early 2008. What worries Beijing is the sudden and unexpected jump in prices, especially for food, a touchy point for many Chinese workers.
The government is paying close attention to the cost of food, which rose 10.1 percent in the year to October, pushing up overall consumer inflation to a 25-month high of 4.4 percent.
The risks are that inflationary expectations could come unhinged if Beijing is seen to be sitting on its hands. The government worries not only about the dampening effects on economic growth. The country's history has plenty of stories of sharp price rises triggering unrest.
That chances of that happening are slim, but Chinese policy-makers are always jumpy about even remote risks of protests that could challenge the ruling Communist Party.
Beijing's recent measures to contain food price rises show that officials are aware of popular frustration and are ready to take serious action if necessary.
In November, the central bank raised interest rates once and banks' reserve requirements twice. Big banks must now hold a record 18.5 percent of their deposits in reserve instead of lending them out.
-- Government data on everything from housing to factory output and prices, although sometimes flawed, offers the best indication of underlying economic trends.
China was hit by a series of strikes in earlier months, especially in its southern manufacturing region, at factories making everything from car parts to air conditioners. Most have ended with substantial wage increases for workers.
Wider discontent among an estimated 150 million pool of migrant workers could undermine government authority or erode the country's competitiveness as a low-cost factory hub.
But the wage demands of the migrant workers have partly chimed with one of Beijing's main economic agendas -- trying to boost domestic consumption and narrow the yawning rich-poor gap, by lifting the share of national income taken home by workers.
China's Communist Party has so far maintained general authority and control. Outbreaks of discontent have remained brief and localized, and authorities have been toying with bringing usually toothless official unions into negotiations.
But with the Party treating social stability as a crucial issue, even limited challenges to the Party's control can produce outsized policy reactions. If Beijing feels strikes are getting out of its broad control, expect a rapid crackdown.
Simmering tensions about land seizures and forced eviction remain another flashpoint, with several suicides by desperate homeowners in recent months stoking public anger. The government has laid out new rights for home and land owners, although it is yet to be seen whether they will be respected on the ground.
Ethnic tensions in Tibet and Xinjiang have distracted the central government and drawn international concern, but have not seriously threatened national stability.
-- Emergence of any regional- or national-level protest movements. So far, protests have tended to be organized at individual factories or directed at local officials. Strict controls make it difficult to form organized national movements, but the internet played a role in spreading labor unrest as workers read about successful activism in other plants.
(Compiled by Chris Buckley; Editing by Andrew Marshall)
