Japan ruling party calls for weapon export ban easing
2010-11-30 08:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's ruling Democratic Party urged the government on Tuesday to ease a decades-old weapons export ban and strengthen its defense posture in the area where it shares a maritime border with China.
The proposal, as the government is updating its mid-term defense policy, comes when the country is locked in a prolonged territorial dispute with China and amid increased regional tension after last week's North Korean attack on South Korea.
"Japan is being left behind the global trend of international joint development and production of defense equipment," the proposal said.
"Japan is slipping into a serious security-related situation where the technological foundation of the defense industry is about to erode. Also, it is getting difficult to explain high procurement costs for defense gear to tax payers."
Japan in 1967 drew up "three principles" on arms exports, banning sales to countries with communist governments or that are involved in international conflicts or subject to United Nations sanctions.
The ban prohibits the nation's defense industry from joining multinational projects such as Lockheed Martin-led F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, and makes it difficult for Japanese defense contractors such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries to drive down costs and keep up with cutting-edge arms technologies.
The Democratic Party pointed to Japan's weak defense capability in the southwest and called for beefing up defense posture in the region to protect sparse islands there.
Sino-Japanese relations deteriorated sharply since September, when Japan detained a Chinese trawler captain whose boat collided with Japanese patrol ships near a chain of disputed islands in the East China Sea, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China.
"Way before the occurrence of the recent ship collision incident off Senkaku, the Chinese navy had become active in the East China Sea, while our country's defense in the southwest remains thin," the proposal said.
China's defense spending has nearly quadrupled over the past decade, while that of Japan, saddled with a weaker economy and a public debt twice the size of its $5 trillion economy, shrank by 4 percent, according to Japan's defense white paper.
But any sign of Japan flexing its military muscle could upset China, where bitterness over Japan's wartime aggression still underpins widespread Chinese public distrust of Japan.
(Reporting by Kiyoshi Takenaka, editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
