China calls on Japan to reduce jet scrambles
2013-04-18 04:36:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Apr 16 2013
Tue, Apr 16 2013
Sun, Apr 14 2013
Fri, Apr 12 2013
Wed, Mar 27 2013
Taiwan Coast Guard patrol ships are seen during a drill held about 30 nautical miles northwest of the port of Kaohsiung, southern Taiwan, March 30, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Pichi Chuang
Thu  EDT
The number of scrambles against Chinese planes nearly doubled to 306 in the year that ended in March. That accounted for the increase in the overall number from 425 to 567, the highest level in 22 years, Japan's Defense Ministry said.
China and Japan have been involved in an increasingly acrimonious stand-off over a group of uninhabited islands in the East China Sea, called the Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China.
"We all know that when it comes to the Diaoyu Islands issue Japan has been continuously taking provocative actions to raise tensions. This is the root cause of the present very tense situation over the islands," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying told a daily news briefing.
Japan, she said, should instead "show more sincerity and take practical steps to work hard with China to find a way to appropriately manage and resolve the problem through dialogue, talks and consultations. This would be best for both countries."
The dispute has escalated in recent months to the point where China and Japan have scrambled fighter jets while patrol ships shadow each other, raising fear that an unintended collision could lead to a broader clash.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Japan¡¯s Abe deliberately re-ignited its warmongering to create war tension in Asia. Killing, Raping, Looting and claiming that¡¯s just Japan¡¯s entry into the imperialist rank as colonists ¨Cthat was how Japan sold to Americans, and Europeans they were ¡°superior¡± as Aryan race ¡ª a term Adolf Hitler hitched his anti-Semitic theory on. Historians in the United States are culprits in fueling war tensions in Asia because they left all the war crimes committed by Japan, and supported, goaded by the United States on the floor of the chopping board. Hundreds of millions of dead, raped, economically deprived victims from their graves are screaming at Abe¡¯s manipulative moves towards Taiwan, CHina and the United States recently. If there is justice, I do not doubt that Japan will be put to serious shame. What will be a scandal is not what the Japanese imperialists did in the 20th century, but how Japanese politicians who are neo-Nazis are dangerously indoctrinating many young, influential Japanese reporters, including Kobayashi and many voters, to become excellent apologists in war crimes, and distort their warmongering as ¡°defense¡± of their country. John Kerry has so called done a horrific job for world peace.
Japan¡¯s Abe deliberately re-ignited its warmongering to create war tension in Asia. Killing, Raping, Looting and claiming that¡¯s just Japan¡¯s entry into the imperialist rank as colonists ¨Cthat was how Japan sold to Americans, and Europeans they were ¡°superior¡± as Aryan race ¡ª a term Adolf Hitler hitched his anti-Semitic theory on. Historians in the United States are culprits in fueling war tensions in Asia because they left all the war crimes committed by Japan, and supported, goaded by the United States on the floor of the chopping board. Hundreds of millions of dead, raped, economically deprived victims from their graves are screaming at Abe¡¯s manipulative moves towards Taiwan, CHina and the United States recently. If there is justice, I do not doubt that Japan will be put to serious shame. What will be a scandal is not what the Japanese imperialists did in the 20th century, but how Japanese politicians who are neo-Nazis are dangerously indoctrinating many young, influential Japanese reporters, including Kobayashi and many voters, to become excellent apologists in war crimes, and distort their warmongering as ¡°defense¡± of their country. John Kerry has so called done a horrific job for world peace.
His trip to Japan, or at least his failure to deny what NHk reported, ignited war tensions in Asia, in an absolutely unnecessary way.
Apr 18, 20136:51pm EDT--
Like the school yard bully, beating you with their fists, while yelling at you ¡°Don¡¯t raise your arms to defend yourself!¡±.
Apr 19, 201312:46am EDT--
Hopefully intelligent people can see Janeallen¡¯s comment for what it is, a vile attempt to distract from the real issues. Everyone knows Japan committed war crimes in WW2. That has nothing to do with the Senkakus.
Apr 21, 20134:58am EDT--
