U.S. urges Chinese leadership role over North Korea
2010-11-29 13:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice called on China on Monday to play a "responsible leadership role" in maintaining peace on the Korean peninsula, amid a new crisis over North Korean actions.
Rice was speaking after North Korea's display earlier this month of uranium enrichment centrifuges to a visiting U.S. scientist and shelling attack last Tuesday on a South Korean island ratcheted up tension on the divided peninsula.
"We're certainly in close consultations with China ... and obviously we look to China to play a responsible leadership role in working to maintain peace and security in that region," she told reporters.
"It's in China's interests, it's in the interests of the countries in the region and we expect them to take steps that are consistent with their obligations" under U.N. Security Council resolutions, Rice said.
She said the activities observed by U.S. scientist Siegfried Hecker at North Korea's Yongbyon nuclear complex were "clear violations" of U.N. sanctions resolutions banning Pyongyang from acquiring sensitive nuclear technology.
"The U.S. strongly condemns these violations," Rice said, adding that the Security Council now needed to study the recent revelations "and determine the appropriate way forward." Sanctions enforcement needed to be tightened, she said.
The United States also strongly condemned North Korea's "outrageous action" in shelling the island of Yeonpyeong, killing four people, she said.
"We continue to call on North Korea to cease its irresponsible actions against its neighbors," Rice said. The United States would work for peace and security in the region but also "confront the threat posed by North Korea's ongoing nuclear activities," she said, without giving details.
The Security Council has not so far debated the attack on Yeonpyeong, but members continue to consult over how they might address it, amid the likelihood that China would block any statement condemning Pyongyang.
(Reporting by Patrick Worsnip; Editing by Cynthia Osterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
can we and should we trust China to take the lead on this? And more to the point do we have a choice in the matter?
Nov 30, 201011:48am EST--
