China postpones Norway talks as Nobel tensions rise
2010-11-30 08:09:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Nov 29 2010
Thu, Nov 18 2010
Wed, Nov 17 2010
Wed, Nov 17 2010
Fri, Nov 12 2010
Candles are placed around portraits of jailed Chinese pro-democracy activist Liu Xiaobo during a candlelight vigil demanding his release, outside the Legislative Council in Hong Kong November 2, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Tue  EST
The Norwegian Nobel Committee angered Beijing last month by awarding the Nobel to Liu, who is serving an 11-year jail term on subversion charges for his role in advocating democratic reform and an end to the Communist party's power monopoly.
The Asian superpower has snubbed Norwegian ministers and pressured diplomats to boycott the December 10 award ceremony, set to focus the world's media spotlight on human rights in China.
Norway, the world's fifth-largest oil exporter, and China have been negotiating for the past two years a bilateral trade deal that could serve as a blueprint for the European Union's potential trade agreement with China.
"There has been a delay and at this point we have not set a new date," Oeyvind Arum, a spokesman for Norway's Industry and Trade Ministry, told Reuters. "The next round of negotiations was due ... during Christmas and New Year."
Neither the Chinese embassy in Oslo nor China's Foreign Ministry were immediately available for comment.
"They indicated that they needed further internal consultations before they can schedule a new negotiating meeting," said Haakon Hjelde, Norway's chief negotiator.
He said the Chinese did not openly link the delay to the award to Liu. But Henning Kristoffersen, author of the book "The New China" and director of international relations at the Norwegian School of Management BI, said there was little doubt.
"The Chinese would never hold a high-level meeting with Norway shortly before or after the award ceremony on December 10," he said. "The authorities in Beijing were very clear that the prize was a big mistake and that it would damage relations."
Beijing blames the Norwegian government for the Nobel decision, even though Oslo says that the Nobel committee is fully independent. The Nobel panel is comprised of former politicians appointed by the Norwegian parliament.
Further raising pressure, a group representing Norwegian residents of Chinese origin said on Tuesday it was organizing a demonstration against the tribute to Liu.
Ya Ming Yuen, head of the Norway-China Association, estimated that about 100 people would protest outside the Oslo City Hall during the award ceremony there.
Yuen presented Norwegian Nobel committee secretary Geir Lundestad a letter signed by 300 Chinese-Norwegians denouncing the Nobel tribute to Liu, whom they see as a criminal.
In past disputes abroad, Chinese diplomats have worked with local Chinese communities to lodge similar protests or take to the streets. The Chinese government normally describes such actions as spontaneous.
"Human rights in China are not good enough, but the west should recognize that things have improved greatly," Yuen told Reuters, insisting that he felt no pressure from Chinese authorities.
"When the West sends messages like this (the Nobel prize) that shows no respect, it has the opposite effect than intended. China will not bow to pressure."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Chinese wish to dictate to the world since becoming a superpower. The Norwegians have always been a peace loving people. They have taken the time to award a Chinese National the world¡¯s most prestigeous prize. The Chinese seem to want to dictate to the Norwegian, who, what, where, when and how they should select the recipients of this prestigeous prize. The prize is not created or Administered by the Chinese, therefore they have no right to dictate to the world and another nation. But as we are aware the Norwegians have no guts, are unable to stand up to being bullied and dont respect Civilized behavior. If they did they should close the Norwegian embassy in China, Ask the Chinese to close their embassy in Norway and tell the Chinese to get lost, we don¡¯t need you. If however the Norwegian are as greedy as the rest of the world, and because of economic and monetary gains see china as their next monetary bonanza, the Norwegians will sacrifice their dignity and self respect and after having China insult and dictate to them continue to allow the snobs to exit on Norwegian soil and continue to curry favor for Chinese buiness and allow the Chinese to insult them further
Nov 30, 201010:39pm EST--
