U.S. tackled China over North Korea nuclear trade: media
2010-11-29 02:09:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States has complained to Beijing several times over the transshipment of missile components from North Korea to Iran via China, the Guardian newspaper reported.
The report comes as China faces mounting international demands to bring its ally North Korea to heel following last week's bombardment of a South Korean island and reports it was at an advanced stage in a trying to enrich uranium, which would give it a second source of material for making atomic weapons.
On one occasion, three years ago, Washington pressed China to act "urgently" to halt a transshipment, the British daily said in report posted on its website Sunday quoting U.S. diplomatic cables -- originally released by the website WikiLeaks, some of which were made available to the Guardian and other media.
The United States has long expressed concern that the isolated North could become an illicit exporter of material for nuclear weapons, including to Iran.
The Guardian quoted an internal cable dated November 3, 2007 and signed by then U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, as saying a North Korean cargo of missile jet vanes destined for the Shahid Bagheri Industrial Group, which runs Iran's solid-fuel ballistic missile program, was due to be shipped to Iran from Beijing the following day aboard a scheduled Iran Air flight.
The newspaper quoted another cable, sent by current Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in May, expressing concern that exports by named Chinese firms "could be used for or diverted to a CW program." Clinton asked whether the suspect transfers were approved by the Chinese government and warns that sanctions may be imposed.
Separately, the New York Times said the leaked cables showed that U.S. and South Korean officials have discussed the prospects for a unified Korea, should the North's economic troubles and political transition lead the state to implode.
The South Koreans even considered commercial inducements to China, according to the U.S. ambassador to Seoul. The New York Times quoted her as telling Washington in February that South Korean officials believed that the right business deals would help salve China's concerns about living with a reunified Korea that is in a "benign alliance" with the United States.
In a report last month, the Institute for Science and International Security (ISIS) said that even though most believe China views North Korea's nuclear weapons program as destabilizing to the region, Beijing is not applying enough resources to detect and stop North Korea's illicit nuclear trade.
"As China seeks to be a global leader, it should also be willing to shoulder the responsibilities that attend such a status. Preventing nuclear proliferation is one of the most important global responsibilities," the report wrote.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Aha! China is caught red handed helping North Korea ship illegal weapons to Iran. Don¡¯t they know that NK and Iran are part of the axis of evil? I guess that makes China the kingpin of evil, hmmm? We will see more and more come out of this, and everyone in the world will soon understand that China¡¯s so-called leaders are nothing more than terrorists. If they were really interested in peace and security in the world, they would not be proliferating such weaponry to such rogue countries, and they abet many other countries as well: Burma, Sudan, South Africa, Pakistan, Syria, etc. I suggest China be thrown off of the UN Security Council at once and that the US recognize Taiwan as the legitimate country of China. China is becoming more and more a rogue nation and hardly deserves any international respect.
Nov 29, 20106:26am EST--
We should all read these messages with the understanding they are part of an ongoing conversation which essentially are reports from the Embassy¡¯s to State Department.
We should all read these messages with the understanding they are part of an ongoing conversation which essentially are reports from the Embassy¡¯s to State Department.
Individually they seem sensational but taken in context with the whole reporting stream they are just information for decision making! I sometimes think the Governments reaction makes the information seem more important than it really is on the subject.
Nov 29, 20109:59am EST--
Dec 01, 20102:07am EST--
