China's Draka chaser loves long hours, foot massages
2010-11-30 05:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Du Kerong, the man behind China's surprise billion-euro bid for Dutch cable maker Draka, has led a turbocharged life that has seen him rise from humble roots to senior airforce officer and entrepreneur, getting by on as little as four hours of sleep a night.
The 55-year old Du is also renowned for stamina when entertaining business associates, able to down glasses of rice wine in single gulps, a former colleague recalled. "Even if we had the courage for that, we wouldn't have the stomach," he said.
Du's gutsy manner was on display in a surprise announcement last week when his flagship Xinmao Group offered to buy Draka DRAK.AS, the world's No.5 maker of steel cables, which had already agreed to be acquired by Italy's Prysmian (
Some said the fast-talking Du, who was in Amsterdam last week promoting the deal, may be relying on his deep pool of energy and charisma to elbow aside Prysmian and earlier suitor Nexans (
) of France, the world's No. 2 and 1 cable makers by revenue, to pull off the deal.
"He's a good talker and a clear thinker," said the former Xinmao employee who worked closely with Du, speaking on condition his name not be used. "Sometimes his thoughts move so fast that subordinates can't keep up with him."
Born in eastern China's Jiangsu Province, Du joined the army at 17, and the Chinese Communist Party a year later, according to a biography published by government of Tianjin's Nankai District, where Xinmao is based.
Du set up a construction materials company called Xinmao that year, which evolved into Xinmao Real Estate and later the Xinmao Group. Today Xinmao employs more than 30,000 and has more than 100 subsidiaries in construction, real estate, hotels, fiber optics, software and other high-tech fields.
"His family was destitute and had nothing," says a senior executive currently at Xinmao, also speaking on condition of anonymity as he was not authorized to talk about his boss. "Now, employees see him as farsighted and wise, and very persistent in his projects."
"When business was the toughest, around 1998-2000, he'd sell his car in order to buy materials for projects, which he would finish on time," he said.
For the few hours of sleep he manages after workdays of up to 20 hours, Du has attached a bedroom to his office in the industrial port city of Tianjin, about 120 km from Beijing, said the former employee.
Du prefers his office in the upscale Xinmao Tiancai Hotel down the street, where he goes for foot massages, to his desk at headquarters, a long-serving employee at the Xinmao compound said.
He is also realistic enough to recognize that he overcentralizes authority in himself and micromanages too much, according to the former colleague.
"He'd pull me aside and talk about how he neglected areas of management," he said.
