U.S. presses China again over jailed geologist
2010-11-30 04:42:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States pressed China again Tuesday to release a U.S. geologist jailed on charges of stealing state secrets, saying his case had not been handled transparently.
Xue Feng, who was born in China and later became a naturalized U.S. citizen, was detained late in 2007 after negotiating the sale of an oil industry database to his employer at the time, Colorado-based consultancy IHS Energy, now known as IHS Inc.
"Our sense has been that the case has not been handled with the kind of transparency that would befit a nation which tells us that the rule of law is paramount in all judicial processes," said Robert Goldberg, U.S. Embassy Deputy Chief of Mission.
Goldberg said the embassy had filed a formal protest with the Chinese Foreign Ministry after being denied permission to attend Xue's appeal at a Beijing court Tuesday.
"We urge the Chinese to grant Dr. Xue humanitarian release and immediate deportation so that he can return home to the U.S. and reunite with his family," the diplomat told reporters outside the courthouse.
"I'm hoping that this is not an issue that we will have to address during President Hu's visit," Goldberg added, referring to Chinese President Hu Jintao's planned trip to the United States in January.
Sino-U.S. relations have been strained this year over a range of issues, from Tibet to Taiwan and the value of the Chinese currency.
China has previously denounced U.S. involvement in Xue's case, saying it was handled in accordance with the law and was an internal matter.
Goldberg said Xue, who has been allowed consular visits in jail where he is serving an eight-year sentence, was in surprisingly good spirits.
"We believe at this point he is not being mistreated," Goldberg added.
Xue was convicted of attempting to obtain and traffic in state secrets, a year after his trial ended, according to the Duihua Foundation, which promotes prisoners' rights in China and the United States.
The database was classified as a state secret only after it was sold, it added.
China's notoriously vague state secrets laws received international attention last year when Australian citizen Stern Hu and three colleagues working for mining giant Rio Tinto were detained for stealing state secrets during the course of tense iron ore negotiations.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Anybody who has every been to china knows that china is not a country ruled by law. Everything in china is so corrupt that you have to sacrifice personal morals and ethics just to survive, not to mention doing business. Furthermore, they arrest this man for selling a document that isn¡¯t listed as a state secret until AFTER THE SALE!!!! Are you kidding me??? How can china justify their actions? But then again, china does protect and harbor countries that commit acts of war and kill innocent civilians. I guess we should expect such irresponsibility from a dictatorship like china.
Nov 30, 201012:57am EST--
In the west we abide by the letter of the law. If you can steal without actually breaking the law it is OK. The activities of some leading up to the sub prime crises is an example of theft without breaking the law. The Chinese seem to follow the spirit of the law, steal and they will lock you up and to hell with the fine print and the smooth talking lawyer. Stern Hu was also arrested for stealing state secrets which caused quite a stir here in OZ. It turns out he was bribing managers of Chinese steel mills into giving Rio confidential information and paying more for steel from his employer, Rio than the market price. Not exactly espionage but the guy was dirty.
Nov 30, 201010:41am EST--
They are tough business men and will take advantage of you if you are a sucker, but once a deal is done they honor the deal and expect the same from you.
A moral man knows when he is doing something immoral, he doesn¡¯t need a law book to tell him. There are of course unscrupulous people in any country. Judge the man not the tribe.
Nov 30, 201011:08am EST--
