North Korea neighbors consider China call for talks
2010-11-28 18:57:00.0
(Reuters) - South Korean and U.S. forces pressed on with massive military drills on Monday as regional powers considered a call by China for emergency talks following North Korea's attack on a southern island.
China's proposed emergency consultations come amid global pressure on Beijing to take a more aggressive role in the standoff between the rival Koreas and try to rein in ally Pyongyang using its leverage as its largest source of aid.
Washington and Tokyo were non-committal, saying they would consult with Seoul, which was skeptical of the proposal to sit down with North Korea around a table, effectively rewarding the North for bad behavior.
"The six-party talks cannot substitute for action by North Korea to comply with its obligations," a State Department spokesman said, referring to disarmament talks which North Korea abandoned two years ago.
The call for two Koreas, the United States, Japan, and Russia to meet at a forum hosted by China must be reviewed "very cautiously" in view of North Korea's provocations, Seoul said.
China, which agreed with South Korea that the situation was "worrisome," suggested the emergency talks for December. It did not say whether Pyongyang had agreed to join.
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak was scheduled to address the country at 8 p.m. ET to speak about the country's response to the North's shelling Tuesday of its western island of Yeonpyeong. Four people were killed in the attack.
Yang Moo-jin, of the University of North Korean Studies, said the possibility of immediate additional provocations by the North was low, citing the massive drills by the South and U.S. forces and the start of Chinese diplomacy to defuse tension.
The nuclear-powered USS George Washington, which has 75 warplanes and a crew of more than 6,000, is taking part in around-the-clock drills in waters west of the Korean peninsula but well south of the sea border disputed by the North.
South Korea's financial authorities expect jitters to remain in the markets for some time but without long-lasting effects but were braced for possible volatile swings in capital flows.
The South Korean won posted the largest weekly drop in over five months Friday and was expected to stay weak, analysts and dealers said.
But in Seoul, life carried on normally for the city's more than 10 million residents, with downtown shopping districts jammed with people despite the freezing temperatures, and cafes decked with Christmas decorations doing brisk business.
"I am worried, but not that worried that I need to stay at home," said Eunhye Kim, an usher showing people from a packed theater. "They don't really want to make war ... there's no gain for either side."
(Writing by Jack Kim; Editing by Nick Macfie and Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sure, we sit at the table and talk with the Chinese while we run military drills in the Sea of Japan.
Nov 28, 20108:56am EST--
The US and others don¡¯t need to do engage in elaborate negotiations about North Korea. The burden is on China, and the Chinese know it is. We just need to keep global pressure focussed on China to bring North Korea into the 21st century under responsible and sane leadership. This is about as simple as foreign policy gets from the point of view of all but the most roguish governments.
Nov 28, 20109:56am EST--
OK, China is proposing talks on North Korea ¨C what is China going to offer? Let¡¯s start by China working with SK, US, Jpn, others to reunite the peninsula and get rid of Kim¡¯s regime. Then China can offer to quit illegally supplying the rest of the world with nuclear materials. Then China can offer to release all of its dissidents and others unfairly locked up in Chinese prisons. Then China can work to reduce tensions by scaling down it military together with other powers and get rid of nuclear weapons. If China were serious about this, they would do more than talk about ¡°calm¡± on the Korean peninsula. Let¡¯s face it, China is simply playing games and has no interest in resolving the crisis.
Nov 28, 20109:56am EST--
