U.S. vows unified response to N. Korea
2010-11-23 18:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States urged restraint on Tuesday following a North Korean artillery attack on South Korea and vowed to forge a "measured and unified" response with major powers, including China.
North Korea fired several dozen artillery shells at a South Korean island in one of the heaviest bombardments of the South since the Korean War ended in 1953, sharply increasing tensions on the divided peninsula.
South Korea warned North Korea of "enormous retaliation" if it took more aggressive steps. But the United States, which has about 28,000 troops stationed in South Korea, played down the chances of any immediate U.S. military action to deter the reclusive state.
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates and South Korean Defense Minister Kim Tae-young agreed to coordinate any response to the North Korean action, the Pentagon said, adding that Gates expressed his appreciation for the "restraint shown to date."
The United States labeled the attack a violation of the armistice agreement which ended the 1950-53 Korean War, as it did North Korea's March attack on a South Korean warship that killed 46 South Korean sailors.
But State Department spokesman Mark Toner said the United States was seeking a unified diplomatic front with North Korea's neighbors, including China, Pyongyang's sole remaining major backer, which has in the past resisted international efforts to get tough with its isolated ally.
"We're going to take a measured and unified approach," said Toner, adding, "We're not going to respond willy nilly."
The White House condemned the attack. U.S. President Barack Obama was awoken at 3:55 a.m. for an emergency briefing and was outraged over the strike, the White House said. He was due to speak with South Korean President Lee Myung-bak, White House spokesman Bill Burton said.
"North Korea has a pattern of doing things that are provocative. This is a particularly outrageous act," Burton said aboard Air Force One as Obama headed to Indiana to visit an auto plant.
Obama's top national security aides, including Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Defense Secretary Robert Gates, met on Tuesday to discuss the situation, the White House said.
The South fired back after Tuesday's attack and sent fighter jets to the area, but no U.S. forces were involved in the South's response, a U.S. official said.
Global stock markets fell in reaction to the escalating tensions. In the United States, major stock indexes such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell about 1.5 percent, while an investor flight to safety pushed up gold and the U.S. dollar.
The artillery attack posed the second test in three days of Washington's vow that it will not reward what it deems bad behavior with diplomatic gestures, like resuming aid-for-disarmament talks.
The attack followed revelations over the weekend of a uranium enrichment facility -- a second source of atomic bomb material in Pyongyang's nuclear program.
In Washington, Republican lawmakers took the lead in calling for a tougher approach to North Korea.
"Two decades worth of attempts to appease this North Korean regime have failed, and further attempts to do so will meet with the same result," said Senator John McCain, the Republican presidential nominee in 2008, calling on Beijing to "play a more direct and responsible role in changing North Korea's reckless behavior."
(Additional reporting by Caren Bohan aboard Air Force One, Alister Bull, Steve Holland, Doina Chiacu and Missy Ryan in Washington; Editing by Doina Chiacu and Peter Cooney)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The only thing that North korea understands is force, not negotiations. A few drone attacks into their capital city might get our message across, that attacks by North Korea against other nations is not an option.
Nov 23, 201012:12pm EST--
This whole thing will remain a standoff indefinitely. America won¡¯t attack North Korea because it is a client state of their biggest creditor, and China won¡¯t let North Korea attack South Korea any more aggressively as it is a client state of their biggest debtor, not to mention the biggest purchaser of their manufactured goods. No way the elites in China will jeopardize 10% GDP growth for the sake of a madman in Pyongyang. Move along folks. Nothing to see here.
Nov 23, 201012:16pm EST--
We will, under the Obama doctrine, send supplys and medicine to pay for N. Korea to stop shelling the south.
This is the typical reaction of this administration unless it is one of our own states trying to stop immigration from Mexico, then Obama will take the state to court and declare the habitants of the state the enemy. Obama can¡¯t possibly condemn N.Korea because they support his same ideology.
Nov 23, 20101:33pm EST--
