Q+A: What Taiwan local elections mean for markets and China
2010-11-26 21:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan voters are choosing mayors in five major cities on Saturday, setting the stage for the 2012 presidential race. A strong performance by the anti-China opposition will stoke concern in Beijing and chill financial markets worried about the future of economic ties.
WHAT IS AT STAKE IN THE ELECTION ?
The China-friendly ruling Nationalists are running against the anti-China Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) in five cities -- Kaohsiung, Taichung, the capital Taipei and Tainan -- totaling about 60 percent of the island's electorate.
Only one area is expected to change hands: Taipei, where polls show the DPP narrowly seizing control from the Nationalists.
The Nationalists are expected to remain in power in Taichung and Sinbei, formerly Taipei county, while the DPP should hang on in Kaohsiung, Taiwan's second city on the southwest coast, and in its traditional stronghold Tainan.
If the DPP keeps the two mayoral posts it controls now and takes Taipei from the Nationalists, it also indicates a broader public discontent with President Ma Ying-jeou, whose ratings have fallen from high levels when he took office in 2008.
HOW WILL FINANCIAL MARKETS REACT TO SATURDAY'S RESULTS?
Short-term investors may shun Taiwan for fear that the opposition DPP's new clout would lead it to the presidency in 2012 and threaten the ruling party's recent moves toward free trade with Beijing after a 60-year chill.
"Some of the support for the Taiwan dollar is due to improved ties, so any sign that those may not continue would be negative," said Patrick Bennett, currency strategist with Standard Bank in Hong Kong.
But longer-term investors will keep their positions in Taiwan and short-term investors will return if it turns out that the DPP chooses not to risk votes by rolling back the ruling party's broadly popular trade deals with China.
WHAT IS CHINA PREPARED TO DO?
Beijing is hoping the Nationalists, its former Chinese civil war enemy that fled to Taiwan in the 1940s, will stay in power. Chinese officials believe the party is more receptive to their goal of political reunification.
But the DPP has not abandoned support for Taiwan's de jure independence from Beijing, a position virulently opposed by China, which says it would lead to war.
A strong DPP showing on Saturday would prompt China to redouble efforts to back Ma's expected re-election campaign with economic sweeteners.
(Reporting by Ralph Jennings; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
