U.S. consulting allies on proposed North Korea talks
2010-11-28 16:28:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States said on Sunday it was consulting with South Korea and Japan on China's proposal for emergency talks on the North Korean crisis, and it again called on Beijing to act to curb Pyongyang's "provocations"
"The 6-Party talks cannot substitute for action by North Korea to comply with its obligations," a State Department spokesman said.
China said on Sunday the emergency talks should be held in December, making clear the talks would not amount to a resumption of six-party disarmament discussions that North Korea walked out of two years ago and declared dead.
But both Beijing and Pyongyang have been pressing regional powers to return to talks, in some form or other, for the past few months in a move political analysts say is designed to extract concessions.
The proposed talks would include the countries involved in the six-party negotiations: North and South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia.
The State Department said North Korea, which precipitated the latest crisis with an artillery attack on a South Korean island on Tuesday, needed to abide by the terms of the armistice which ended the 1950-1953 Korean War and U.N. Security Council resolutions.
"Clear steps by North Korea are needed to demonstrate a change of behavior," the U.S. statement said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Don¡¯t pressure China to treat North Korea as her colony unless and until USA allies restrain themselves, as they have beggared thy North Korea by economic sanctions and deadliest military to a breaking point of war.
Nov 28, 20109:32pm EST--
No trip to the middle kingdom to Kowtow ( It was bad enough when Colin Powel went with his tail between his legs) to thier suggestions that NK is the victim, and to allow them to appeare to be the peace keeper when thier hegemony is to blame. They allow NK to jab SK to test the resolve of the free world because they fear all they cannot control. Anyone that doesn¡¯t believe Communist China is the nuber one super power is nuts!
Nov 28, 201010:45pm EST--
