China urges U.S., after Boston bombings, to condemn Xinjiang terrorism
2013-04-25 05:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China urged the United States on Thursday, 10 days after the Boston Marathon bombings, to condemn what Beijing has called terrorist attacks in its western Xinjiang region instead of lecturing the country on human rights.
Nine residents, six police and six ethnic Uighurs were killed on Tuesday in a knife, axe and arson attack, the deadliest violence in the region since July 2009, when Xinjiang's capital, Urumqi, was rocked by clashes between majority Han Chinese and minority Uighurs that killed nearly 200 people.
But the U.S. State Department on Wednesday merely expressed regret at the loss of life and urged China to "provide all Chinese citizens, including Uighurs, the due process protections to which they're entitled".
The U.S. refusal to condemn the attack showed double standards, considering that it had been the recent victim of a terrorist attack, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying told reporters.
"We simply oppose the U.S. reversing black and white, confusing right and wrong, and continually refusing to condemn violent terrorist incidents, and instead, making wild accusations about Chinese policy toward ethnic minorities," she said.
Many Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking Muslim people native to Xinjiang, chafe at Chinese controls on their religion, language and culture.
China has blamed previous attacks in the energy-rich region -- strategically located on the borders of Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and Central Asia -- on Islamic separatists who want to establish an independent East Turkestan.
Dilxat Raxit, the Sweden-based spokesman for the exiled World Uyghur Congress, has said the violence was sparked by the shooting and killing of a young Uighur by "Chinese armed personnel", prompting Uighurs to retaliate.
U.S. Ambassador to China Gary Locke was in Xinjiang with a delegation of American energy, rail and transportation executives when the attacks took place.
(Reporting by Megha Rajagopalan, Writing by Michael Martina:; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If Martin Luther King Jr, was an Uighur, Chinese paramilitary or plain clothed service forces (Termed ¡®Community Workers¡¯ for Chinese Propaganda purposes) would shoot him dead. The U.S labeling this ¡®terrorism¡¯ would validate Chinese propaganda and make the U.S complicit in the repression and colonization of a people and their country. Of course China wants the U.S to take this stance. The only thing pre-planned about the situation in this article, is the security services raiding a property with impunity in line with repressive policy and shooting a young man dead. The rest is ¡®blowback¡¯, followed up by Chinese officials torching the home of the victims.
Apr 25, 201310:29am EDT--
Apr 26, 201310:12am EDT--
Let me try to understand this. The U.S. asked China to take action against their ally North Korea and China seemed to do very little (There were some sanctions, but were they sufficient?) In that scenario, China is linked to North Korea (via a non-military alliance) In this scenario the U.S. was not even involved, so why should they need to comment? The U.S. stated its regret as to loss of life, but was there evidence of terrorism. For China to be mad that the U.S. did not condemn the event (or state that it was an act of terror) is really interesting. So I ask myself, why must the U.S. condemn the event? (Most of the time when the U.S. makes a statement China doesn¡¯t like it, so why they want it now?)
Apr 27, 20131:32am EDT--
