Australia commits to rare earths supply to Japan
2010-11-23 03:01:00.0
(Reuters) - Australia promised on Tuesday to be a future long-tem supplier of rare earths to Japan, after China suspended shipments of the minerals to its neighbor.
After Japan's Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara raised the issue during strategic and trade talks in Canberra, Australia's Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd hinted rare earths would likely form part of a free trade pact being negotiated with Tokyo.
"The Australian government understands the significance of rare earths globally. Australia stands ready to be a long term, secure, reliable supplier of rare earths to the Japanese economy," Rudd told reporters in a news conference with Maehara.
For the past two months, China had suspended shipments to Japan of rare earths, crucial minerals for many high-tech products, due to a spat over disputed islands in the East China Sea.
Japan is the world's fourth biggest user of the minerals.
Maehara, on his first bilateral visit overseas, said he was making Japanese access to rare earths, and security of resource supplies generally, one of his top foreign policy priorities.
The issue overshadowed discussions on security concerns like North Korea, but the meeting took place before reports of North Korea firing dozens of artillery shells at a South Korean island.
"We will be looking to collaborate on the area of rare earths, and I believe this is a particularly excellent outcome in terms of the agreements we have reached on this occasion," Maehara said. "We are very pleased that Australia is also able to give us a long-term commitment to rare earths."
Australia is endowed with an abundance of rare earths but it will be 2013 before the first of two mines under construction is completed. The second mine is scheduled to start up in 2014, and Chinese companies have been anxious to secure stakes in Australian miners.
But Australia's government last year blocked plans by China Non-Ferrous Metal Mining Co. to invest A$252 million in Australian rare earths miner Lynas Corp.. Both Australia and Japan agreed on Tuesday to hold fresh negotiations on a free trade pact in January.
Australia and Japan started free trade negotiations in April 2007, hoping to expand the $58 billion two-way trade relationship. But the talks have become bogged down over agricultural market access.
(Additional reporting by James Grubel; Editing by Kazunori Takada)
