China urges peace and talk after North Korea shells South
2010-11-23 03:00:00.0
(Reuters) - China expressed worry about reports that North Korea had shelled a South Korean island on Tuesday in the latest escalation of tensions on the Korean peninsula that neighbors the world's second-biggest economy.
A spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, Hong Lei, told a news conference both sides of the divided Korean peninsula should "do more to contribute to peace," and said it was imperative to return to six-party talks aimed at ending North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
"We have heard reports and express our concern. The situation still needs to be confirmed," said Hong, responding to a question about the North Korean artillery attack.
"China hopes that the relevant parties will do more to contribute to peace and stability in the region," he added.
China is North Korea's only major ally, and its economic and diplomatic support have been important to shoring up its otherwise isolated neighbor, whose leader Kim Jong-il visited China twice this year to strengthen ties.
But those ties have become a sore point with Washington after revelations that North Korea appears to have made big steps toward enriching uranium. A U.S. envoy on the issue, Stephen Bosworth, arrived in Beijing on Tuesday.
The stalled six-party talks bring together China, North and South Korea, the United States, Japan and Russia and have sought to end Pyongyang's nuclear weapons development in return for aid.
The impoverished and isolated North depends heavily on its only major ally for economic and diplomatic support and its leader, Kim Jong-il, has visited China twice this year, in part to gain backing for the anointment of his son to eventually take over the family dynasty.
A U.S. academic, Siegfried Hecker, who recently visited North Korea, said at the weekend he had seen more than a thousand centrifuges for enriching uranium during a tour of the North's Yongbyon nuclear complex.
(Reporting by Michael Martina: Writing by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ken Wills and Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I would not negotiate one bit. They could no t get me to spit over the fence save their lives. They have enough money to build centrifuges while the people suffer. Now they want to start a war? And do they think they think those hungry soldiers are really ready to fight? If only George Bush had not squandered our moral authority, this would be a perfect time to get rid of some of the old nukes we are so desperately trying to unload. But we have attacked Iraq and other countries without provocation also. SO what?
Nov 23, 20104:01am EST--
¡°North Korean officials also hinted to American interlocutors that they would continue missile tests and conduct a third test of a nuclear device if the United States did not resume negotiations with Pyongyang¡± Blackmail and threatening the greatest military country is just what the doctor has ordered. The guts of this little pigmy! Not even a whiff of alcohol. Let him eat the fuel rods and we should tell them loudly. Spending bilions of whatever mony they have on war and military efforts. What an idiot!
Nov 23, 20104:20am EST--
It¡¯s a civil war between Koreans. Only Koreans can iron out their differences.
Nov 23, 20107:27am EST--
