Analysis: China toughs out crisis sitting on Korean fence
2010-11-24 07:35:00.0
(Reuters) - China's famed diplomatic fence-sitting now faces an agonizing test on the barbed-wire dividing North and South Korea, but Beijing is likely to endure the sting and shield its friend, the North.
North Korea's deadly shelling of a South Korean island on Tuesday will be a major test of how well China can balance its role as Pyongyang's only major ally with international demands that it pressure, even punish, the North over the worst bombardment on the Korean Peninsula since 1953.
In the end, Pyongyang's importance to China as a buffer against possible regional containment and conflict is likely to outweigh the urgings of the Obama administration and U.S. allies for a tough response from Beijing that could rile North Korea.
"There won't be any shift in the macro-structure of relations because of a localized problem like this," said Xu Guangyu, a retired major general in the People's Liberation Army who now works for the government-run China Arms Control and Disarmament Association.
"Our biggest objective is stability on the Korean Peninsula. That interest is not served by abandoning North Korea," he said.
"China's attitudes won't change. It will make calls for restraint. It's afraid of an escalation. But there won't be any fundamental shift."
But if China resists calls for strong censure of Pyongyang, however, its regional standing could suffer, a worry that will also weigh on Beijing officials' minds.
U.S. officials have already complained about China's muted response to the shelling that killed at least four people. President Hu Jintao is due to visit Washington in early 2011, and that could add pressure on Beijing to criticize the North.
"The Chinese did not react in a way we thought was conducive to striving toward regional stability," a senior U.S. official in Washington D.C. told Reuters.
Seoul and Tokyo were already upset over Beijing's hands-off stance about the sinking in March of a South Korean navy ship that Seoul said was torpedoed by North Korea.
This time, China may move to chide the North sooner and more sharply. But Washington and its allies will probably want more.
They may look to China to back criticism of the North with sanctions, possibly through the United Nations Security Council.
"A push for a new sanctions resolution at the United Nations may be necessary to test once more whether the international community faces a North Korea problem or a China problem," Scott Snyder, an expert on Korea at the Council on Foreign Relations, said in an emailed comment.
CHINA'S INVESTMENT
China sees North Korea as a strategic buffer against the U.S. and its regional allies, and throughout this year President Hu has shown how much political prestige and economic aid he is willing to invest in Pyongyang.
In early May, North Korea's leader Kim Jong-il visited China on his first trip abroad since 2006, and he visited again in late August ahead of the anointment of his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, as heir-apparent in the dynastic one-party state.
Since then, senior Chinese leaders have visited Pyongyang.
China's 1,415-km (880-mile) border with North Korea includes stretches of rivers that freeze over in winter, and Beijing fears that frontier could become a conduit for refugees and upheaval if Pyongyang's regime crumbles.
Washington is sending the nuclear-powered USS George Washington, which carries 75 warplanes, to join exercises with South Korea from Sunday to the following Wednesday, U.S. officials in Seoul said on Wednesday.
"China will not welcome the U.S. aircraft carrier joining the exercises, because that kind of move can escalate tensions, and not relieve them," said Xu, the retired major general.
(Additional reporting by Michelle Nichols in New York and Ross Colvin in Washington; Editing by Don Durfee and Sanjeev Miglani)
