Taiwan pro-China party holds edge in mayoral races
2010-11-27 16:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's China-friendly ruling party held onto most of the island's mayoral posts up for grabs in tense elections Saturday seen as a test of the party's popularity ahead of the 2012 presidential race.
Wins in three of five mayoral seats gave the Nationalist Party, or KMT, a clear shot at retaining the presidency, which will calm Beijing as it has worked closely with the party on landmark trade deals after decades of political hostilities.
China has claimed sovereignty over self-ruled Taiwan for six decades but since 2008 has discussed economic issues with President Ma Ying-jeou's government. Beijing hopes those talks will lead eventually to political unification.
"Of course China doesn't want to see any change in the status quo, particularly in the three cities that the KMT has held for a long time," said Shane Lee, political scientist at Chang Jung University in Taiwan.
The KMT won second four-year terms in Taipei and Sinbei, the island's two largest cities, and in the central city of Taichung. The anti-China opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) held the southern cities of Kaohsiung and Tainan.
Taiwan financial markets will at least remain stable and may gain on the KMT's victories as the results herald more tie-ups between export-reliant Taiwan and economic powerhouse China.
Saturday's wins also end a slump for the KMT. The party did poorly in local polls elsewhere in Taiwan last year and in by-elections earlier this year as Ma's opinion poll ratings struggled after a string of 2009 domestic flaps.
However, Taiwan politics change fast, meaning the 2012 presidential race will be decided by unforeseen new issues dominating the public agenda that year.
"Hau Lung-bin will go to the people and listen to their voices," the reelected Taipei mayor said of himself in a televised speech. "There are a lot of areas where we need to review and improve."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It seems the northern part of the sovereign country of Taiwan cares more about money and not getting shot at by Communist Mainland China and the southern part of Taiwan cares more about freedom and staying independent. I wonder who is keeping an eye on how much the CCP is pouring into the political campaigns in Taiwan? I¡¯m sure the KMT knows full well, but they are not going to admit to this.
Nov 27, 20109:10am EST--
