Centrifuges confirm concerns on North Korea: Pentagon
2010-11-21 16:59:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea's effort to enrich uranium is typical of its defiance of the United Nations and major powers including China must put pressure on Pyongyang to abandon its nuclear ambitions, senior U.S. officials said on Sunday.
North Korean officials took a U.S. nuclear scientist, Siegfried Hecker of Stanford University, to a plant at its Yongbyon nuclear complex where he saw hundreds of centrifuges, sources familiar with the matter told Reuters on Saturday.
Washington has believed since 2002 that Pyongyang had such a program but the apparent sophistication of its effort could ignite fresh debate over how to deal with North Korea's unpredictable leadership and whether to resume talks aimed at ending its nuclear ambitions.
"The notion that they could develop this is obviously a concern but I would say fairly consistent with their long-standing willingness to ignore the U.N.," Defense Secretary Robert Gates said.
"North Korea has ignored a number of Security Council resolutions and sanctions. They continually try to export weapons in violation of those resolutions," Gates told reporters in Santa Cruz, Bolivia, where he was attending a conference of American defense ministers.
Admiral Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. military's Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the disclosure showed that North Korea was a "dangerous country" intent on making nuclear weapons and major powers must work together to bring pressure on North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.
"We have to continue to bring pressure on him specifically. Those in the region -- in particular the six-party talk countries, Russia, China, the United States, Japan, and South Korea, we all have to continue to do that," Mullen told ABC television's "This Week with Christiane Amanpour" talk show.
Asked whether this new facility raised concerns the North was making more nuclear weapons "right now," Mullen told ABC: "This certainly gives that potential real life."
The North Koreans told Hecker they had 2,000 centrifuges in operation but the U.S. team that visited the country was unable to verify that they were working, the sources told Reuters.
Gates dismissed the notion the enrichment program might be for energy production, saying North Korea had had an ongoing nuclear arms program for some time and probably had a number of nuclear devices.
"I believe they have nuclear weapons, they're clearly developing longer-range missiles, including potentially a mobile ICBM (intercontinental ballistic missile), so all of these programs are of great concern to every nation," he said.
Gates said he had "no idea" what motivated North Korea to reveal the plant at this time, and he declined to discuss U.S. options going forward, saying the incident had occurred while he was out of the country and he needed to consult first with other U.S. security and diplomatic officials.
CHINA'S ROLE
By showing off its nuclear hand, analysts say North Korea is seeking to gain leverage in any aid-for-disarmament negotiations in stalled six-way talks with regional powers China, Japan, South Korea, Russia and the United States.
Its nuclear program is seen as a threat to U.S. allies Japan and South Korea, and a proliferation risk given North Korea's long history of selling missile technology abroad.
The top U.S. envoy on North Korea arrived in Seoul late on Sunday to start discussing with key Asian nations ways to thwart Pyongyang's nuclear ambitions.
Mullen singled out China -- North Korea's closest ally -- saying Beijing would necessarily have "an awful lot to do with" future attempts to sway Pyongyang.
"We've been engaged with China for an extended period of time with respect to North Korea ... a great part of this, I think, will have to be done through Beijing," he told ABC.
Mullen put the nuclear disclosure in context by pointing to the March sinking of a South Korean warship, which Washington and Seoul blame on Pyongyang. The suspected torpedo attack killed 46 South Korean sailors and stoked tensions on the peninsula.
"All of this is consistent with belligerent behavior -- the kind of instability creation in a part of the world that is very dangerous," Mullen said.
The North's reported nuclear advances come nearly two months after Kim Jong-il started the transition of power to his youngest son, Kim Jong-un. Analysts say he wants to use nuclear muscle to boost his son's credentials with the military.
"And, in fact, I also believe that this has to do with a succession plan for his son," Mullen said.
(Additional reporting by Arshad Mohammed in Washington, David Alexander in Santa Cruz, and Jeremy Laurence in Seoul; Editing by Anthony Boadle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°There¡¯s an old saying in Tennessee ¡ª I know it¡¯s in Texas, probably in Tennessee ¡ª that says, fool me once, shame on ¡ª shame on you. Fool me ¡ª you can¡¯t get fooled again.¡±
Nov 21, 20101:33pm EST--
More silly propaganda¡­ I am a frequent reuters reader, it angers me to see so much lobbying, political extremism and ignorance is represented in many, many articles. One could make a long list of bad things going on here, like opening pandoras box¡­ How can this be possible in the greatest western media outlet by far.
More silly propaganda¡­ I am a frequent reuters reader, it angers me to see so much lobbying, political extremism and ignorance is represented in many, many articles. One could make a long list of bad things going on here, like opening pandoras box¡­ How can this be possible in the greatest western media outlet by far.
How dare you people talk about Paris Hilton and what a threat terrorism is. And completley ignore the real behind the scenes action ¡°the real news¡±?
Does reuters actually focus at all on informing people correctly? Heres the real story to this article.
Nov 21, 20101:33pm EST--
¡®The Real Story¡¯ When the cold war ended, US bosses soon demanded an excuse to keep the military industry running, ¡°in an attempt to save the dwingling US economy¡±. This required war or at least the prospect such. Independently from 11.9.01, and the middle east. North Korea was ¡®in a way¡¯ allowed to develop it¡¯s nuclear capabilities. There¡¯s no denying that the US knew about it. Now it¡¯s hard to tell sor sure whether there is any real intention of war with North Korea. Neither could I tell you if this has been done on purpose to gain a much longer term excuse. What IS certain is that the situation has been taken advantage of for the above named purposes¡¯, and that current propaganda aimes to mainain the illusion of a threat. There has also been a keen enthusiasm by other western and oriental powers to use North korea in a similar fashion. Mainly by supporting US policy and South Korea.
¡®The Real Story¡¯ When the cold war ended, US bosses soon demanded an excuse to keep the military industry running, ¡°in an attempt to save the dwingling US economy¡±. This required war or at least the prospect such. Independently from 11.9.01, and the middle east. North Korea was ¡®in a way¡¯ allowed to develop it¡¯s nuclear capabilities. There¡¯s no denying that the US knew about it. Now it¡¯s hard to tell sor sure whether there is any real intention of war with North Korea. Neither could I tell you if this has been done on purpose to gain a much longer term excuse. What IS certain is that the situation has been taken advantage of for the above named purposes¡¯, and that current propaganda aimes to mainain the illusion of a threat. There has also been a keen enthusiasm by other western and oriental powers to use North korea in a similar fashion. Mainly by supporting US policy and South Korea.
Nov 21, 20101:53pm EST--
