China's Xinmao hijacks European cable deal
2010-11-22 00:05:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Xinmao Group gatecrashed an all-European cable industry takeover on Monday, proposing a 1 billion euro ($1.4 billion) cash offer for Dutch group Draka DRAK.AS that eclipses an agreed bid from Italy's Prysmian.
) had won over Draka DRAK.AS, a market leader in cable in China, with its second attempt at a takeover bid. Prysmian's aim is to grab the world cable industry number one spot from another Draka suitor -- Nexans (
The global cable market, expected by market research firm CRU to reach $176 billion in 2011, is highly fragmented and seen as ripe for consolidation, driven by manufacturers that are looking to boost their negotiating power both with raw material suppliers and end users of cables.
Draka, 48.5 percent owned by a secretive family investment fund Flint Beheer[ID:nLDE6AL1J6], is a popular takeover target. Prysmian, the industry number two, made a failed bid for it in the summer of 2009. Only a month ago, Nexans had a cash bid rejected. It now plans to make a statement on November 24.
The Chinese group's proposed 20.50 euros-per-share offer values Draka's equity at about 1 billion euros, against Prysmian's recommended cash and shares bid of 817 million euros.
Kempen Capital Management, with a 5.2 percent stake, said Draka management should examine the Xinmao bid well.
Unlisted Xinmao, whose listed subsidiary Xinmao Science and Technology Co. Ltd (
) has a market capitalization of just over $400 million, said it had fully committed financing in place for the offer through a vehicle called Tianjin Xinmao S&T Investment Corp. The company said it was confident a deal could be completed in the second quarter of 2011.
"Xinmao has followed Draka for quite some time but the Nexans bid intrigued them even more. There is no overlap of activities...so we see no antitrust issues," said Joseph Krant of Catalyst Advisers, which is advising Xinmao.
However, Prysmian's chief executive Valerio Battista said he was not considering matching Xinmao's proposed offer, which would be worth 22 percent more than Prysmian's based on a Prysmian share price of 12.47 euros where it traded on Monday afternoon.
Draka's fate could be decided by its biggest investor, Flint Beheer, which had given an irrevocable commitment to the Prysmian offer and did not comment on the Xinmao development.
Flint is a vehicle of the Fentener van Vlissingen family, which has three members in the top-25 richest Dutch people. It bought an initial stake when Draka was spun off from Philips (
Prysmian and Draka said they aimed to forge a leader in worldwide energy and telecom cables, particularly high-tech, by stitching together Prysmian's southern and Draka's northern European presence.
Draka shares jumped 26 percent to 19.52 euros by 1602 GMT, well above the 16.76 euros per share value of the Prysmian offer price but short of the Xinmao offer. Prysmian's shares fell 5 percent to 12.37 euros.
Prysmian's offer consists of 8.60 euros in cash and 0.6595 Prysmian shares for every Draka ordinary share. That represented an 11.4 percent premium over Draka's closing price on Friday.
A deal with Draka would give Prysmian access to specialist businesses such as elevator and automotive cables, where it is a market leader, as well as its optical fibre operations, where it is No.2 in the world and a market leader in China. Draka is the principal automotive cable supplier of Airbus (
China accounted for 46 percent of global demand for fibre optic cable in 2009, though consumption from Chinese network operators dropped by 11 percent in the first nine months of 2010 and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, with new investment in broadband infrastructure, is expected to make a noticeable contribution to 2011 demand, CRU said recently.
Goldman Sachs, Leonardo & Co, Mediobanca and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer are advising Prysmian, while JP Morgan and Allen & Overy are advising Draka. BNP Paribas and Credit Agricole advised Nexans on its bid for Draka.
(Additional reporting by Nigel Tutt in Milan, Leila Abboud in Paris, Marcel Michelson in Amsterdam and Quentin Webb in London, Writing by Alexander Smith; editing by Andrew Callus)
