Analysis: China's yuan deserves a break in inflation blame game
2010-11-19 12:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Much as critics of China's currency policy would like to pin the blame for the country's bout of inflation on an undervalued currency, the truth is that a cheap yuan is just one cause of rising prices and certainly not the trigger.
The corollary may be even more unsettling for them. Without much appreciation, Beijing should be able to wrestle prices under control.
"This round of inflation is a monetary phenomenon. The root is loose money. Yuan appreciation may play a part in the loose money, but I don't think it is the key reason," said Dongming Xie, China economist at OCBC Bank.
"In China's case, the impact of currency appreciation on the consumer price index is not as big as in small economies."
According to this line of reasoning, price pressures bubbling up now in China are simply a result of the government's long-standing unwillingness to let the yuan rise more quickly.
On a fundamental level, a cheap yuan has led to an accumulation of cash in the Chinese economy, providing ample kindling for a flare-up in inflation -- a view expressed last week by U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner.
But from a short-term perspective, the current jump in prices has little direct connection to the exchange rate. And in the short term, at least, yuan appreciation will be only a small part of the government's solution.
The swelling of its foreign exchange reserves, from $819 billion in 2005 to $2.65 trillion at last count, would have generated inflation or currency appreciation in most countries.
But in China, inflation has averaged only about 3 percent per year since then, while the yuan has gained just 7.4 percent on a trade-weighted basis, according to the Bank for International Settlements.
END OF THE LINE?
The explanation of Beijing's gravity-defying success is that it has broken the circuit between currency undervaluation and inflation. Empowered by both its size and its many levers of control in the financial system, it has been remarkably successful at sterilizing foreign exchange inflows.
China has sopped up cash with a steady issuance of central bank paper, locked up more liquidity through reserve requirements and kept a tight grip on credit growth by giving banks strict orders about how much they can lend.
Could it be that the sudden jump in inflation to a 25-month high means that China's charmed run is coming to an end?
"Five years of massive current account surpluses will always bring inflation at some point," said Stephen Green, an economist with Standard Chartered in Shanghai. "Yuan undervaluation is certainly one of the key causes of the liquidity conditions we have."
But he is also quick to point out other factors, from higher wage costs to the cyclical impact of a surge in bank lending.
Having been careful for years to keep excess cash out of the economy, Beijing opened the sluice gates to counter the global financial crisis. It has been too slow to close them.
The People's Bank of China noted in a report last month that money growth was still too fast, a lagging effect from last year's record 9.6 trillion yuan in new loans.
GET THE MONEY OUT!
The problem, in other words, is not a sudden inability to manage liquidity, but a temporary suspension of liquidity-management discipline.
There are signs that Beijing is intent to get it right again. Along with raising reserve requirements to a record high for big banks at 18.5 percent, there is also talk that it will cut total lending quotas by about 15 percent next year.
Nevertheless, while China has done well to cope with all the cash that has streamed in over the years, this cannot continue forever. It has to find ways to guide some of the money to the exits, said Zhou Qiren, an academic adviser to the central bank.
"The real solution to this problem is to encourage Chinese people to spend money overseas and domestic enterprises to venture abroad," Zhou, who is also a professor at Peking University, said in remarks that were published on Thursday.
So along with interest rate increases, higher reserve requirements, tighter lending controls and even price intervention, faster yuan appreciation is sure to be on the policy menu for Beijing in its fight against inflation.
Importantly, a stronger yuan would help curb imported inflation, a priority as global commodity prices edge up on the back of monetary easing in the United States.
"Lack of yuan appreciation exacerbates the external shock from commodity prices," said Andy Ji, economist and currency strategist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia in Singapore.
But if the past is any guide -- and in China, it certainly is -- the yuan's rise will be gradual.
"Going too fast would encourage even more capital inflows, pushing up prices further," said Tan Ruyong, a professor with the Shanghai University of Finance and Economics.
(Additional reporting by Zhou Xin and Aileen Wang; Editing by Ken Wills and Vidya Ranganathan)
