Factbox: Mechanics of Taiwan month-end local elections
2010-11-24 03:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan voters will pick mayors and county magistrates in elections on Saturday that will send a signal on which party, the pro-China Nationalists or anti-China opposition, has a cleaner shot at the presidency in 2012.
Voters in Taiwan's five biggest cities and counties totaling 60 percent of the island's eligible electorate will choose mayors and magistrates. City and county council races take place on the same day. The rest of Taiwan chose local leaders in 2009.
Polls are open from 8 a.m. (0000 GMT) to 4 p.m. on Saturday, and results are due mid-evening on the same day. New terms start on December 25 and run for four years.
In the city of Taipei, the hardest race to call of the five, Nationalist incumbent Mayor Hau Lung-bin is fighting back against a do-nothing image with a new infrastructure and an international floral exhibition that opened this month.
He is running against Su Tseng-chang, a charismatic former opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) premier often seen as his camp's most likely candidate to win the presidency.
In neighboring Sinbei city, Taiwan's biggest electoral district with about 3 million people, DPP Chairwoman Tsai Ing-wen slightly lags Eric Chu, former vice premier and one of the Nationalist Party's young rising stars.
The southern port city of Kaohsiung is expected to give popular DPP incumbent another four years in office against two rivals, Yang Chiu-hsing and Huang Chao-hsing. Tainan, another opposition stronghold, is tipped to elect the DPP's Lai Ching-te over Nationalist contender Kuo Tien-Tsai.
Central Taiwan's main metropolis Taichung is leaning toward re-electing Jason Hu, a long-standing Nationalist mayor respected at home but not seen likely to pursue higher office. His rival is the DPP's Su Chia-chuan.
Taiwan's economy is the dominant issue. Candidates want to be seen as concerned about jobs, the rich-poor gap and bold new infrastructure that helps the economy while factoring in the environment.
Traditional party lines are expected to weigh heavily on races in Kaohsiung, Taichung and Tainan, easily giving the opposition two seats and the Nationalists one.
Party lines also play a part in Taipei and Sinbei, but smear campaigns, personal charisma and voter perception of who's done what lately weigh heavily.
