Bernanke hits back at Fed critics, points at China
2010-11-18 22:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke on Thursday hit back at critics of the U.S. central bank's controversial bond-buying program and issued a thinly veiled attack on China's policy of keeping its currency depressed.
Bernanke, facing a firestorm of protests from within and outside the central bank, said a more vigorous U.S. economy was essential to the global recovery and dismissed charges he was debasing the dollar.
"The best way to continue to deliver the strong economic fundamentals that underpin the value of the dollar, as well as to support the global recovery, is through policies that lead to a resumption of robust growth in a context of price stability in the United States," Bernanke said in comments prepared for delivery to a conference at the European Central Bank in Frankfurt on Friday.
The Fed's November 3 decision to buy a further $600 billion in U.S. government debt generated outrage among many nations who charged the United States with seeking to weaken the dollar to gain an export edge.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble has called the policy "clueless." Domestic critics have also lashed out, arguing the policy could ignite inflation and fuel asset bubbles.
Fed officials circled their wagons this week to defend the program. Two officials added their endorsements on Thursday, another expressed opposition, while a fourth said monetary policy should not play the main role in driving a stronger recovery.
In his remarks, Bernanke said sluggish growth, declines in inflation and an unemployment rate that has hovered near 10 percent for months convinced U.S. policymakers they needed to act.
"On its current economic trajectory, the United States runs the risk of seeing millions of workers unemployed or underemployed for many years," he said. "As a society, we should find that unacceptable."
Addressing international criticism of the Fed's action, Bernanke said much of the recent weakness in the dollar reflected an unwinding of the increases that were notched as investors fled to the safety of the greenback during the European sovereign debt crisis in the spring.
Many emerging economies have worried that volatile investment inflows sparked by the dollar's decline could be destabilizing -- either fueling inflation or asset bubbles.
"Currency undervaluation by surplus countries is inhibiting needed international adjustment and creating spillover effects that would not exist if exchange rates better reflected market fundamentals," he said, without explicitly pointing to China.
Bernanke broadened the case against China, which keeps the yuan on a tight leash, by saying inflexible currencies are preventing a needed rebalancing of global growth and could end up destabilizing the world economy.
"For large, systemically important countries with persistent current account surpluses, the pursuit of export-led growth cannot ultimately succeed if the implications of that strategy for global growth and stability are not taken into account," he said.
The Fed's bond-buying plan -- know as quantitative easing or QE, for short -- won a surprise endorsement from a policymaker who had been seen as an internal critic.
"I believe that QE is a move in the right direction," Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank President Narayana Kocherlakota told a conference in Chicago.
However, Philadelphia Fed President Charles Plosser said the costs of the program did not outweigh the benefits, while Fed Governor Kevin Warsh said the economy faced problems that monetary policy could not solve.
"Monetary policy has an important role to play," Warsh told business leaders in Chicago. "But it is not a predominant role."
Instead, he said, businesses need more certainty in terms of fiscal, trade and regulatory policies.
(Additional reporting by Pedro Nicolaci da Costa in Washington and Ann Saphir and Eric Johnson in Chicago; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Bernanke is living under a false assumption created by a false report on the rate of inflation that is going on. China doesn¡¯t have a core index to exclude food and fuel and consequently are already looking to price controls. We have price controls in the form of inflation deception.
Nov 19, 20109:19am EST--
The real problem is: once inflation start, it will be hard to slow it down. Another worry: everyone know that the government CPI index is a joke at best. So the real inflation is much higher than measured and this impact most to the poor people.
Nov 19, 20101:55pm EST--
