Six nations decline invitation to Liu Nobel gala
2010-11-18 13:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Six countries declined invitations to the December 10 Nobel Peace Prize ceremony for jailed Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo after an unprecedented campaign by China to sabotage attendance, the Norwegian Nobel Committee told Reuters.
The six nations that declined are Russia, Kazakhstan, Cuba, Morocco, Iraq and China itself. They gave no reason for declining, said Geir Lundestad, secretary of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, which awards the accolade.
Lundestad said China had mounted a campaign to persuade diplomats to avoid the awards ceremony in Oslo, and had returned all mail sent by the Committee unopened.
"I don't know of any example where a country has so actively and directly tried to have ambassadors stay away from a Nobel ceremony," he told Reuters.
Another 16 countries had not replied to the invitation by the committee's extended deadline of Thursday morning but might still reply later and attend, Lundestad said on Thursday.
"China is not the only factor in this," Lundestad added. "There are always some ambassadors that don't come for some reason, and they don't have to say why."
"The big question this year is China, and how China is able to affect the decisions of others," he said. "Several countries have to check with their home governments .... This has become a delicate issue with some governments."
The Nobel Committee sent invitations to 58 countries with embassies in Norway, and 36 have accepted.
According to an Asian diplomat, the Vietnamese, Philippine and Indonesian envoys to Norway will not attend.
Hanoi's will not come because the dissident Vietnamese Buddhist monk Thich Quang Do was nominated for the 2010 prize, while the Philippine and Indonesian ambassadors will be traveling at the time, the diplomat said.
There was no comment from the Russian, Kazakh and Cuban embassies in Oslo.
A spokesman for the Indian embassy in Norway told Reuters he "was not in a position to give an answer," while a spokeswoman for the South African embassy said: "We are still awaiting instructions from our head office."
Even with some diplomatic no-shows, Lundestad said, he expected 1,000 or so admirers of Liu Xiaobo to attend the ceremony at Oslo City Hall.
However, because Lundestad says Liu's family appears to have been denied permission to travel -- his wife has been held under virtual house arrest since the prize was announced -- the committee intends to hold on to the medal, diploma and check for 10 million Swedish crowns ($1.46 million).
(Additional reporting by John Ruwitch in Hanoi, Gwladys Fouche and Wojciech Moskwa in Oslo; Editing by Alison Williams)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If the Chinese fear this, I can¡¯t imagine how they¡¯d react to something truly alarming.
Nov 18, 201010:54am EST--
I¡¯d like to extend a personal invitation to liu and the dalai lama to thanksgiving dinner. What will the chinese do, refuse to take my job?
Nov 18, 20103:28pm EST--
It¡¯s interesting to see the Chinese netizens reaction to this news in Chinese forums. I¡¯ve been learning Chinese online with Surf Chinese for 2 years and find it interesting to see a different perspective on this issue reading about it in a different language.
Nov 18, 20109:24pm EST--
