China should tighten its monetary policy: central bank advisor
2010-11-21 12:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China should tighten monetary policy to staunch liquidity, and more measures should follow next year, an advisor to the central bank said in remarks published late on Saturday.
"We need to find ways to drain excessive liquidity, and adopt a suitably tightened and prudent monetary policy," Xia Bin, an academic advisor on China's central bank's monetary policy committee said in an interview with a popular financial news website (www.hexun.com).
Xia said the fact that the economy was flush with money was the fundamental reason for the recent spike in inflation. China's consumer inflation climbed to a 25-month high of 4.4 percent in October.
Xia does not have decision-making power as an advisor to the central bank, but does provide input to the policy-making process.
On Friday, the People's Bank of China announced that it would increase required reserves by 50 basis points, its fifth such announcement this year, to remove excess cash from the economy.
Xia, a former vice governor of the central bank, also said that the country could afford to further raise required reserves.
He said that China, in the face of the United States' "irresponsible printing of dollars," needed to strengthen its supervision of capital inflows and foreign investment in China.
China's foreign exchange regulator said on Monday that foreigners would only be able to buy one home in China to curb speculation.
"I personally think that limits on foreign investment speculation on commercial buildings should also be strengthened," Xia added.
(Reporting by Sally Huang and Michael Martina;Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Nov 21, 20104:21am EST--
Nov 21, 20106:37am EST--
China should stop the long-term and irresponsible practice of manipulating its currency to favor Chinese businesses. The US needs to temporarily make adjustments to compensate for the 30+ years of long-term unfair, irresponsible chinese trade and monetary policies. In light of Chinese restrictions on everyone else on the planet (all non-chinese are foreigners), everyone else should stop buying china-made products and prohibit purchases of real estate by the irresponsible foreigners from China. Alternatively, China could grow up, begin behaving in a responsible and equitable manner, leave behind all the state-sponsored discrimination and racist tactics against anyone who is not ethnically chinese, and actually join the modern world it so wants to dominate. Back when China needed help and wanted ¡°foreign investments¡±, the US and other countries were there to extend the hand of friendship and worked to help China develop. Now that China has sucked up more than it¡¯s share of world resources and the US is having a little trouble, does China extend the hand of friendship ¨C NO. They reach out to strike down the fallen and make sure they don¡¯t get up again.
Nov 21, 20107:20am EST--
