China condemns Congress for security report
2010-11-19 04:42:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Foreign Ministry on Friday hit back at a report to Congress on China's military capabilities and economic policies, saying it distorted reality and was symptomatic of Cold War thinking.
The U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, a congressional advisory body, issued a lengthy report this week looking at everything from China's currency policy to its growing military clout.
It also said that China Telecom had briefly "hijacked" U.S. Internet traffic in April, charges the company has denied.
"This report ignores the facts, is full of Cold War thinking and political bias," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said in a statement carried on the ministry's Website (
"We advise this so-called committee to stop interfering in China's internal politics, and do more things that are conducive to Sino-U.S. mutual trust and cooperation," he added.
The commission was set up in 2000 to advise the U.S. Congress on the economic and national security implications of the U.S.-China relationship. Its members include scholars, former government officials and diplomats.
China-U.S. relations have been strained this year over everything from U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, Tibet and the value of the Chinese currency.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It is very unfortunate, but China isn¡¯t really our friend. Folks should not turn a blind eye to this simple fact. We are viewed by them as the enemy, mainly in an economic sense, but an advasary just the same.
Nov 19, 20106:45am EST--
One will not easy to understand why US is not China¡¯s best friend. Just go through the headlines on the Bloomberg, CNN, CNBC .. etc. Even the recent Economist magazine, which used to be a great magazine, read its headline as ¡°Buying up the world¡± with Mao Zedong portrait at the front page. No wonder China looks at the western world suspiciously.
Nov 19, 20101:52pm EST--
