China may resume rare earth exports next week: Japan
2010-11-19 08:00:00.0
(Reuters) - China's shipments to Japan of rare earths could resume next week, Japan's trade minister said on Friday, nearly two months after exports of the minerals, vital for making many high-tech products, stalled amid a spat over disputed islands in the East China Sea.
Customs procedures for shipments to Japan are improving, Trade Minister Akihiro Ohata told reporters, adding: "I strongly hope that shipments will start moving next week."
Japanese firms have complained of restrictions on shipments of the minerals by Chinese customs officials since late September, when a Chinese trawler captain was detained after his ship collided with Japanese patrol boats near the disputed islands. He was later released and sent home.
In a move to diversify its sources of supplies of the strategic minerals, Japan agreed with Mongolia on Friday to cooperate on developing mineral resources, including rare earths.
China produces 97 percent of the world's rare earth metals.
A survey by Japan's trade ministry of more than 30 firms this week showed that 16 out of 27 that gave detailed responses said there had been signs of improvement in China's customs procedures.
"I think the Chinese understand that stalled exports of rare earths to Japan would in turn have a big impact on China's production of computers," Ohata said.
He said the improvement in customs procedures was in line with comments by Zhang Ping, the head of China's National Development and Reform Commission, who told him last weekend that the issue would be resolved soon.
Daily checks showed there had been very little loading of Japan-bound rare earths in the past two months, said Tsutomu Murasaki, director of the trade ministry's nonferrous metals division.
The survey showed most shipments still being blocked, though some loading began after Chinese customs gave the go-ahead to the shippers on November 17, Murasaki told a news conference. Shippers had applied for customs clearance in early October.
Tensions remain between Japan and China despite the release of the trawler captain. The two countries' leaders, however, signaled a thaw may be in sight when they met on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific leaders' gathering in Japan last weekend.
China has set 2010 export quotas of rare earths 40 percent lower than 2009 levels, raising alarm among buyer nations about supplies.
The shortage and higher cost has resulted in an increase of smuggling of rare earths, an official at a Beijing-based metals pricing service told Reuters last month.
Japan, seeking to offset the risk of its dependence on its giant rival, has recently been pledging closer ties with other Asian nations and partnering with them on rare earth development.
In October, Japan agreed with India to cooperate in developing and recycling rare earth minerals and rare metals, as well as with Vietnam to mine rare earths in the southeast Asian nation.
(Additional reporting by Risa Maeda and Yoko Kubota; Editing by Michael Watson and Sugita Katyal)
