Bernanke hits back at Fed critics
2010-11-19 18:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke hit back on Friday at critics of the U.S. central bank's bond-buying program and issued a thinly veiled attack on China's policy of keeping its currency on a leash.
Bernanke, facing a chorus of protests about the asset-buying spree from within and outside the central bank, said a more vigorous U.S. economy was essential to fuel the global recovery and dismissed charges he was debasing the dollar.
"The best way to continue to deliver the strong economic fundamentals that underpin the value of the dollar, as well as to support the global recovery, is through policies that lead to a resumption of robust growth in a context of price stability in the United States," Bernanke told a conference at the European Central Bank in Frankfurt.
The Fed's November 3 decision to buy a further $600 billion in U.S. government debt with new money generated outrage among policymakers in many nations, who accused the United States of seeking to weaken the dollar to gain an export edge.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble called the policy "clueless," while domestic critics have argued the policy could ignite inflation and fuel asset bubbles.
In his remarks on Friday, Bernanke faulted inflexible currencies for blocking a needed rebalancing of global growth, but admitted a need for greater U.S. saving as well.
"Deficits and surpluses are generated by many countries' behavior not a single currency," Bernanke said during a panel discussion with IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn and European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet.
"It will be very difficult for exchange rates by themselves to restore the balance and so I think structural adjustments on both sides are necessary," Bernanke said.
"We need to move in that direction," he said.
Addressing international criticism of the Fed's action, Bernanke said much of the recent weakness of the dollar reflected an unwinding of the increases that were notched as investors fled to the safety of the greenback during the European sovereign debt crisis in the spring.
Still, analysts said Bernanke's emphasis on the need to reinvigorate the U.S. economy was a dollar negative.
"It is hard enough to stop a central bank from weakening its currency when it is cutting rates, but when it is willing to print money to do so ... it looks very much as if they see a weaker currency if not as the sole target of monetary policy, then as something that is natural, if not inevitable," analysts at Citibank said in a research note.
Many emerging economies have worried that volatile investment inflows sparked by the dollar's decline could be destabilizing -- either fueling inflation or asset bubbles.
While Bernanke did not explicitly point to China, U.S. officials have long argued that an undervalued Chinese yuan gives the Asian export powerhouse an unfair advantage.
"For large, systemically important countries with persistent current account surpluses, the pursuit of export-led growth cannot ultimately succeed if the implications of that strategy for global growth and stability are not taken into account," he said.
Michael Feroli, an economist with JPMorgan Chase in New York said Bernanke's forceful words carried a message for domestic and international critics alike.
"The essence of the chairman's argument is that the market will resolve undervalued Asian currencies in one of two ways: either an increase in the price level in Asia, or a decrease in the price level in the U.S.," he said.
"Without an aggressive Fed response, the U.S. runs a greater risk of deflation and U.S. monetary policy would in part be abdicated to Asian policymakers."
Bernanke said sluggish U.S. growth, falling inflation and an unemployment rate that has hovered near 10 percent for months convinced Fed policymakers they needed to pump in more stimulus.
"On its current economic trajectory, the United States runs the risk of seeing millions of workers unemployed or underemployed for many years," he said. "As a society, we should find that unacceptable."
(Additional reporting by Mark Felsenthal in Washington; Editing by Mike Peacock, John Stonestreet, Andrew Hay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
When pretty much everyone in the world from hicks (me) to the finance ministers of G8 countries thinks the idea is idiotic, maybe it¡¯s time for Bernanke to splash some cold water on his face, drink a cup of coffee, and wake up. Idiotic ideas are still idiotic even if you own them¡­
Nov 19, 20108:40am EST--
With no fiscal stimulus coming as a result of a split government, QE2 is all we have. The dollar would be weaker without China¡¯s currency manipulation and the European debt crisis so why does it matter if the Fed weakended the currency. For those of you worried about inflation, it is time to actually look at the data and forget your stupid anecdotal claims. The CPI comes out every month. This month is was on Wednesday. Take a look, see how its compiled, understand while the volatile components are taken out and start using some facts in your arguements.
Nov 19, 20109:09am EST--
These pain in the azzes need to own up, admit they are wrong and suffer the consequences.
Nov 19, 20109:40am EST--
