Oil drops to 4-week low on China rate worries
2010-11-17 16:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil prices slumped to a four-week low on Wednesday as worries persisted that China would raise interest rates to cool down inflation, curbing demand from the world's biggest growth engine.
U.S. crude for December delivery settled $1.90 lower, or 2.31 percent, at $80.44 a barrel, the lowest for a front-month contract since October 19.
Four-day losses grew to $7.37, or 8.39 percent, the biggest percentage drop since the four days to May 7, when prices fell 12.86 percent. Prices have skidded from a two-year high of $88.63 hit on Thursday.
ICE Brent January crude fell $1.45, or 1.71 percent, to $83.28.
U.S. crude stockpiles fell 7.3 million barrels last week as imports dropped and refinery demand increased as more production units restarted after seasonal maintenance, data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration showed.
Oil markets also shrugged off signals from the dollar, which fell against the euro and a basket of currencies amid talk that Ireland may soon get help needed to fix its sovereign debt problems. <USD/>
Ireland committed itself on Wednesday to work with a European Union-IMF mission on urgent steps to help its stricken banking sector, a process that could lead to a bailout despite reluctance in Dublin.
In the usual correlation pattern, a lower value of the dollar sparks more risk-taking in the oil markets.
"After failing at Tuesday's close, bulls are shedding length and that is why crude hasn't received much support from the dollar's reversal today even with the inventory slide," said Stephen Schork, president at the Schork Group in Villanova, Pennsylvania.
Commodities and global markets have been hit hard in recent sessions on concerns involving China, the world's largest energy consumer. China has overtaken the United States to become the world's largest energy consumer.
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said his government was preparing steps to tame rising prices, the official Xinhua news agency reported late on Tuesday.
The tendency of China's central bank to raise interest rates around the 20th day of the month makes this coming Friday a "sensitive window" for a rate rise, an official newspaper said on Wednesday, citing unnamed analysts.
"Until the Chinese interest rate question and some key portions of the European sovereign debt issues are better clarified, this global economic uncertainty will keep speculative longs across the oil complex on the defensive," said Jim Ritterbusch, president of Ritterbusch & Associates in Galena, Illinois.
U.S. CPI, QE2, IRELAND
U.S. core consumer inflation rose by a 0.2 percent in October, smaller than expected and a record low, further supporting the U.S. Federal Reserve's decision to ease monetary policy through a massive purchase of Treasury bonds.
The anticipation and announcement of the Fed's so-called quantitative easing decision had helped in oil's most recent rally, on hopes that the move would help speed the sluggish pace of U.S. economic recovery.
But the just-concluded midterm elections that gave more seats to Republicans in the U.S. Congress have emboldened some GOP legislators to question the wisdom of the bond purchases, saying it may imperil the dollar and spawn inflation.
(Additional reporting by Robert Gibbons in New York; Ikuko Kurahone and Dmitry Zhannikov in London; and Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; Editing by Marguerita Choy)
