Chinese inflation will stabilize at 3 percent: OECD
2010-11-18 05:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Inflation in China will level off slightly above 3 percent as rising import prices offset a likely decline in food price inflation, the OECD said on Thursday.
Although the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development noted risks if a weak currency combined with high commodity prices, stabilization of inflation at about 3 percent would be more than acceptable to the Chinese government, which is now worried about mounting price pressures.
In its semi-annual Economic Outlook, the OECD also said that China's growth was picking up thanks to a turn in the inventory cycle and would remain buoyant for the coming two years.
The annual rate of growth will reach 10 percent in the fourth quarter, up from 9.6 percent in the third quarter, making for full-year growth of 10.5 percent, the Paris-based organization said.
The OECD noted that while China's counter-crisis stimulus plan was coming to an end, public investment was not about to drop off because the government would ramp up spending on public housing, health care and initiatives promoting urbanization.
Rising incomes will also support private consumption, it said.
"Overall, domestic demand should accelerate in the projection period, while export growth moderates as the expansion of world trade eases back to trend," the report said.
Consumer price inflation rose to a 25-month high of 4.4 percent in the year to October and it is on track to breach the government's full-year target of a 3 percent average.
The OECD forecast that inflation would hit 3.1 percent this year, 3.3 percent next year and 3.0 percent in 2012.
"Continued weakness of the currency and strength of commodity prices could generate higher inflation," it said.
The OECD noted that the yuan's effective exchange rate had weakened despite modest appreciation against the dollar since it was lifted from a de facto bilateral peg in June.
"The stability of the domestic economy would be enhanced if exchange rate policy were more oriented to allowing an appreciation against a basket of currencies," it said.
(Reporting by Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is funny. Does the OECD really have such bad tunnel vision when it comes to China? Inflation in staple foods is inevitable. This is due to changes in China¡¯s standard of living. China is now the largest importer of meat, soy and corn and can no longer counter the higher cost of global market prices. China is also under pressure by the release of 600 million USD into the global marketplace. Continuing to fix its currency against the dollar at such an unfair rate of exchange will cost them. Money is also to easy to get here. Even though most of the big banks here are state controlled or state owned, they will continue dangerous loan practices, as long as interest rates remain so low. Expect inflation to pass 5% within the next 60 days, unless the Chinese state both, increases the value of the RMB, increases interest rates, requires larger down payments on loans and reduces import tariffs on food products across the board.
Nov 18, 20107:30pm EST--
