U.N. council gets Sudan report that infuriated China
2010-11-12 17:41:00.0
(Reuters) - After weeks of delays due to Chinese objections, the U.N. Security Council on Friday received a report on violations of the arms embargo in Sudan's western Darfur region that infuriated Beijing.
Austrian U.N. Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting told reporters he was passing the so-called Panel of Experts' report on compliance with the embargo to council members. A council diplomat later confirmed that the report had been sent out.
The confidential report, which Reuters has seen, said Khartoum committed multiple breaches of the embargo and China has done little to ensure its weaponry is not used in Darfur.
China had reacted angrily to the report and refused to allow the Security Council's Sudan sanctions committee to formally pass it to council members so that they could consider taking action, envoys said. Sanctions committees work on the basis of consensus, which means each member has veto powers.
As a result, it sat in limbo on the committee for weeks before Mayr-Harting passed it to the 15-nation council.
Normally such reports are published on the website of the Sudan sanctions committee, which Mayr-Harting chairs. It is unclear whether the experts' report will be made public.
The Chinese delegation has publicly complained about the report, saying it had "serious concerns" about it.
The attempt to prevent the reports' transfer to the Security Council and release to the public, envoys said, was emblematic of China's increasingly self-confident approach to international diplomacy as it seeks to protect states like North Korea and Sudan to which it has close ties.
It is not illegal to supply weapons to Khartoum, but states are required to have so-called "end-use" guarantees from the Sudanese government that the arms will not end up in Darfur. But many weapons and much ammunition reaches Darfur regardless of such guarantees, the experts' report says.
For this reason, the expert panel recommends expanding the 2005 arms embargo to include Khartoum, but diplomats say China would most likely use its veto power to block any such move.
The conflict in Darfur flared in 2003 when mostly non-Arab rebels took up arms against the government, accusing it of neglecting the region. Khartoum fought back, and the United Nations estimates up to 300,000 people died in the ensuing humanitarian crisis. Khartoum puts the death toll at 10,000.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
There is a simple solution ¨C boycott China and Chinese goods. It¡¯s time to do it.
Nov 12, 20107:54pm EST--
Let¡¯s face the honest truth. The blood of Africans means nothing to the rest of the world. Nor does the blood of Haitians. The rest of the world will point its finger at the US and cry ¡°Racism¡± at the top of their lungs, and at the same time turn their backs on the butchery and starvation in the Sudan, Chad, Angola, Haiti, and numerous other spots around the world where the population is predominantly black.
Nov 13, 20109:45am EST--
