SAIC to take GM stake if China approves: sources
2010-11-14 16:26:00.0
(Reuters) - China's SAIC Motor Corp Ltd (
) if Chinese regulators approve a deal to deepen an existing alliance between the two automakers, three people familiar with the matter said.
The potential investment from SAIC is part of a surge in investor interest in GM that expected to push the pricing of its shares to $29 or above in the U.S. automaker's initial public offering, one of the sources said.
China's government would have to approve the SAIC investment before Wednesday for it to go forward as part of GM's IPO, the sources said.
The amount of the proposed investment by China's top automaker was not immediately clear on Sunday.
Talks between the two sides have been under way for more than two months and have covered a range of topics including the deepened cooperation in the development of electric vehicles and support for SAIC's ambitions to move beyond the China market, sources have said.
The deal is now awaiting approval by China's Ministry of Commerce, one of the sources said.
At one point last week, U.S. and Chinese officials became involved in the discussions between GM and SAIC, the person said.
That reflects the government ownership stake in both automakers and the potential U.S. political sensitivity around a Chinese investment in GM, a company still seen as an icon of American industry, the person said.
Until this week's expected IPO, the U.S. Treasury will hold almost 61 percent of GM as a result of the Obama administration's decision to fund the top U.S. automaker's restructuring in a 2009 bankruptcy.
For that reason, the sources were not authorized to discuss the negotiations between SAIC and GM publicly.
A decision by SAIC to invest in GM would underscore the U.S. automaker's competitive strength in China, now the world's largest auto market, analysts have said.
A central part of GM's pitch to investors has been its Shanghai-GM joint-venture with SAIC. The Chinese automaker has a 51 percent stake in that joint venture as part of a deal struck with GM last year.
In another China-related move ahead of the IPO, GM said last week that it had struck a deal to buy an additional 10 percent stake in its Wuling joint-venture that makes small commercial vans.
Through its joint-ventures in China, GM claims a 13 percent market share in China, the largest in the industry.
(Reporting by Kevin Krolicki in Detroit, Soyoung Kim and Clare Baldwin in New York, editing by Martin Golan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Last year, a Chinese motor company had failed to acquire a GM¡¯s product line. Now they are interested to acquire part of GM¡¯s IPO shares. I can¡¯t see why Chinese regulators would not approve this strategic investment. GM overall improves a lot in past 2 years, and more importantly, U.S. government has earned lucrative profits from rescue.
Nov 14, 20101:59pm EST--
Well, well. Just when it wasn¡¯t clear what the next way to ¡°transfer wealth¡± out of American hands would be for the Obama administration selling its shares in GM to the Chinese floats right to the surface. Americans are literally being sold out by government.
Nov 15, 20109:53am EST--
