Oil tumbles on China rate and euro zone concerns
2010-11-12 16:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil prices slumped more than 3 percent on Friday, retreating from a 25-month high, amid a broad commodities rout on fears that China may raise interest rates to brake its economy and concerns about euro zone debt.
Profit-taking struck the market as traders said oil's near 8 percent gain over the past two weeks may have gotten ahead of fundamentals, despite news this week of record Chinese demand in October and big declines in U.S. crude and fuel stocks.
Friday's pull-back followed the biggest drop in the Shanghai composite index
in more than a year on the talk of Chinese interest rate increases, after inflation sped to a 25-month high in October and bank lending roared past expectations. Earlier, China raised bank reserve requirements.
U.S. crude for December delivery fell $2.93, or 3.34 percent, to $84.88 a barrel, slipping to $84.52 intraday.
Prices fell 2.27 percent on the week, after last week's 6.6 percent surge.
Total volume topped 771,000 lots with less than an hour left in electronic trading on Friday, above Thursday's 746,068 and 11.5 percent above the 30-day average.
"I think the $3 drop today was more than corrective. It feels like the hype of higher prices, which began November 1st, hit the brick wall hard today," Michael Korn, a Princeton, New Jersey-based options broker, said, referring to Saudi Arabia's November 1 indication that $90 oil would be tolerated. [ID:nLDE6A0131] "I think today was about longs getting out."
In London, ICE December Brent crude fell $2.47 to settle at $86.34 ahead of Monday's contract expiration.
"Today's sharp price plunge was mainly driven by issues that focused primarily on concerns over Chinese monetary tightening, European sovereign debt issues, mainly related to Ireland, and disappointment regarding the G20 talks," Jim Ritterbusch, president at Ritterbusch & Associates in Galena, Illinois, said in a note.
The International Energy Agency, an adviser to 28 industrial countries, predicted on Friday the rate of oil demand growth will slow in 2011, while raising its 2010 forecast, providing no comfort to traders looking for a more sustained global demand recovery. <IEA/M>
"When you look at the fundamentals, although improving during the week, they are not really supporting a very strong increase in oil prices as we have had," said Christophe Barret of Credit Agricole.
Oil vacillated, tracking the euro much of the day, deepening losses as the dollar bounced when greenback buying was sparked by an uptick in Treasury yields. <USD/>
While euro zone debt concerns had been overshadowed by news from China and signs of improving fundamentals, commodity markets appeared to pay more heed on Friday.
Other commodity markets also plunged from multi-year highs, with Ireland's debt woes and this week's spate of exchange-imposed higher margin requirements adding to investors' growing risk aversion.
Amid heightened concerns about Ireland, a Group of 20 leaders' summit in Seoul had not attained a breakthrough on resolving global economic imbalances amid incongruent policies.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos and Jeffrey Kerr in New York, Alex Lawler in London and Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; Editing by Walter Bagley)
