Senate urged to pass China currency bill
2010-11-16 16:24:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Nov 12 2010
Fri, Nov 12 2010
Thu, Nov 11 2010
Fri, Nov 5 2010
Wed, Nov 3 2010
Tue  EST
"The Fair Currency Coalition believes it is imperative that the Senate help Main Street America by counteracting currency undervaluation by China and any other country engaging in this mercantilist practice. The time for action is now," the group said in a letter to each member of the Senate.
The group, which also includes textile producers and other domestic manufacturers that compete with imports from China, urged the Senate to pass a bill approved by the House of Representatives in late September.
In addition, two co-authors of the House bill released their own letter urging Democratic and Republican Senate leaders to agree to schedule a vote on the bill.
"With nearly 15 million Americans out of work, it is vitally important that Congress act now to give the administration the necessary tools that will put a stop to China's currency manipulation," Representatives Tim Murphy, a Republican, and Tim Ryan, a Democrat, said.
Democratic Senator Charles Schumer said earlier on Tuesday that senators would discuss whether to vote on currency legislation, but no decision had been made.
Republicans won control of the House in November elections and reduced the Democratic majority in the Senate, and they may not be as supportive of the measure.
It is directed mainly at China, which many economists and lawmakers believe deliberately undervalues its currency by as much as 15 percent to 40 percent.
"The bill is a targeted remedy that sends an across-the-board message. Enactment of the bill would have a positive impact on the U.S. economy without incurring any new public debt or significant budgetary expenditures," the Fair Currency Coalition said.
Many other business groups, such as the U.S.-China Business Council and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, oppose the House bill. They agree that China's currency is undervalued, but say passing the legislation could backfire on the United States. They recommend diplomatic pressure to get Beijing to move.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Such a move would cause China to raise tariffs on all US goods. While it may in the short term benefit domestic producers, it would essentially hinder the expansion and saturation of American products in the Chinese market. One thing is sure, China¡¯s domestic consumption rates will continue to rise with their middle class, doesn¡¯t the US want a piece of that market too? Reducing taxes on domestic manufacturers in the US makes more sense than shutting them out of the developing world. It would be better to take China, and the rest of Asia, to the WTO for failing to provide a competitive bidding process for every contract out here. Why do you think a country like South Korea is so export oriented? Because they only buy domestic products. You will never see a Ford in South Korea and creating a free trade agreement with them, will only cost the US tariff revenue and manufacturing jobs. Now is the time to invest more in innovation projects. How about a stimulus plan that is science oriented? How about a real Mars space program. Lets set our goals so high that even if we don¡¯t reach them, at least we will have become stronger because of them.
Nov 16, 20108:30pm EST--
