Oil tumbles 3 percent on economic concerns
2010-11-16 17:21:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil slumped 3 percent on Tuesday to a two-week low as the dollar rose on euro zone debt concerns and as fears that China's attempts to cool inflation will reduce demand and sparked a broad commodities sell off.
U.S. crude for December delivery fell $2.52, or 2.97 percent, to settle at $82.34 a barrel. Total crude oil trading volume was above 800,000 lots, 18 percent above its 30-day average.
Oil's three-session slump has pulled prices down 6.23 percent, the biggest three-day percentage slide since the three-day period to August 12, when rising U.S. jobless claims, concerns about a faltering economic recovery and a rising dollar weighed on oil.
In London, ICE front-month January Brent crude fell $2.03 to settle at $84.73 a barrel.
"The prospect of further monetary tightening in China is worrying for all commodities," said Carsten Fritsch, analyst at Commerzbank in Frankfurt. "So far, Chinese oil demand has been robust, but there are concerns that it could be seriously affected by higher rates, for example."
The Reuters-Jefferies CRB index .CRB, a global commodities benchmark, hit three-week lows on Tuesday as commodity prices plunged in a second major sell-off in three days as the dollar surged.
A stronger dollar can pressure oil and other dollar-denominated commodities by attracting investors to foreign exchange markets seeking higher yields, increasing the value of greenbacks paid to producers and making commodities more expensive for users of other currencies.
"There was just too much speculative length in crude and this is being bled out of the market right now. There's worry about euro zone debt and whether China will raise its interest rate," said Andy Lebow, broker at MF Global in New York.
"A week ago, every trader thought $90 was the target, but that's not how it looks right now."
Oil has retreated after hitting a 25-month peak above $88 a barrel last Thursday, the highest prices since the midst of the financial crisis.
As oil jumped last week, money managers increased their net long positions to a record 189,002, as of November 9, Commodities Futures Trading Commission data showed.
The dollar has rebounded strongly over the last two weeks as the impact of the Federal Reserve's quantitative easing has pushed up U.S. bond yields.
Oil prices fell as low as $82.03 in post-settlement trading and traded at $82.24 before paring losses slightly when industry group the American Petroleum Institute's weekly inventory report late Tuesday showed crude stocks fell 7.7 million barrels last week.
Gasoline stocks fell 1.7 million barrels, but distillates rose 222,000 barrels, according to the API.
A Reuters analyst survey ahead of the report yielded a forecast for U.S. crude stockpiles to be up, though only by 100,000 barrels. <EIA/S> Distillate stocks were expected to be down 2.2 million and gasoline stocks were estimated to have slipped 800,000 barrels.
The U.S. Energy Information Administration will release the government's report on Wednesday at 10:30 a.m. EST (1530 GMT).
A fresh sign demand remains tepid was data from Master Card showing that while U.S. gasoline demand rose last week versus the previous week, it was down from year-ago.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos in New York and Christopher Johnson in London; Editing by Lisa Shumaker)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
We¡¯re printing ,dollars like mad men, yet the dollar was described in this story as ¡°stronger.¡± What¡¯s the deal. Is the buck ¡°stronger,¡± because all the other currencies of the world are going to hell in a hand basket? Sterling Greenwood/AspenFreePress
Nov 16, 201011:46am EST--
