Geithner to meet Friday with China's Wang, Zhou
2010-11-11 00:23:00.0
(Reuters) - Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, who last month put off a decision on whether China is manipulating its currency, will meet in Seoul on Friday with top Chinese economic officials, his office said.
Geithner will talk with Chinese Vice Premier Wang Qishan, who handles China's economic, energy and financial affairs, and with the head of China's central bank, Zhou Xiaochun.
The three men are in Seoul for the Group of 20 summit, which continues on Friday.
President Barack Obama met with Chinese President Hu Jintao on Thursday on the sidelines of the summit, where hopes are fading for G20 leaders to agree on specific commitments for reducing global imbalances.
Geithner, in an interview with CNBC television on Thursday, said China cannot continue to resist upward market pressure on its yuan currency without facing higher inflation and rising asset prices.
In October, Geithner postponed a semi-annual report on whether China or any other country was manipulating its currency for an unfair trade advantage.
"These meetings provide an opportunity to make additional progress on the important challenge of securing stronger and more balanced growth," the Treasury Department said at the time.
The outcome of the G20 talks could influence whether Geithner formally labels China, and potentially other countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Switzerland, Taiwan and Hong Kong, as currency manipulators, said Fred Bergsten, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
It also could influence whether the U.S. Senate, in the short of amount of time it has left on this year's legislative calendar, will vote on a bill passed by the House of Representatives threatening to punish China for its currency practices by allowing new U.S. duties on some of its exports.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Andrew Hay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Timmy-just one suggestion¨Cbring your checkbook and pay them off!!
Nov 11, 20101:04pm EST--
