FTSE falls to 1-week closing low, hurt by miners
2010-11-10 13:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index fell to a one-week closing low on Wednesday, pressured by miners on fears over softening demand from China after downbeat import data, with worries about Ireland's debt also darkening the mood.
closed down 58.25 points, or 1 percent, at 5,816.94. The index ended up 0.4 percent on Tuesday at 5,875.19, having briefly broken through the 5,900 level for the first time since June 2008 earlier in the session.
Miners .FTNMX1770 retreated after a recent advance sparked by the Federal Reserve's decision to pump more cheap money into the economy, led down by platinum miner Lonmin (
), off 4.7 percent, as metals prices fell.
Sentiment surrounding the sector was soured after data showed October import growth in China, the world's biggest consumer of metals, was slower than expected. Investors were looking ahead to Chinese CPI data, due to be released overnight.
"(Investors are) uneasy given ongoing concerns over... Ireland, and there is also some weakness in metals pulling the FTSE back," Mic Mills, head of electronic trading at ETX Capital, said.
"The downward momentum from yesterday appears to be still in evidence this afternoon as investors look to take some profit from the recent rally," he said.
British inflation will fall below target in two years' time, the BoE forecast, but said the outlook was highly uncertain and it stood ready to change policy in either direction.
) said it will replace the Trent 900 engines on three of its Airbus A380 planes after finding oil stains on them, almost a week after Australian rival Qantas (
) halted test flights of its long-delayed 787 Dreamliner airliner on Wednesday after a test flight powered by Rolls-Royce's latest Trent 1000 engine made an emergency landing in Texas after smoke appeared in the cabin.
) dropped 1.1 percent, handing back some of its recent gains, after meeting first-half profit forecasts.
) topped the FTSE 100 leader board, up 3.8 percent, after the electricity generator reported half-year results and raised its dividend, with BofA Merrill Lynch upgrading its recommendation on the stock to "buy."
), Invensys (
