Analysis: China currency bill prospects murky as U.S. eyes G20
2010-11-12 10:43:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Nov 4 2010
Wed, Nov 3 2010
Thu, Nov 11 2010
Mon, Nov 8 2010
Thu, Nov 4 2010
Fri  EST
U.S. officials say Beijing keeps the yuan's value low against the dollar to aid exports at the expense of U.S. jobs.
Democratic leaders still in control of both chambers expect Republicans to block most legislation in the wake of their November 2 election victory, and trade has lower priority than domestic issues like tax cuts and unemployment benefits, congressional aides said.
While the Senate will remain under Democratic control in the new Congress, the House will be run by the Republicans, whose top leaders, presumptive Speaker John Boehner and Majority Leader Eric Cantor, voted against the currency bill.
Among the main sponsors of China currency legislation in the U.S. Senate contacted by Reuters, only Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown's office expressed a commitment to push for the bill in the lame-duck session.
Donald Straszheim, head of China research at the investment advisory firm ISI Group in California, said he saw no chance of a bill moving in the lame-duck session and that prospects the new Congress would pursue it were just as dim.
"Passing a 2010 House bill look-alike and signing it into law would be the nuclear option and is not going to happen," he said.
Despite the crowded agenda of the short lame-duck session, supporters and opponents of the currency bill are keeping one eye on Congress and the other on this week's summit of the Group of 20 global economic powers in South Korea.
U.S. President Barack Obama met with Chinese President Hu Jintao on Thursday on the sidelines of the summit, where hopes are fading for G20 leaders to agree on specific commitments for reducing global imbalances.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner will meet in Seoul on Friday with top Chinese economic officials, his office said.
Geithner has held out the G20 as the best forum to address China's currency issue. He postponed a semi-annual report, due on October 15, on labeling China a currency manipulator with an eye on progress at the G20 summit.
"Barring a miracle at the G20 summit this week, the ball will be in the Senate's court on November 15 and we expect it to act," said Charlie Blum, executive director of the Fair Currency Coalition, a proponent of the bill.
"We are still concerned about the prospect of something moving in the lame-duck," said Christopher Wenk, senior director for international policy at U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The chamber's position is that China's currency policies need to be addressed, but it does not think U.S. legislation is the way to do it.
With Hu slated to visit the United States in January, analysts say Beijing might offer some gestures to soothe its critics and Washington would avoid issuing a damning currency report until after he leaves.
But a G20 negotiator in Seoul said China was "resisting all the wording on how to rebalance and rectify external imbalances, the measures, the timelines, the process -- every single element."
If the G20 approach fails with China, labor and manufacturing groups that argue China steals jobs by suppressing the value of the yuan to make its products cheaper will renew calls for unilateral U.S. action.
China released its currency from a de facto peg to the U.S. dollar in June, but has permitted the yuan to strengthen less than 3 percent since. China's overall trade surplus widened in October $27.1 billion from September's $16.9 billion.
"Passing legislation to hold China and other nations accountable for currency manipulation is one of the few things the Senate could do to spur job growth in America in the short time that remains this year," said Scott Paul, executive director of the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
Heritage Foundation economist Derek Scissors said, however, that behind closed doors, members of Congress know that currency legislation will "accomplish almost nothing."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Where was the Fair Currency Coalition when asian economies were imploding under western speculators? when Latin American currencies were on the run? when African currencies were on the run? Did the US attempt to bring stability? The answer is not just no, it¡¯s he## no. I suppose there was some recognition of china¡¯s role in stabilizing the asian financial crisis when our last president (GWB) praised them for maintaining their currency high. Since then it has only gone up in value but our fickle and scapegoat mentality now blames others for our mess.
Nov 15, 20109:24pm EST--
Hahahahaha. Your praising GWB for trying to keep China¡¯s currency high? What would that ever have to do with the Asian Financial Crisis. 1992 is a long time before 1997. And the China of 1992 was weak and dependent on the grace of republican importers far more than the stagnant American economy of today. I take that back, the republicans are still trying to ship their retarded supporters jobs to the east even today. How many red necks does it take to understand Bretton Woods II?
Nov 16, 20106:52am EST--
My bad, I meant Clinton in 1998 was praising them for keeping their currency high, and this did bring back stability to the region. And no that¡¯s not a long time ago unless we¡¯re just thinking short-term. As far as jobs are concerned, liberal labor laws are just as much to blame.
Nov 16, 201012:48pm EST--
