Japan, China mute disputes to improve ties
2010-11-14 03:24:00.0
Japan, China mute disputes to improve ties | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Japan, China mute disputes to improve ties
Sat, Nov 13 2010
Sat, Nov 13 2010
Sat, Nov 13 2010
Sat, Nov 13 2010
Wed, Nov 10 2010
China's Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi (L) is welcomed by his Japanese counterpart Seiji Maehara before their bilateral meeting in Yokohama, south of Tokyo November 14, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Shizuo Kambayashi/Pool
YOKOHAMA, Japan
Sun  EST
YOKOHAMA, Japan
But Kan, speaking a day after an ice-breaking meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao, repeated that the East China Sea islands at the heart of the dispute were Japan's, a stance that could mollify his critics at home but again rile China.
Relations between Asia's two biggest economies soured from September after Japan detained a Chinese skipper whose fishing boat collided with Japanese patrol vessels off the disputed islands, which are near potentially rich maritime gas reserves.
The boat captain was later released and sent home, but the tensions festered, prompting worries about fallout for business ties. Kan, in office for just five months, has come under domestic fire for appearing to bow to China's demands.
"Japan's position is that no territorial issue exists," Kan told a news conference in Yokohama, the port city near Tokyo where he hosted a weekend Asia-Pacific summit.
"If you look at other countries with territorial issues ... that doesn't mean that the two countries cannot engage in economic, cultural and people-to-people contacts," he added.
"We need to overcome various bilateral problems and establish firm relations between our countries," said Kan, who on Saturday met Hu for their first formal chat since the tensions flared.
Japan has also been worried that China curtailed shipments of rare earths after the row broke out, putting strains on Japanese companies that use the metals for many high-tech goods.
Kan said Japan had received assurances Beijing would not use rare earths as a tool in disputes, sidestepping a question as to whether a complaint to the World Trade Organization was possible.
GAS FIELD DISPUTE, MUTUAL MISTRUST
But Yang Jiechi replied that reopening talks required "an atmosphere," the official said, suggesting stumbling blocks remained.
The two ministers did agree to improve ties through private and cultural exchanges, the Japanese official said.
"Both sides also believe that they must take active steps to enhance public goodwill and promote practical cooperation to advance the improvement and development of Sino-Japanese relations," said a statement about the ministerial meeting on the Chinese Foreign Ministry website (www.mfa.gov.cn).
While some of the heat may have gone out of the dispute, Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai sounded a sobering note, stressing that any improvement faced hurdles.
China-Japan ties have long been plagued by China's bitter memories of Tokyo's past military aggression as well as present mutual mistrust over military intentions.
Cui told a mainland-run Hong Kong newspaper that China and Japan were aiming for a stable strategic relationship, but added: "historical and present-day conflicts and problems between them mean this will not always be plain-sailing."
"Precisely because there are these difficulties, both sides should redouble their efforts," Cui, a former ambassador to Japan, told the Wen Wei Po newspaper.
Bitterness over Japan's wartime atrocities still underpins widespread Chinese public distrust of Japan. In 2005, sometimes violent protests against Japan broke out in several Chinese cities and scattered protests have been held recently.
In past weeks, protests in Japan over China have drawn thousands of people, angry that Kan appeared to have caved in to Chinese pressure. Several hundred protesters rallied in Yokohama on Sunday after a 3,000-strong demonstration a day earlier.
To rousing applause, Toshio Tamogami, a former air force general who has argued that Japan was not an aggressor during World War Two, called for Japan to build up its military.
Tamogami told reporters that while it was good that the two leaders met, China was not a country that could be trusted.
"If Japan gives an inch, China will take a mile," he said. "China is a country that can't admit it is wrong."
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley and Edwina Gibbs; Editing by Ed Davies)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I love the word ¡°mute¡± used in the headline. Mediation remains a long way from reconciliation of the two strong Asian powers. It is time to engage in dialogue over oil and fishing rights of the disputed territories.
Nov 14, 20107:26am EST--
