U.S. and China both right in QE2 debate: Soros
2010-11-16 10:16:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and China both have valid points in their discussions over the U.S. Federal Reserve's latest bout of quantitative easing, billionaire George Soros was quoted as saying by a Norwegian newspaper on Tuesday.
"Both sides are right in this case," Soros was quoted as saying by Dagens Naeringsliv. The daily talked with Soros after he met Norway's trade minister in New York on November 12.
"The Chinese are trying to maintain their undervalued currency while the United States in reality is flooding the world with dollars, which leads to pressure in other countries and leads to great tension in forex markets," said Soros.
China and some emerging economies have fumed at the Fed's easy-money policy, which they fear will lead to capital inflows and unneeded appreciation of their currencies.
Asked if the Fed had any other choice but to continue to print money to stimulate a weak U.S. economy, Soros said fiscal measures would have been better.
"Fiscal stimulus would have been preferred because it would not have had damaging side effects that quantitative easing had," Soros was quoted as saying.
"But that is impossible to carry out... because of the success (at this month's mid-term elections) of the Republican Party which is opposed to such measures," he said.
(Reporting by Wojciech Moskwa and Camilla Knudsen; Editing by Neil Fullick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Nov 16, 20108:46am EST--
Great peace of history to look on today when we reflect on our the best news source in the world ¡°Reuters was financed as a public company in 1984 on the London Stock Exchange and on the NASDAQ in the United States. However, there were concerns that the company¡¯s tradition for objective reporting might be jeopardized if control of the company later fell into the hands of a single shareholder. To counter that possibility, the constitution of the company at the time of the stock offering included a rule that no individual was allowed to own more than 15% of the company. If this limit is exceeded, the directors can order the shareholder to reduce the holding to less than 15%. That rule was applied in the late 1980s when Rupert Murdoch¡¯s News Corporation, which already held around 15% of Reuters, bought an Australian news company that also owned stock in Reuters. Murdoch was subsequently compelled to reduce his holdings to less than 15%. If only more news companies would take such an objective point of view when it comes to investment. The NY Times and the Boston Globe both belong to a Russian Scum Bag. Fox News belongs to a Saudi and CNN is the property of a very curious George named Warner. PS: I¡¯m an anonymous Reuters author and fan.
Nov 16, 20108:52am EST--
