Q+A: How serious is China's inflation? What will Beijing do?
2010-11-15 05:03:00.0
(Reuters) - China's consumer price inflation sped to a 25-month high in October, rising 4.4 percent from a year earlier. With producer prices jumping, pipeline inflationary pressure also appears to be quite strong.
WHERE IS CHINA'S INFLATION COMING FROM?
At first glance, it seems clear that Chinese inflation has been driven by food prices. Accounting for about a third of the consumer price index, food costs rose 10.1 percent in the year to October, while non-food inflation was up just 1.6 percent. It is therefore tempting to dismiss concerns about inflation by noting that pressures are not broad based. That would be a mistake.
In contrast to 2007 when pork production plummeted because of blue-ear pig disease, there has been no major supply shock this time around. Instead, the main source of upward pressure on food prices is much the same as that in the frothy property market: a vast pool of domestic liquidity.
Liquidity has an outsized impact on food prices, because agriculture is the one sector of the Chinese economy where supply is tight and over-capacity does not act as natural disinflationary force. By contrast, clothing prices have been falling as a slump in American and European demand has led factories to redirect their output to the domestic market.
In addition, food inflation has to some extent been affected by supply problems. A cold spring delayed planting and damaged vegetable crops. Rising labor costs have also pushed up the price of agricultural production.
WHAT IS THE SOURCE OF CHINA'S LIQUIDITY?
To hear it from many Chinese officials, the blame lies outside the country in the loose monetary policies of developed economies that are propelling cash toward emerging markets.
They may be right to worry about a new round of quantitative easing the United States, but the fact is that excess liquidity in China has a decidedly domestic provenance.
First, despite steps toward policy normalization, Beijing has moved slowly to control money growth. The People's Bank of China noted in a report last month that a record lending binge during the global financial crisis was having a lagging impact.
Second, capital inflows do pose a headache for Beijing. But for all the talk about hot money, the vast majority of cash comes through ordinary trade channels rather than via the hands of shadowy speculators. China's trade surplus has risen over the past half year, averaging $22 billion a month and dwarfing even the most aggressive estimates of speculative inflows.
To hold its exchange rate down, Beijing prints vast amounts of yuan to buy up the foreign exchange streaming in. The rising trade surplus has combined with the tightly controlled currency regime to foster the creation of high-powered base money.
HOW WILL CHINA RESPOND?
Last month's interest rate rise may have been a watershed for monetary policy, indicating that concerns about inflation have finally reached the top of the policy agenda in Beijing.
Market jitters last week centered on the prospect of another interest rate increase. While that is likely before long, most analysts believe the government will wage its anti-inflationary battle primarily through quantitative measures.
Required reserves for big banks are already at a record high, and are likely to be nudged still higher. The official target for new loans may also become more restrictive, from 7.5 trillion yuan ($1.1 trillion) this year to 7 trillion yuan next year. Some local governments have reverted to old-fashioned food price controls; such measures will become more widespread. Trying to blunt imported inflationary pressure, China may also let the yuan rise about 5 percent against the dollar next year.
A powerful signal of the government's intentions could come later this month. China still describes its monetary policy as "appropriately loose." There is talk that an economic planning meeting for next year may produce a new formulation, such as "prudent" or "stable and healthy."
WHAT ABOUT SPECULATIVE INFLOWS AND CAPITAL CONTROLS?
While not the cause of China's excess liquidity at present, speculative inflows threaten to add to the problem.
China has very tight capital controls, but there are still plenty of loopholes because of its extensive trade and investment links with the rest of the world.
A rise in foreign exchange reserves in recent months that cannot be fully explained by trade and investment suggests that inflows are indeed climbing. A widening interest rate differential over the United States, the prospect of yuan appreciation and buoyant property and stock markets give speculators reason to try to pierce China's controls.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
typical china¡­.blaming others for their own problems. QE hasn¡¯t even happened yet, thus the excess liquidity hasn¡¯t even been put into the market yet, and yet china is trying to use this as the reason why their inflation is so high¡­.LOL. Actually, china was the culprit who is responsible for it¡¯s own inflation problem. china pumped liquidity into its own market with its credit lending binge¡­..can¡¯t blame anybody else but yourself, china. But, this is typical communist finger pointing. They don¡¯t accept the destructive role the communist party played in the: Great Leap Forward
typical china¡­.blaming others for their own problems. QE hasn¡¯t even happened yet, thus the excess liquidity hasn¡¯t even been put into the market yet, and yet china is trying to use this as the reason why their inflation is so high¡­.LOL. Actually, china was the culprit who is responsible for it¡¯s own inflation problem. china pumped liquidity into its own market with its credit lending binge¡­..can¡¯t blame anybody else but yourself, china. But, this is typical communist finger pointing. They don¡¯t accept the destructive role the communist party played in the: Great Leap Forward
Border Wars with India, Russia, and Vietnam
Sudan¡¯s Ethnic Cleansing It¡¯s time for china to start accepting the fact that their government is FAR from perfect. It¡¯s time for the chinese liars to go¡­.along with all the other failed communists states in history.
Nov 15, 20101:29pm EST--
