China can't resist upward yuan pressure: Geithner
2010-11-11 04:49:00.0
(Reuters) - China cannot continue to resist upward market pressure on its yuan currency without facing higher inflation and rising asset prices, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said on Thursday.
Geithner, in an interview with CNBC television on the sidelines of a Group of 20 leaders summit, said he believed there had been progress on China currency issues and authorities in Beijing believed that it was important to let the appreciation process continue.
"If you resist those market forces that are just a reflection of confidence that you're going to see strong growth in China, strong productivity growth in China, if you resist those market forces, that pressure is not going to go away," Geithner said. "It's just going to end up in higher inflation or higher asset prices and that'll be bad for China."
A draft copy of the G20 leaders' final statement calls for them to move "toward more market determined exchange rates and enhancing exchange rate flexibility rate flexibility to reflect underlying economic fundamentals."
"What that means is all the pressure you see falls disproportionately to those emerging market economies that allow their currencies to move and that's unfair to them and creates a set of broader tensions in the economy that are worth trying to avoid," he said
WEAKER DOLLAR IN U.S. INTEREST?
Geithner also defended U.S. exchange rate policy, saying IN the interview the United States would never deliberately weaken the dollar.
"The U.S. will never do that," Geithner said, responding to a suggestion by former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan that Washington was pursuing a policy of weakening the dollar.
"We will never seek to weaken our currency as a tool to gain competitive advantage or to grow the economy," Geithner said. "It's not an effective strategy for any country and it's not for the U.S. We'll never do that."
Greenspan wrote in a Financial Times guest column published on Wednesday that a weak U.S. dollar policy, coupled with the suppression of China's yuan currency, was driving up exchange rates in the rest of the world.
Geithner attributed the dollar's weakness to a reversal of safe-haven capital flows and a return to risk appetite. He said two and a half years ago the dollar began rising because the world was concerned about depression and systemic collapse and sought "the safety of the risk-free assets of the U.S."
"The dollar generally rose during that period of time and as the world becomes more progressively confident, some of (those) safe haven inflows have been reversed," he told CNBC. "That's been the dominant trend we see, that's very encouraging," he added.
"It's worth stepping back to see what are basic objectives of this proposal and they are to make sure that as the world recovers, we don't set in motion the types of forces that could lead to re-emergence of excessive imbalances around the world -- deficits and surpluses -- because those would threaten our future growth," he said.
(Reporting by David Lawder; Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s got nothing to do market forces¡­ It¡¯s the 600 Billion you¡¯ve printed Geithner
Nov 11, 201011:16am EST--
China can resist upward pressure on the Yuan by simply controlling capital flows, which is very easy to do in a controlled economy. Inflation can be resisted by simply raising interest rates and tightening money supply further etc.
¡°Fait Accompli¡± statements like this may win Geithner a few fans in the front office trading room floors on Wall St, as will schemes such as QE2 and indirect USD weakening strategies.
But these problems are not limited to Wall St anymore, and Geithner is in Korea representing the US with the G20 leaders and deputies who will no doubt not appreciate such petulant abrasive statements, disgraceful behavior indeed.
Nov 11, 20109:03pm EST--
