Nikkei seen edging lower, focus on China rate
2010-11-14 18:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average is expected to come under downward pressure on Monday, reflecting falls in U.S. shares and increasing concerns over possible monetary tightening in China to curb inflation.
Rekindling jitters about debt problems of some euro zone countries, including Ireland, could also make investors hesitant about building new buy positions.
Still, the Nikkei is expected to find support due to recent falls in the yen against the dollar.
"The market is nervous about extending purchases in the Nikkei as last week's rallies were a bit too rapid. We may see some more profit-taking, reflecting falls in overseas markets," said Hiroichi Nishi, general manager at Nikko Cordial Securities.
"But the Nikkei's fall will be limited by bargain-hunting as we see ample liquidity in global markets," Nishi said.
Nikkei futures traded in Chicago closed at 9,740, down 0.2 percent from the Osaka close of 9,760.
is likely to move between 9,600 and 9,800 on Monday, traders said.
On Friday, the Nikkei fell 1.4 percent to 9,724.81 from a 4-? month closing high marked the day before.
Technical sentiment for the Nikkei stayed healthy but the market could be in a slight consolidation mode after the Nikkei reached an intraday peak on Thursday of 9,885.37, the highest since June 24.
Technical resistance is seen around the intraday high and more resistance at the 200-day moving average of 9,930.
Bargain-hunting interest will grow should the Nikkei dip below 9,600.
In early Asian trade, the dollar was little changed at 82.50 yen.
Mizuho and SMFG's bigger-than-expected hikes in profit forecasts on Friday failed to ease investor concerns about the Japanese banks' longer-term prospects after bond trading gains drove stellar quarterly profits.
Nomura, Japan's biggest brokerage, has a very high chance of showing a net profit this financial year, its chairman said, despite a stock market slump that drove second-quarter net nearly to zero.
Sharp, a Japanese electronics maker, will start selling mobile phones in India next month, the Nikkei business daily reported on Saturday.
India's mobile phone market is expected to grow as the nation had more than 200 million new users in the past year, while only 50 percent of the population use mobile phones, the newspaper said.
The Japanese government is considering giving financial support for Hitachi's bid to win a high-speed railway project order in Britain, the Nikkei reported.
The Japanese government would provide a loan through the Japan Bank for International Cooperation to a railcar-leasing company that Hitachi plans to establish with a leading British general contractor, the daily said.
(Reporting by Chikafumi Hodo; Editing by Michael Watson)
