FTSE 100 falls sharply on Ireland, China worries
2010-11-16 08:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index fell sharply on Tuesday, led by banks and mining stocks, with investor sentiment knocked by concerns over Irish debt and further tightening of monetary policy in China.
By 1217 GMT, the FTSE 100
was down 84.92 points, or 1.5 percent, at 5,735.49.
Euro zone finance ministers will try to find a way out of Ireland's debt crisis on Tuesday, with Dublin resisting calls that it seeks a state bailout by contending that only its banks may need help.
Banks .FTNMX8350 were under pressure, with Lloyds Banking Group (
) worst off, shedding 2.8 percent and 2.7 percent respectively.
) was a big faller, off 4.4 percent, with traders saying that its flagship AHL fund was having a tough week.
"Concerns surrounding Ireland I think are impacting heavily on market sentiment and all companies, I suppose, are feeling the pain," Peter Dixon, economist at Commerzbank, said.
"The miners may take a bit of a hit if and when the Chinese economy slows down so you've got all sorts of other factors coming into play," he said.
Mining stocks .FTNMX1770 took the most points off the blue chip index, following metals prices lower, on fears of interest rate hikes in China, the world's biggest consumer of metals.
Further dampening the mood, inflation in Britain rose unexpectedly to a four-month high in October, forcing Bank of England Governor Mervyn King to write another public letter explaining why inflation remains so far above target.
) was the standout FTSE 100 gainer, adding 2.8 percent after the drinks can maker said it expected its second half results to be in line with its expectations, prompting Seymour Pierce to repeat its "buy" rating on the stock.
"The tone is one of steady improvement rather than euphoric optimism but the rating discount is unjustified," the broker said in a note.
), up 1 percent, with Numis Securities lifting its rating on the outsourcer to "buy" from "add," ahead of a trading update on Thursday.
Meanwhile, AstraZeneca (
) climbed 0.7 percent as investors welcomed news it may sell its Astra Tech dental implant and medical devices business for some $2 billion, giving it more cash for share buybacks in 2011.
U.S. stock index futures pointed to a lower opening on Wall Street on Tuesday, ahead of U.S. October producer prices data and U.S. October industrial output figures, scheduled for release at 1330 GMT and 1415 GMT respectively.
), the world's biggest retailer.
