U.S. wants China to move quickly on currency: Obama aide
2010-11-13 03:47:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. officials would like China to move quickly on reforming its exchange rate and will be watching for movement on the yuan currency by the time President Hu Jintao visits Washington in January, one of President Barack Obama's top advisers said on Saturday .
The United States has pressed China over its yuan exchange rate, which Washington argues is held artificially low, unfairly boosting Chinese exports.
"The pacing of this is obviously a sovereign decision by them," Obama's national security advisor Tom Donilon told a news briefing in Yokohama, where Obama is attending an Asia-Pacific economic summit this weekend.
"President Hu Jintao's visit in January would be an important time to look at exactly what the quantum of progress has been on this," he said. "... The United States ... would like to see China proceed apace on these reforms, because it's important we think to China, but it's important to the world in terms of a stable economic path forward."
He said he thought the Chinese had heard not just U.S., but also international concerns. "It's been a global discussion," Donilon said.
"At the end of the day, China has a huge interest in seeing a sustainable global recovery. China has a very big interest in seeing a strong and robust US economy," Donilon said.
Leaders at the G20 meeting in Seoul on Friday vowed to move toward market-determined exchange rates, a reference to China's tightly managed yuan.
(Reporting by Patricia Zengerle, editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Tens of thousands of Chinese laborers once cracked rock to build the Union Pacific Railway. It is now a time to show China America`s gratitude, tens of thousands of Americans are volunteering to crack rock to build the Trans China Speed Rail. All that is required is a strong back, sledge hammer and a pup tent. Extra bowls of rice and fish heads will be given to those that fulfill their daily quota. Surviving Americans laborers that crack enough rock to payback their debt will receive the Mao Zedong Medal and a free ride on the fastest train in the world.
Nov 13, 20107:01pm EST--
People in hell want ice water, too. But they won¡¯t get it.
Nov 13, 20108:55pm EST--
What a pathetic charade. Obama pretends to want China to stop driving down the Yuan, but they¡¯re doing it by buying our bonds; he doesn¡¯t seem so eager to see that stop. Meanwhile, the rest of the world has started a similar campaign of whining about Bernanke¡¯s QE2 infusion and we¡¯re hypocritically, but correctly, ignoring them. The moral of all this is that most countries make their own beds, they try to blame the rest of the world when it¡¯s time to lie in them. China has a right to manage their currency as they see fit, so do we. As long as we need to borrow hundreds of millions from them, they¡¯ll be selling us more than we sell to them; that money has to come from somewhere.
Nov 14, 20108:25am EST--
