UK's Cameron urges China to move on exchange rate
2010-11-10 06:33:00.0
UK's Cameron urges China to move on exchange rate | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
UK's Cameron urges China to move on exchange rate
Wed, Nov 10 2010
Sun, Nov 7 2010
Wed, Nov 10 2010
Tue, Nov 9 2010
Mon, Nov 8 2010
Wed, Nov 10 2010
Britain's Prime Minister David Cameron (L) meets China's President Hu Jintao at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing November 10, 2010. Cameron pledged on Wednesday to fight trade protectionism ahead of the G20 meeting, but urged China to move towards greater exchange rate flexibility to safeguard the global recovery. Credit: Reuters/Andy Rain/POOL
Wed  EST
The United States and others have pressured China to allow its yuan currency to rise faster, and accuse Beijing of keeping it undervalued to gain a trade advantage.
"China is already talking about moving toward increased domestic consumption, better healthcare and welfare, more consumer goods as its middle class grows, and in time introducing greater market flexibility into its exchange rate," he said.
"This cannot be completed overnight, but it must happen," Cameron added.
In an earlier meeting with China's President Hu Jintao in the Great Hall of the People, the two leaders discussed the issue of global economic imbalances.
Cameron, leading Britain's biggest trade delegation to China, urged the Chinese authorities to help ward off a retreat into protectionism.
"Britain will go on arguing that in Europe we should be open to trade from China and not putting up trade walls, and we need you to help us to make that argument about why protectionism is wrong," Cameron told a meeting of business delegates
With Britain angling to double bilateral trade with China by 2015, he said the world's second-largest economy offered prospects for British firms in a raft of sectors including retail, banking, insurance, high-tech and pharmaceuticals.
The prime minister added that China played a vital role in tackling Iran's nuclear ambitions, and called on Beijing to exert more pressure on Myanmar, formerly known as Burma, whose election last weekend has been condemned in the West as a farce.
"I believe China can work with us to improve the situation for the Burmese people," Cameron said. "China is one of the few countries that Burma will listen to on this point."
Cameron, who heads a two-party coalition, also talked up the virtues of the rule of law and Western-style democracy in Communist Party-ruled China. He noted that a British government was always subject to the rule of law.
"At times they can be frustrating when the courts take a view with which the government differs," the prime minister said.
Cameron's speech has echoes of one made a year ago by U.S. President Barack Obama to an audience of students in Shanghai, where he championed Internet freedom and human rights.
One student asked Cameron directly what his message was for the Communist party, to applause from students, while another accused him of lecturing China.
"It was a speech, not a lecture and I hope it will be taken in that way," Cameron said, adding that human rights needed to be discussed with mutual respect.
A $1.2 billion deal signed by aero-engine maker Rolls-Royce was the high point so far of the trade push spearheaded by Cameron. Officials have not put a total value on the deals, but they fall well short of the $20 billion of contracts China agreed with France during bilateral meetings last week.
