European shares slide on Ireland, China
2010-11-16 04:36:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares retreated on Tuesday, led lower by miners, on concerns about Ireland's debt ahead of a key meeting of euro zone finance ministers and renewed talk of further policy tightening in China.
At 0929 GMT (4:29 a.m. ET), the FTSEurofirst 300
index of top European shares was down 0.9 percent at 1,102.19 points after closing 0.8 percent higher in the previous session.
Miners topped the decliners, as key base metals prices fell on fresh concerns that China, one of the world's top commodity consumers, could further tighten monetary policy.
The STOXX 600 Basic Resources index .SXPP slipped 2.3 percent, while BHP Billiton (
), Antofagasta (
), Rio Tinto (
"We have certainly seen an increase in uncertainty and the focus has been on Europe and on what's happening with Ireland and the peripheral countries. All eyes are looking toward the Brussels meeting of EU finance ministers," said Keith Bowman, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown.
Euro zone finance ministers are expected to discuss on Tuesday the future euro zone crisis resolution mechanism, which Germany wants to start from 2013, replacing the 440 billion euro European Financial Stability Facility set up after Greece sought help in May.
Financial shares, which often derive strength from solid macroeconomic environment, were on the back foot, with the STOXX 600 banking index .SX7P slipping 1.4 percent. Standard Chartered (
), Credit Agricole (
), Bankinter (
"There is also some degree of uncertainty with the U.S. as well. We saw some mark up in treasury yields yesterday, with a group of economists questioning the Federal Reserve's QE2 program."
European shares climbed to a two-year high a week ago on the U.S. Federal Reserve's further stimulus plans, but doubts about whether the Fed would ultimately buy the $600 billion worth of bonds it had promised has put some pressure on equities.
New York Federal Reserve President William Dudley defended on Tuesday the controversial bond-buying program, saying the Fed was not expressly seeking to devalue the dollar, while he cautioned that the program was unlikely to generate a spurt of growth.
Among individual movers, German chipmaker Infineon (
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100
, Germany's DAX
, France's CAC 40
, Italy's MIB
, Spain's IBEX 35
and Ireland's ISEQ
