China's Hu says to seek domestic growth, FX reform
2010-11-13 12:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China will seek to expand domestic demand and remains committed to reforming its exchange rate, President Hu Jintao said, following months of friction over Beijing's currency policy and large trade surplus.
Hu told a regional business forum in Japan on Saturday that China "will make vigorous efforts to establish lastingly effective means for expanding domestic demand, especially consumer demand."
China's rapid growth has helped to shore up the global economy and spur on Asia while the United States and Europe have struggled with high unemployment and financial woes.
But international tensions over China's growing clout and how it plans to use it spilled over into a summit of the Group of 20 (G20) leading economies in Seoul that ended on Friday.
"China will continue making encouragement of a balanced international balance of payments an important task in ensuring macroeconomic stability," Hu told a business forum in the port city of Yokohama, which is hosting the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit over the weekend.
China has also been at odds with Japan after a sea territory dispute flared in September, and the United States has pressed China over its yuan exchange rate, which Washington argues is held artificially low, unfairly boosting Chinese exports.
"China will continue going forward with reform of the renminbi exchange rate formation mechanism on the basis of retaining initiative, controllability and gradualness," Hu said.
China has maintained a drumbeat of criticism of U.S. easy money policies over recent days, claiming that Washington could destabilize the global economy and inflate asset bubbles after the U.S. Federal Reserve announced it was going pump as much as $600 billion into the economy.
"China will adhere to open development, to a fundamental national policy of opening up," Hu said.
"Especially in responding to the international financial crisis, the emerging market economies led the way in economic recovery and have maintained quite fast growth," Hu said.
Separately, Hu met a senior Taiwanese politician, Lien Chan, on the sidelines of the APEC summit to discuss economic relations, which have been at odds since 1949 when Nationalist, or Kuomintang, forces fled to the island from the mainland to escape victorious Communist forces.
Taiwan and China this year signed an Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement, which may pull the island economically closer to the fast-growing mainland and eventually open the way for discussion of their political future.
Hu told Lien, honorary chairman of Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang Party, that Beijing wanted to focus on economic flows for now.
"We'll keep to a steady approach of first dealing with easy issues, and then difficult ones, and with economics issues first and politics later," Hu told Lien, according to China's official Xinhua news agency.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let us hope that China walks the talk of currency and other reforms which will go well to boost worldwide recovery of economies of many countries struggling for recovery from the last financial crisis! The pace of reforms is very crucial at this juncture to avoid competitive devaluation of respective countries to fend for their exports. US has already resorted to this by purchase of $600 bn debt. So where this race stops?¡­Frankly no one us know?
Nov 13, 20102:25am EST--
China will certainly walk the talk but not at the pace the Americans will like it. America love knee jerk reactions..China and most of the rest of the world hates it. To be fair to the Chinese, USA has ceased being a manufacturing nation before China emerged industrially, In the USA that is a pride about being a knowledge economy, R&D, creativity and brain work. The prevailing attitudes is to leave it to other to do the dirty business of manufacturing and fabrication. The Chinese like the Indians, Vietnamese and the Koreans and Japanese before this work hard at improving at these tasks that the American feel are below them to perform. Worst still in the last decade the Americans realized that they didn¡¯t have a lock on creativity and innovation either. The truth is that nations that have the hunger to improve will succeed whether at manufacturing, R&D and everything else. Rather than be a ¡°cry-baby¡± claiming unfairness, USA as a nation has to wake up and review its own attitudes towards work and wealth. Obama is full of rhetorics but has said little about working harder. Perhaps urging people to work hard cannot sell votes!
Nov 13, 20108:36am EST--
Alexhar your assertion that the US is a tired but common refrain. The US is still the top manufacturer by dollar amount. It¡¯s just that it doesn¡¯t manufacture the stuff that consumers use on a daily basis. Most of the manufacturing is on the higher end¡­defense, aerospace, complex machinery, lasers, satellites etc¡­ Most of this is automated. It¡¯s improvements in automation and processes that have led to the reduction in manufacturing jobs not China. Look at Intel and the massive new chip fabrication plants they are building. It takes very few humans to run them. And before you say ¡°Yeah but that¡¯s all in China¡± you are wrong. Those plants are in the US. 75% of Intel chips are sold outside the US but 75% of Intel chips are made in the US.
Nov 13, 201010:59am EST--
