China says G20 won't broach specific currencies
2010-11-10 02:43:00.0
(Reuters) - The G20 summit will try to address global challenges and should not discuss China's yuan or any other specific currency, China's vice foreign minister said on Wednesday.
Cui Tiankai said many developing countries were concerned about the liquidity being injected into the global economy as a result of the latest monetary easing by the Federal Reserve, the U.S. central bank.
Asked whether the yuan would be discussed at the summit, Cui said: "I think there is a broad agreement among G20 members that we should not focus on any particular currency of any particular member, because this is not the root cause of the global economic problems."
"The recent crisis is certainly caused not by the Chinese currency or any other emerging market's currency," Cui, who was speaking in English, added.
In listing the "structural problems" the G20 must tackle, Cui mentioned imbalances in global development and the international financial system as well as "weakness in international regulation and supervision."
Abundant liquidity, especially after the Fed decided last week to print money to buy $600 billion worth of U.S. government bonds "is posing some risks to the financial stability of many countries, including the BRIC countries," Cui said, referring to Brazil, Russia, India and China.
"I think many other developing countries and emerging markets have similar concerns," he said.
"It's quite possible that many G20 members will express that concern at the summit with recommendations and proposals on how to deal with the situation," said Cui, China's senior G20 negotiator.
Cui, who has been working on the draft of the communique that will be issued on Friday after the two-day meeting, said China was ready to use its greater voting power in the International Monetary Fund to make the fund better serve the interests of developing countries. He did not elaborate.
Cui said the relationship between Beijing and Washington remained sound despite the recent passage of a bill by the House of Representatives, the lower chamber of Congress, that aims to punish China for holding down the yuan.
China had maintained effective communication with the United States over key policies, he said.
"I don't think the U.S. Congress is the right place to discuss or to take any decision on the Chinese currency -- it is certainly not the right place," he said.
"The leaders are coming to Seoul for better coordination and cooperation. They are not coming for confrontation," he said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
QE2 ¡­The Chinese¡­ A Non- politicized academic understanding QE2 The Chinese rating change is a red herring. The more meaningful statement in China¡¯s recent comments is: ¡­¡± entirely encroaches¡± on the interests of creditor.¡± That statement correctly predicts the outcome of QE2 will negatively impact CHINA returns on its holdings to the benefit of the US. It simply reinforces the fact that the US and China¡¯s interests have diverged. It is not however in China¡¯s best interest to accelerate a sell off (they would be the biggest losers if a massive selloff occurred) given the amount of their holdings. The Fed I believe correctly weighed the short term loss of already declining Chinese support against the current backdrop of the very serious risk that the US is on the cusp of Japanese¡¯s style self-reinforcing deflationary spiral. The Chinese previously stated a desire to diversify and reduce their dollar holdings. Their purchases of US debt were already in decline. The reduction however, is in part a result of weaker US consumer demand, which predictably resulted in a decrease in US dollars flowing back to China. This decreasing flow of dollars makes the Chinese previous level of investment in the US structurally unsustainable. Absent QE2 there is a strong likelihood that there will be tremendous pressure globally to raise interest rates. This will come about as a byproduct of stronger economies recovering and raising their interest rates to cool off their own inflationary risks. The US current effective rate of 0% interest rate has not fueled any meaningful credit expansion. Marginally higher rates will decrease bank profits but they should be sufficient to attract the capital needed to fund US debt. Once the US economy gets back on its feet (a direct benefit of a weaker dollar, stronger exports) the economy will be able to withstand higher interest rates. Inflationary risks from the fed actions are overblown. Historically the Fed has been very effective in reducing money supply (ME) and raising interest rates to dampen on inflation (with the exception of the period of stagflation 30+ years ago).I think the much bigger risk of uncontrollable inflation is going to be commodities. The economic recovery in emerging markets will put tremendous pressure on commodities. This will be especially true if commodity producers cannot increase production to meet the additional demand. The resulting inflationary pressures will simple be supply and demand. The global economy faces a very real inflationary risk as a result of speculators creating a self-reinforcing feedback loop. The forward pricing momentum speculators create is not based on supply and demand, but rather entirely based on the anticipation of higher prices in the future. QE2 is brilliant¡­ With Bernanke playing the role of a loyal puppet Geithner has (somewhat surprisingly) turned out to be a masterful puppeteer.
Nov 10, 201011:18am EST--
