China offers to help Portugal but silent on debt
2010-11-07 11:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China will back Portugal's efforts to deal with fallout from the world financial crisis, President Hu Jintao said on Sunday, but he stopped short of promising to buy Portuguese bonds as the debt-ridden country had hoped.
"We are willing to take concrete measures to help Portugal cope with the global financial crisis," he said after meeting Prime Minister Jose Socrates, without elaborating.
The meeting was the last stop of Hu's four-day to France and Portugal before returning to Beijing later on Sunday.
Last month, Premier Wen Jiabao promised to buy Greek government bonds when Athens returns to markets, in a show of support for the country whose debt burden pushed the euro zone into crisis and required an international bailout.
Portugal, which unlike Greece still sells bonds on financial markets although at high cost, had hoped for a similar promise as it is trying to soothe investors' concerns about its ability to cut a high budget deficit and rein in ballooning debt.
Deputy Foreign Minister Fu Ying, who is part of the Chinese delegation visiting Europe, told Reuters on Saturday that Beijing remained committed to investing in European bonds and was willing to lend Portugal a helping hand.
Portugal and China also signed several cooperation treaties in areas such as financial services, logistics, renewable energy and tourism, and agreed to work to double their bilateral trade by 2015.
Hu said he would encourage Chinese companies to invest in Portugal, while China also wanted Portuguese firms to sell more goods in the world's most populous country.
A stern-looking Socrates thanked Hu for a "personal effort" to achieve not only the doubling of trade and more mutual investment, but also "a more balanced relationship so that both our peoples can benefit from this ambition."
Portuguese imports from China in the January-August period jumped 47 percent to 1.03 billion euros ($1.45 billion) from last year, while exports to the world's second largest economy in the first eight months of the year totaled just 149 million euros.
Investors' concerns that Portugal may fail to rein in its budget deficit and debt have caused its debt premiums to soar this year, raising the risk of a Greek-style bailout.
But the minority Socialist government maintains it will meet the budget deficit target of 7.3 percent of GDP this year and 4.6 percent in 2011 year. It is betting on higher exports to avoid a new recession next year, when tough austerity measures such as higher taxes and wage cuts will start. <Id:nLDE69C26Q>
In an example of possible investment, Portugal's largest company and utility EDP said China Power Holding International (CPI), with which it signed an agreement for a potential partnership, expressed interest in buying a stake in the Portuguese company.
"Given the strategic significance the cooperation partnership may have, CPI has manifested its interest in a potential entry into EDP's capital," EDP said in a statement.
), the world's biggest lender by market value, and Portugal's largest listed bank Millennium bcp (
China's Huawei Technologies, the world's second-largest telecommunications equipment maker, and Portugal Telecom (
(Writing by Andrei Khalip; editing by Myra MacDonald)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let¡¯s stop this non-sense and put tariff to the Chinese products. Lets get our jobs back.
Nov 07, 201010:37am EST--
well the nonsense is the belief that the US can still manufacture high quality low end or mid end goods for export. Apart from China, can someone really believe the US is not in the losing end by forming an economic pact with India during the recent visit to India by President Obama? Apart from high tech, the Indian work force is not only cheaper but also educated. Even for high tech, India is not that far away from the US especially in the IT sector. Perhaps the US should learn something from Germany. Despite this day of age of cheap high skill labor, Germany is still an export juggernant in the world. Because it retrained its workforce to stay competitive when its economy was in trouble.
Nov 07, 20102:14pm EST--
Well BigHelio, I couldn¡¯t agree more with you. Unfortunately, the previous government preferred chasing elusive weapons of mass distruction in Iraq instead of spending the money on education. And going by the outcome of last week¡¯s election, the ¡°majority¡± of Americans want that back.
Nov 07, 20105:09pm EST--
