Frustration rises from rubble of China's deadly quake
2013-04-22 07:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Hundreds of survivors of a 6.6 magnitude earthquake that hit southwest China, killing nearly 200 people, pushed into traffic along a main road on Monday, waving protest signs, demanding help and shouting at police.
"We are in the open air here. No place to sleep, nothing to eat. No one is paying any attention to us," said Peng Qiong, 45, a farmer in Chaoyang village on the outskirts of Lushan, near the epicenter.
China has poured resources into Sichuan since the early Saturday quake, including 1 billion yuan ($161.9 million) from central coffers for disaster relief and compensation. About 18,000 troops are in the area.
The earthquake killed at least 186 people and injured more than 11,000, state media said.
But while many have praised the government for its swift response, growing anger among some underscores the government's challenge, magnified by the fact that Sichuan bore the brunt of a 7.9 earthquake in 2008 that killed nearly 70,000 people.
In some cases, roads closed to non-emergency traffic have been clogged with all kinds of government vehicles.
On the way to Baoxing, a heavily damaged area about 40 km (25 miles) from Lushan, idling ambulances, troop transporters, construction vehicles and tour buses for relief workers blocked both lanes of the road, making access possible only on foot or by weaving motorcycles.
Tian Kuanqian surveyed a winding fissure that split the upper level of his house. For more than two days, the 40-year-old farmer has watched as emergency vehicles passed their wrecked village by.
"If they continue to ignore us like we are trivial, we will have no choice but to protest," he said.
The back room hung of Tian's house was torn from the building and perched on a steep slope. Inside, a poster of former revolutionary leader Mao Zedong hung above a collapsed wall. Tian's family including elderly parents sleep on the ground.
"It's been three days and we haven't seen noodles or water. What we need are tents," Tian said.
"Our leaders have visited and we're working getting these people food and water," said the officer, who declined to give his name.
The damage to listed businesses in the area appeared limited. Toll road operator Sichuan Expressway said none of its roads were damaged, while motor-maker Dongfeng Electric said the quake did not cause any losses.
China Lumena New Materials Corp said none of its equipment in Sichuan had been damaged, while department store owner Maoye International said its subsidiary, Chengshang Group, whose principal business is in Sichuan, said all stores were operating normally.
In Zhongba village, part of Baoxing, residents said it took two days for help to arrive. When it did, supplies and tents were in short supply. Almost all buildings are damaged and many have collapsed.
Zhang Zhenghua, a 41-year-old farmer, said officials drove through the village on Monday and stopped briefly to apologize for the delay in help.
"The secretary mentioned subsidies to rebuild our homes. We hope they do what they say," Zhang said.
(Writing by John Ruwitch; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Funny, the news which I am getting from China is one of which the govt is sending its reserve corps there to help the people. Also the premier went there to oversee the work as well. Once again Reuters tries to paint a different picture of the true events. Willfully ignorant? I think not. Politically motivated? Definitely＃
Apr 22, 20132:34pm EDT--
Dropbox, I think you missed the point of the story. Yes, Xinhua and other outlets are full of pics of a strong central response, but even with that 每 any response that doesn＊t help all affected immediately (humanly impossible when widespread damage hits) results in anger and frustration for those involved still left needing help. Thus news stories are made.
Dropbox, I think you missed the point of the story. Yes, Xinhua and other outlets are full of pics of a strong central response, but even with that 每 any response that doesn＊t help all affected immediately (humanly impossible when widespread damage hits) results in anger and frustration for those involved still left needing help. Thus news stories are made.
Ascribing politics to this is bluntly silly. Read with open mind similar stories from UK/EU/US/elsewhere and you＊ll see Reuters is rather evenhanded 每 anyone affected by a major event and under the perception they are not getting help (and that can get a reporter＊s ear) will get play. That said, if I were one of the victims mentioned in the story I＊d be getting tired of it all, too. Western perceptions of China＊s response to the previous earthquake mentioned (the 7.9 event) are generally favorable, especially when contrasted with the US＊ handling of the Katrina hurricane. This round doesn＊t mean the central government isn＊t trying (※many have praised the government for its swift response§) or that Reuters is saying they aren＊t. It just means the response isn＊t succeeding as quickly as those that need it want.
Apr 22, 20133:49pm EDT--
As evidence of my early post, for Dropbox 每 Please check the story ※School resumes after Texas blast, but town＊s frustration grows§ 每 ※Bill Killough, 76, said he had checkbooks, medication and guns sitting out where he had left them after fleeing his home in a hurry.
As evidence of my early post, for Dropbox 每 Please check the story ※School resumes after Texas blast, but town＊s frustration grows§ 每 ※Bill Killough, 76, said he had checkbooks, medication and guns sitting out where he had left them after fleeing his home in a hurry.
※They don＊t care. Don＊t care,§ he said, referring to federal authorities who he believes are calling the shots here.
※There＊s no reason why they can＊t escort§ residents in to get their belongings, he said.§
Apr 22, 20134:07pm EDT--
