Clinton urges peaceful outcomes on maritime disputes
2010-10-30 01:46:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Oct 29 2010
Sat, Oct 30 2010
Sat, Oct 30 2010
Fri, Oct 29 2010
Fri, Oct 29 2010
Sat  EDT
"The United States has a national interest in the freedom of navigation and unimpeded lawful commerce. And when disputes arise over maritime territory, we are committed to resolving them peacefully based on customary international law," Clinton said in remarks prepared for delivery at the East Asia Summit (EAS).
A Chinese Foreign Ministry official accused Japan of damaging the atmosphere between the two countries on Friday after Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara raised the issue of the Senkaku islands, called the Diaoyus in Chinese, at the summit. Both China and Japan claim sovereignty over the isles.
In the inaugural U.S. participation in the EAS gathering, Clinton did not refer directly to the dispute but told the Asian-Pacific leaders "maritime security is another area in which we can all benefit from close cooperation."
Clinton adopted a mild tone in her comments, making no explicit reference to the many policy disagreements between the United States and China, including the value of the Chinese currency, pressuring North Korea to curb its nuclear ambitions and a dispute over so-called rare earth minerals.
She said the United States -- which will be represented by President Barack Obama at next year's summit in Indonesia -- wanted "to help strengthen and build this organization as a key forum for political and strategic issues in the Asia-Pacific."
"We believe that the EAS should pursue an active agenda that involves the most consequential issues of our time -- including nuclear proliferation, the increase in conventional arms, maritime security, climate change, and the promotion of shared values and civil society, she said.
She adopted a restrained tone on human rights, an issue where many Asian countries resent U.S. criticism and regard it as interference in their internal affairs.
"While the United States agrees that no country can impose its values on others, we do believe that certain values are universal -- and that they are intrinsic to stable, peaceful, and prosperous countries," she said in remarks released by the State Department. "Human rights are in everyone's interest."
(Reporting by Arshad Mohammed; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Ms. Clinton, the representative from the world¡¯s fastest declining superpower is playing mediator to the world¡¯s fastest (re) rising hyperpower? Firstly, Okinawa belongs to China as historical records attested. Secondly, China has the world¡¯s fastest supercomputer, beating US hands-down. Thirdly, the Japanese FM is a troublemaker. Fourthly, mark my words, that FM is toasted and will be replaced. He overplayed his hands and did not know his place in the global pecking order. China is #1 without equal for 85% of her 6,000 years history. China is again resurging to #1 fast and furious. As everyone knows, China owes America, here and there.
Nov 01, 20104:02am EDT--
