China's Hu to sign deals, discuss G20 with Sarkozy
2010-11-04 08:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese President Hu Jintao arrived in France on Thursday on a two-nation trip to Europe to smooth trade tensions with big investment deals and discuss French President Nicolas Sarkozy's plans for his G20 presidency.
Hu's three-day state visit to France, after which he travels to Portugal, comes at a time when EU leaders have closed ranks with Washington in urging China to appreciate its yuan currency more quickly, unsettling relations between Beijing and Brussels.
China hopes this week's visit, accompanied by billions of euros in deals from Airbus plane orders to clean coal technology, can ease those tensions ahead of a G20 leaders summit in South Korea next week which will focus on global economic imbalances.
In turn, Sarkozy's government, which takes up the G20 baton after the Seoul summit, wants to build common ground for its ambitious agenda of reforming the global monetary system, while avoiding alienating China by harping on about the yuan.
Paris has said its G20 presidency, which includes plans to diversify currency reserves and stabilize commodity markets, hinges on avoiding conflict with the world's No.2 economy.
"It is not by reproaching people for things that you make progress," Sarkozy said ahead of Hu's arrival. "China should not be seen as a risk but an opportunity ... We are going to sign very important contracts and start very important talks on the eve of France's G20 presidency."
Paris' historic Champs Elysee avenue was decorated with Chinese flags for Hu's arrival, which caps a slow rehabilitation of Sino-French ties since Sarkozy angered Beijing in 2008 by meeting the exiled Dalai Lama, prompting Chinese citizens to call for a boycott of French goods and companies.
Human rights protests were planned during Hu's trip, but the French government has carefully avoided antagonizing Beijing ahead of the visit -- scarcely reacting to last month's award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo.
"We have the feeling the objective of this visit is to sell Airbus planes and nuclear reactors to China, which is good, but it is a detriment to human rights," said Jean-Francois Julliard, secretary-general of Reporters Without Borders.
"It is unthinkable that we sacrifice the values that founded France just for economic gain," said Julliard, whose group is one of several due to take to Paris' streets on Thursday.
AIRBUS, ALCATEL, TOTAL REAP DEALS
Hu, who touched down in Paris around 1220 GMT, was due to be received by Sarkozy with full military honors before heading to Paris' exclusive George V hotel. Alongside Sarkozy, he will later preside over the signing of billions of euros in deals -- billed by French officials as the biggest between China and a European leader -- before a formal state dinner.
China Southern Airlines, the country's largest carrier by fleet size, said on Thursday it would purchase 36 aircraft worth $3.78 billion from Airbus. Sources familiar with talks earlier told Reuters that China could purchase around 100 Airbus planes in total.
French teleco gear maker Alcatel-Lucent also announced 1.2 billion euros in deals with three Chinese phone companies, while oil major Total and insurer Axa were among other firms due to seal deals.
On Friday, Hu will travel to the Mediterranean resort of Nice, where afternoon talks are expected to center on foreign affairs, including Iran's nuclear ambitious, the situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and the development of Africa, where resource hungry Chinese companies are heavily investing.
On Saturday, Hu flies to Portugal where President Anibal Cavaco Silva, struggling to rein in the country's debt, will hope for a repeat of a Chinese performance in Greece that boosted the ailing Greek economy with promises of investment and debt purchases.
(Additional reporting by John Irish, Tim Hepher, Emmanuel Jarry and Yann Le Guernigou; Editing by Alison Williams)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Airbus now has a factory in China. So the Airbus deal has little impact Europe¡¯s big problem: unemployment.
Nov 05, 20108:12am EDT--
