China says consensus in U.S. is for good China ties
2010-11-04 08:20:00.0
(Reuters) - The consensus for both major U.S. political parties is to maintain good relations with China, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said on Thursday in the country's first official response to this week's mid-term U.S. elections.
U.S.-China tensions have flared up this year over business and trade, long the basic glue in a relationship between powers who differ sharply over human rights, climate change, and flash points such as Taiwan, Iran and North Korea.
"The long-term stable and healthy development of Sino-U.S. relations is in the fundamental interests of the peoples of both countries," Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei told a news briefing.
"It is also conducive to global peace and development. This is, as well, the consensus of both U.S. parties and of U.S. society," Hong added.
"We especially need to work with the U.S. side to develop positive, cooperative and comprehensive Sino-U.S. relations in the 21st century," he said.
Hong would not comment directly on the results of the election, as he said this was an "internal matter" for the United States.
U.S. voters, anxious about the economy and unhappy with President Barack Obama's leadership, punished Democrats in an election rout on Tuesday that gave House control to Republicans and weakened the Democratic majority in the Senate.
During the election campaign, some Democrats accused China of pilfering U.S. jobs by suppressing the value of its yuan currency and rigging its economy to favor Chinese state companies against U.S. investors.
In the last official business before they broke for the campaign, the House raised China's ire by passing a law that would treat an undervalued currency as an unlawful subsidy that could be remedied by duties on selected Chinese goods.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Sabrina Mao; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
There¡¯s a storm brewing in the South China Sea and no person of reason left to stop it. No way we will win in a trade war with China, we will just end up making it harder for our products and corporations to succeed there.
Nov 04, 20108:43am EDT--
You¡¯re on your own, Buddy Unfortunately, there is NOTHING the government can do to stimulate job growth. There never was and there never will be. That¡¯s the dirty little secret known throughout Washington as well as the economic community. Here¡¯s why. If you¡¯re living in the United States and it¡¯s YOUR job that gets exported, you¡¯re placed in the position of having to get another job. If enough jobs in the United States are exported, eventually you will reach a point where there is no other job for you to find. That¡¯s not good for your standard of living. So, when YOUR government (at the behest of lobbyists working on behalf of YOUR employer) legislatively sets the stage for the export of MILLIONS of jobs to Mexico, China, India, Bangladesh, Viet Nam, Thailand, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong, Ecuador, Brazil, Honduras, Guatemala, Panama and Heaven knows where else, it duplicates YOUR situation by a factor of about 15,000,000. It is much less comfortable for you to adjust to YOUR new situation that it is for your new counterpart in China. What also becomes obvious is that there is no one in China willing to send your job back to you. There is also no one in the United States government who is willing to undo the legislation that helped propel your job overseas. And, finally, your old employer doesn¡¯t even remember your name. So, neither the Republicans, the Democrats or that new flavor of the day ¨C the Tea Party, is going to do a thing to help you except argue over when to cut off your unemployment benefits. That¡¯s the truth of it. The last, best chance you had was the Democrats but you screwed THAT up. Make whatever plans and adjustments you can. You¡¯re on your own, buddy.
Nov 04, 20108:45am EDT--
The only real opponent to good China ties are politicians. China has been used and abused on both sides of the political fence. Much like everything else political in America, the issue is no longer about whether good ties with China will benefit the American people. Our politicians could turn the cure for cancer into a horrible thing given enough time to beat the other party over the head with it.
Nov 04, 20108:55am EDT--
