Germany wants bigger China role in Afghanistan
2010-11-02 05:50:00.0
(Reuters) - Germany called on China on Tuesday to do more to help stabilize Afghanistan in the face of a growing insurgency and worsening violence, but also stressed there was no military role for the Chinese to play.
Violence across Afghanistan is at its worst since the Taliban were ousted in 2001. How to stabilize Afghanistan will be a major concern at a NATO summit in Lisbon this month and when President Barack Obama reviews Washington's strategy in December.
"We have a shared interest when it comes to the question of at what time do we reach a stable, or at least an agreeably stable, Afghanistan, with a security that we can accept," German Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg said.
"There is no military role for China. I absolutely do know that," he said at the Germany embassy in Beijing.
Casualties among U.S. and NATO-led troops and civilians have reached record levels despite the presence of more than 150,000 foreign troops. Some European NATO members, under pressure at home over the increasingly unpopular war, have begun to question how much longer they can keep their commitments in Afghanistan.
Washington also plans to begin drawing down its troops from July 2011, depending on conditions on the ground -- primarily the readiness of Afghan forces to assume security responsibility.
Germany is the third-largest contributor to the NATO-led force in Afghanistan with about 4,600 troops and, like the United States, is looking at starting a partial withdrawal in 2011.
China's involvement in Afghanistan is mainly economic but stability is still crucial to its interests.
China's top integrated copper producer, Jiangxi Copper Co and China Metallurgical Group Corp, are involved in the exploration of the vast multi-billion dollar Aynak Copper Mine to the south of the capital, Kabul.
Afghanistan's economy is in tatters after three decades of foreign interventions and civil war, although the U.S. Defense Department estimated earlier this year Afghanistan's mineral resources could top $1 trillion.
China would benefit from a stable Afghanistan because it would be easier for its firms to complete billion-dollar resource deals they have or are considering. Untapped Afghan resources include iron ore, copper, lithium, oil and gas, and gems.
It would also cut the threat of violence in its largely Muslim northwest Xinjiang region, where Beijing has long worried about links between Afghan and ethnic Uighur militants, and possibly curb a flow of heroin into the country.
Afghanistan produces more than 90 percent of the world's opium, the raw material used to produce heroin.
But Chinese experts say Beijing is reluctant to get any more entwined in a country that has proved a quagmire for outsiders for centuries. It is even less keen to meddle through Pakistan, a staunch ally that it has long supplied with finance and arms.
"All of those things can be expanded, as Europe's commitment can be expanded, as NATO's commitment can be expanded," he said.
"When it comes to goals we can reach and we have to reach, I think, the neighbors can also play a significant role. We have to look at the most important neighbors as well ... and China is one of them."
(Reporting by Reuters Television; Writing by Ben Blanchard and Paul Tait; Editing by Ken Wills and Alex Richardson)
