AIG's crown jewel AIA makes hot Hong Kong debut
2010-10-29 10:44:00.0
AIG's crown jewel AIA makes hot Hong Kong debut | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
AIG's crown jewel AIA makes hot Hong Kong debut
Fri, Oct 29 2010
An AIA global offering road show is held inside a hotel in Hong Kong October 6, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Fri  EDT
) surged 17 percent in its Hong Kong debut as investors, chasing exposure to Asia's fast-growing life insurance business, piled into the record offering in the world's hottest IPO market.
) after a two-year effort to sell its Asian unit, including a failed takeover attempt from British insurer Prudential plc (
Encouraged by the first-day pop, AIG exercised the green-shoe in full, taking the IPO size to $20.5 billion. That makes it the third-biggest IPO ever, behind Agricultural Bank of China Ltd (
The strong start boosted AIA's market value above the $35.5 billion Prudential had initially offered for AIA in March, vindicating AIG's decision not to accept a $30.4 billion bid that followed.
AIA CEO Mark Tucker will now battle it out with Prudential to grab a greater share of the $358 billion Asia-Pacific life insurance market after spending about 17 years building Prudential's Asian business.
Diversifying quickly into bancassurance -- selling insurance products through banks -- is one of the battles Tucker has on his hands, as he drives growth at AIA after the wounds inflicted by AIG's near-collapse.
"The successful IPO would turn management's full attention back to the core business. The IPO and the separation from AIG took up some of management's time," said Sally Yim, senior analyst of financial institutions group at Moody's Investor Service.
"Whoever is able to diversify into bancassurance and at the same time strengthen their agency productivity will be the winner in Asia," she added.
Tucker, 52, a former professional soccer player known for his long hours and competitive nature, faces off against the likes of Prudential, ING (
AIA closed at HK$23.05, 17.1 percent above the IPO price of HK$19.68, after hitting a high of HK$23.15. A Reuters poll had, on average, forecast the shares to start trading at HK$21.79.
Asia has led the world in IPOs this year, raising a record $127.4 billion to account for more than 66 percent of all global volume, according to Thomson Reuters data. One-third of Asia's IPOs have been in Hong Kong, drawing on its access China's big investor base.
AIA also caps a record year of insurance IPOs, which saw Japan's Dai-ichi Life Insurance (
AIA's IPO closed two days ahead of schedule after being swamped by orders from China and traditional long-only funds. AIG sold the IPO at the top end of the marketing range after the offer was subscribed 9.62 times.
Investors are betting that AIA's market value, which will rank it as the fifth-largest stock on the benchmark Hang Seng index
, will generate demand from funds for benchmarking purposes. CLSA estimates AIA will have a 5 percent weighting in the Hong Kong index.
While the life insurance business is poised for strong growth in Asia, some of AIA's big markets are mature, which is a concern for some investors.
"We still have to see how it performs in emerging markets especially in India and China," said Patrick Yiu, a director at CASH Asset Management.
Life insurance premiums in Asia are projected to grow at compounded annual rate of 12.3 percent between 2009-2014, compared with 2.5 percent in Europe and 4.4 percent in North America, according to Sigma Swiss Re estimates.
Other insurance stocks fell as some investors pulled money out of AIA's bigger rivals. Prudential shares in London rose 2 percent.
"It's a win-win situation for the Pru, as it is the only other insurer with strong interest in Asia, so either it is in the right market, or it becomes a takeover target," said Mic Mills, head of electronic trading at ETX Capital.
AIA trades at about 1.4 times price to embedded value, while its larger, China-focused rivals China Life and Ping An trade at P/EV of over 2 times. But relative to its mature market peers such as Prudential plc, AIA trades at a premium.
(Additional reporting by Vikram Subhedar and Clare Jim in HONG KONG and John Hopkins in LONDON; Editing by Lincoln Feast and David Cowell)
