Analysis: Japanese mainstream nationalism clouds China ties
2010-10-29 03:35:00.0
(Reuters) - A stagnant economy, fraying social norms and China's growing clout are making nationalism more attractive to a broader swathe of Japanese, potentially complicating Tokyo's efforts to mend strained ties with Beijing.
The strains have raised concerns about fallout for business, although analysts note a chill earlier this decade did little to deter a flood of two-way trade that made China Japan's top trade partner last year, replacing the United States.
Thousands of protesters gathered in Tokyo on two recent weekends, waving national flags and carrying placards denouncing China's claim to the islets and Japan's response. Among them were couples with toddlers and young mothers wheeling prams, a far cry from past gatherings of men dressed in military fatigues.
"Unlike before, a full-time job doesn't guarantee lifelong stability and even a college graduate can't get a job as employment is becoming more fluid amid globalization," said Masahiro Abe, a lecturer at Konan University.
"Vague worries about a changing society seem to be creating a mentality of embracing something big and strong, such as nationalism, anti-foreign movements and religion."
Battered by a rising yen that is flirting with postwar highs, Japan's fragile economic recovery has stalled, even as China takes over its No.2 global economic ranking.
The same economic stagnation that fans nationalism, however, makes China's dynamism indispensable for Japanese growth.
"As we see Japanese companies unveil their (second-quarter) earnings just now, it is clear many of them are benefiting greatly from their China business. I don't think they are going to conduct a major review (in their ties with China)," said Xiao Minjie, chief economist at FuNNeX Asset Management in Tokyo.
Still, signs that nationalism is going mainstream could make it harder for Tokyo's leaders to manage ties with China, even as Beijing grapples with anti-Japanese protests of its own.
Chinese and South Korean property purchases have sparked public concern. Kan told a parliamentary panel the government would look into the situation, although his foreign minister said care was needed given a policy of promoting foreign investment.
"It is not clear how much impact the recent protests will have on the government. But if this turns into a wider grassroot movements, the government will surely be hit at the voting booth," said Kensuke Suzuki at Kwansei Gakuin University.
Toshio Tamogami, a former air force chief who helped organize the two major rallies this month, said movements like his were attracting a wide group of people including youth and women.
"They believe something is wrong with the Chinese side, but they also believe something is wrong with the Japanese government, which cannot take a firm stance (in the dispute)," Tamogami, who was sacked in 2008 for writing that Japan was not an aggressor in World War Two, told Reuters in a phone interview.
Kan's Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) swept to power last year pledging to pay more heed to consumers' interests after more than half a century reign by the conservative Liberal Democrats.
The Citizens Group That Will Not Forgive Special Rights for Koreans in Japan, which says it has 10,000 members, opposes extending rights reserved for Japanese citizens to Korean residents, many descended from those brought to Japan as forced labor during Tokyo's 1915-1945 colonial rule of the peninsula.
"If a thief pays you a visit, you get mad and club him. That's what's done in any house or country," a member of the group told passersby at a demonstration in a posh Tokyo shopping district, referring to China's claim to the islets.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Can Japan and China ever have a close tie? It¡¯s very unlikely. The Japanese invasions and brutal killings in China are on Chinese minds day and night. It¡¯s even written into the national anthem (March of the Volunteers):
Can Japan and China ever have a close tie? It¡¯s very unlikely. The Japanese invasions and brutal killings in China are on Chinese minds day and night. It¡¯s even written into the national anthem (March of the Volunteers):
Arise! All who refuse to be slaves!
Let our flesh and blood forge into our new Great Wall!
As the Chinese people faces its greatest peril,
Every person¡¯s forced to expend their very last cry.
Arise! Arise! Arise!
Million hearts beat as one,
Brave the enemy¡¯s fire, March on!
Brave the enemy¡¯s fire, March on!
March on! March on! On!
Oct 29, 20108:27am EDT--
Tokyo Governor Shintaro said that the U.S. is not reliable, and that Japan develop nuclear weapons Ishihara said the U.S. nuclear weapons as a threat, but the function does not apply to Japan. U.S. missile interceptor system to protect only the United States, if necessary, and even Hawaii can be lost. Japan also will be naive to think that nuclear weapons to guard the United States to Japan, but China has long been seen through the U.S. will not protect Japan. He said that Japan is a small country, two hydrogen bombs can destroy Japan. For example, if a throw in Okinawa, Japan to destroy the western half. For such countries, the U.S. troops can not come from the local community, the United States not as the ability and financial resources. Ishihara said Japan has a nuclear bomb if so, will not turn into the current situation. The United States did not dare to make too much of the Japanese economy requirements.
Oct 29, 201010:58am EDT--
Dear Mr. Takenaka and Ms. Sieg, ¡° ¡­ Korean residents, many descended from those brought to Japan as forced labor during Tokyo¡¯s 1915-1945 colonial rule of the peninsula.¡± This description is wrong.
Dear Mr. Takenaka and Ms. Sieg, ¡° ¡­ Korean residents, many descended from those brought to Japan as forced labor during Tokyo¡¯s 1915-1945 colonial rule of the peninsula.¡± This description is wrong.
The record says that the number of Korean forced laborers in Japan was 245. Reference: Asahi-Newspaper, July 13, 1959, 2nd side; ¡°Most Korean residents in Japan live in Japan with their own decision; two hundred and forty five were drafted laborers, according to Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan.¡± However, the current Korean population in Japan is approximately 600,000.
After Japan surrendered to the Allies in 1945, Korean people in Japan were encouraged to go back to Korean Peninsula, but people who chose to stay in Japan were also accepted and obtained the special-permanent-resident status. Also, after WWII, when Cheju Uprising happened, many Korean fled to Japan as refugees. Biological mother of the current Japanese Prime Minister, Kan is one of them. Therefore, Korean population in Japan basically consists of those people and their offspring, who are not forced to come to Japan. I hope you could correct the mistake.
Thank you. Sincerely,
Nov 03, 201010:56pm EDT--
