Analysis: More than decoupled, China is in league of its own
2010-10-26 04:40:00.0
(Reuters) - What's weak is strong, what's down is up, what's loose is tight -- pretty much everything that defines the American and European economies these days finds its diametric opposite in China.
The world's second-largest economy is growing near a double-digit pace, inflation is picking up and the government definitively stepped up monetary tightening last week with its first interest rate increase in nearly three years.
Two years on from the global financial crisis, the contrast with the rich world is striking. In the United States and Europe, growth is sluggish, a slump into outright deflation is a real risk and central banks look set to loosen policy further.
So the evidence is in: China is decoupled, influenced by, but ultimately independent from other major economies.
"The crisis was a test and China passed the test. Decoupling has become a much more solid thesis now than three years ago when we only talked about it hypothetically," said Qing Wang, Morgan Stanley's chief economist for greater China.
One of the knocks against the decoupling thesis in the past has been that China, with its currency closely tied to the dollar, cannot carve out its own monetary policy.
A widespread assumption before last week was that the People's Bank of China would need to wait for the Federal Reserve to raise rates before doing likewise, condemning it to a choice between importing easy money or breaking the link by allowing more yuan appreciation.
"China sent a message to the rest of the world. They do have what they consider an independent monetary policy. They don't have to solely rely on their exchange rate as a policy tool," Wang said.
WHAT EXPORT RELIANCE?
Looked at on a value-added basis, exports contribute about 17 percent to Chinese growth, Kevin Lai, an economist with Daiwa Capital Markets in Hong Kong, said.
While not negligible, this is far lower than other Asian countries from South Korea to Singapore.
"For Asia in general, decoupling hasn't happened yet," Lai said, noting that Asia consumes just 22 percent of its own exports. "But whether Asia is decoupling or not, China is not so dependent on exports."
And that dependence has waned since the financial crisis. Exports will make a tiny contribution to Chinese growth this year, with the trade surplus stabilizing below $200 billion.
Yet not everyone is a fan of the decoupling thesis. Andy Rothman, China macro strategist with CLSA in Shanghai, says it misses the point.
The source of China's outperformance over the past two years has not been its separateness from the rest of the world, but rather success on a range of policy fronts, he said.
It had a far less leveraged housing sector, a well-implemented stimulus package, a much healthier government fiscal position and continued expansion of health care coverage that is helping to reduce precautionary saving.
"They've been doing a lot of the things that the United States said it wanted to do, but didn't seem to be able to actually accomplish," Rothman said.
China may have gone its own way with last week's interest rate rise, but the fact is that the yuan's tethering to the dollar still limits its policy decoupling.
The dollar's recent tumble means that China has been paying an increasing amount for key commodity imports, posing an inflationary risk and eroding its terms of trade.
It is no coincidence that Beijing sped up the yuan's rise over the past two months.
"More rapid yuan appreciation was not a response to pressure from Washington, but was a response to dollar weakness. It was as simple as that. They have to protect their own purchasing power," Lai said.
Dong Xian'an, chief economist with Industrial Securities in Beijing, predicts the government may later this year delink the yuan further from the dollar, allowing it to fluctuate by more than the current daily limit of 0.5 percent.
"This will help to make monetary policy more flexible and independent," he said.
Nevertheless, in another dimension, China is on track to couple itself more tightly with developed economies. Beijing's rigid capital controls have acted as a breaker, preventing global financial turmoil from washing onto its shores.
Now, bit by bit, China is promoting the yuan's use abroad and giving investors more channels through its capital account, such as in the decision to let foreign holders of yuan buy domestic bonds.
"For a country to be completely immune from volatile developments in the rest of the world is another way of saying this country is isolated from the rest of the world," Wang said.
"If China becomes more open, it will be more exposed."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Reuters wrote: ¡°Looked at on a value-added basis, exports contribute about 17 percent to Chinese growth¡± That¡¯s certainly one way to look at it. Another way to look at it is to realize that it passed Germany and is now the world¡¯s largest exporter. The USA is #3, as per the CIA World Factbook. China came to the realization that it should be independent. In 2016 it will release its own airliner, the single-aisle C919 with up to 190 seats. After 2016, it will no longer need Boeing or Airbus. It stole and/or negotiated its way to a world-class high-speed train and is now building tracks to cover the country. China already unveiled its 27 passenger AC313 helicopter; the Chinese market is pretty much closed to Sikorsky and the other manufacturers. China has almost a monopoly on rare earths; the rest of the world, except for Japan, has been soundly sleeping while China locked-up the market. China has never respected intellectual property laws, so it will simply continue to copy DVDs and CDs. Look for Kindle and other electronic books to go the same way soon. In other words, in only a few more years, China will not be buying foreign goods. The business geniuses of the USA and Europe have been outmaneuvered, but that won¡¯t stop them from collecting more bonuses. http://saucymugwump.blogspot.com/
Oct 26, 201012:26pm EDT--
Actually, China¡¯s initial orders for high-speed trains were built under technology transfer agreements using variants of existing high-speed trains from Bombardier, Alstom and Kawasaki. More interesting is the fact that the Comac C919 is more an ¡°american built¡± aircraft than the Boeing 787 Dreamliner. Most C919 components will be sourced from GE, Honeywell and Hamilton Standard .. here in the States. Conversely, almost all of the new Boeing is manufactured in Japan, Italy, Korea, Sweden, France and India, with Rolls Royce engines from the U.K. .. then it is simply assembled in the U.S.
Oct 27, 201011:23am EDT--
Duh, of course. They have a lot more growth potential. Most everyone in America already has a fridge. CAPITALISM loves things that are growing, and frowns on flat-lining, steady things. ECON 101.
Oct 27, 201011:46am EDT--
