Tokyo says Japan and China should avoid tit-for-tat
2010-10-22 07:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan and China should focus on the big picture and avoid tit-for-tat recriminations, Japan's chief cabinet secretary said on Friday, as public protests and sharp comments by senior officials suggested mounting tensions between Asia's two biggest economies.
Messages on the Chinese Internet in recent days have called for protests in Chongqing, a sprawling city in China's southwest, and a smaller city, Deyang, also in the southwest, after thousands of protesters marched last week in both countries.
China's distrust of Japan resurfaced on Thursday when Beijing refused to say whether the leaders of the two countries would meet at a regional summit this month and accused Tokyo's foreign minister of rekindling ill-will.
"Neither side should be nitpicking over particular comments and then overreacting," Yoshito Sengoku, the de facto No. 2 in Japan's cabinet, told a news conference.
He said the two sides should take a broad, generous approach and give each other leeway as he reiterated calls for building mutually beneficial strategic ties.
Sino-Japanese relations deteriorated sharply last month after Japan detained a Chinese trawler captain whose boat collided with Japanese patrol ships near a chain of disputed islands in the East China Sea, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China.
Concerns remain in Japan that Beijing is holding back shipments of rare earth minerals, vital for electronic goods and auto parts, following the dispute.
Thousands of protesters marched last week in both countries, venting anger and underscoring their fragile ties, strained by bitter Chinese memories of Japan's wartime aggression and Japanese worries about China's growing economic and military might.
The two governments are trying to arrange a meeting between Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan on the sidelines of the end-October gathering in Vietnam. The meeting is being arranged for October 29, Mainichi newspaper said.
Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara told a news conference that he would like both countries to discuss at the meeting how to improve ties, as well as specific issues such as rare earths.
(Additional reporting by Yoko Nishikawa in Tokyo and Chris Buckley in Beijing; Editing by Edmund Klamann)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Smart words in my eyes, although the demonstrations in China shouldn¡¯t be taken too seriously. It really only reflects the discontent of the Chinese with their own government, but out of fear of being shot dead they need to find another target in order to vent their frustration.
Smart words in my eyes, although the demonstrations in China shouldn¡¯t be taken too seriously. It really only reflects the discontent of the Chinese with their own government, but out of fear of being shot dead they need to find another target in order to vent their frustration.
As to the rare earth issue, this conflict leads to innovation. Japan and the rest of the world is now searching for alternatives. China¡¯s recent actions might backfire in the end.
Oct 22, 20102:42am EDT--
@Rhino1, Rare earth minerals, being rare, need to be utilized conservatively even if they come from a cheap source. The fact that 97% of the world¡¯s supply comes from China speaks of the imbalance and exploitation when it¡¯s already well known fact that rare minerals exists almost every where else on Earth. I¡¯m sure the West do not want to source from slave labor and ecological damaging conditions. Yes, it is everyone¡¯s interest, including China¡¯s, to open up more mines elsewhere.
Oct 22, 20107:53am EDT--
@ Rhino1, ¡°It really only reflects the discontent of the Chinese with their own government, but out of fear of being shot dead they need to find another target in order to vent their frustration.¡± That¡¯s just a typical western slanted vision.
Oct 22, 20107:59am EDT--
