China party paper rejects faster political change
2010-10-27 05:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Communist Party newspaper said on Wednesday that stability had to be the bedrock of any political changes, parting company with more urgent calls for reform from some leaders, including Premier Wen Jiabao.
The front-page editorial in the People's Daily gave unusual prominence to a topic that most leaders have been skittish about confronting: how to adapt the one-Party state to changing times and a fast-growing economy.
The editorial made no mention of party leaders, including Wen, the only senior leader who has abandoned that reticence and appealed for firmer reform. It suggested steady adjustments, rather than breakthrough changes, were more appropriate.
Political changes, the paper said, "cannot be divorced from reality and try to leap over stages, and even less should they be flashy and superficial with empty slogans."
It invoked Deng Xiaoping, the late paramount leader who ushered in economic reforms but rejected political relaxation after the 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy protests.
"Comrade Deng Xiaoping clearly pointed out that in judging whether a country's political system and structure are correct. there are three measures, and the first is whether there is political stability," said the editorial.
Political changes, it said, "absolutely cannot copy the Western political model of multiple parties taking turns in government and a... separation of powers."
In August, he said that if China failed to proceed with political restructuring it "may lose what it has already achieved through economic restructuring." Authorities, he said, must check abuses or faced "regression and stagnation."
Wen and President Hu Jintao leave office in early 2013, giving way to a successor generation that has given no hints of wanting faster changes.
Since 1989, Beijing has rejected any notion of embracing Western-style democracy, with officials pointing to the turmoil that has afflicted some post-Soviet states.
Authorities have condemned the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize this month to Liu Xiaobo, a jailed dissident who won fame in 1989.
(Reporting by Michael Martina and Chris Buckley; Editing by Benjamin Kang Lim and Ken Wills and Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The bonding of totalitarian regimes is by honor oaths that are secret,but fully leaked.So no member in the higher brigade of power would like to reduce his importance and throws crumbs of power to the smaller fry in the party.This is a sacred and serious act and cannot be simply democratized with popular voting by minions of unknown political entities with radical political agenda.
They know how to play their cards for now.Once China goes through an economic correction, which is likely in the next two/three years a lot will change.A silent and sticky revolution that powers cannot stop or control will occur and transform China faster than can be imagined
Oct 27, 20108:00am EDT--
