Geithner, China's Wang discuss economic ties
2010-10-24 03:36:00.0
Geithner, China's Wang discuss economic ties | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Geithner, China's Wang discuss economic ties
Mon, Oct 25 2010
Sun, Oct 24 2010
Sun, Oct 24 2010
Sun, Oct 24 2010
Sat, Oct 23 2010
Sun  EDT
Geithner and Wang, who are designated as special representatives of their respective presidents on U.S.-China economic issues, met at Qingdao airport, a stop-off for Geithner after Group of 20 meetings in South Korea.
"The two sides exchanged views on U.S.-China economic relations and the preparation for the (G20) Leaders' Summit in Seoul," according to a statement emailed by the U.S. embassy in Beijing.
The airport meeting in China came at the end of Geithner's trip to the Group of 20 finance ministers and central bank governors meetings in Gyeongju, South Korea, where officials agreed to refrain from competitive currency devaluations and reduce current account imbalances.
Last week, Geithner delayed a semi-annual report to U.S. lawmakers on whether China manipulates its yuan for a trade advantage, choosing instead to press the issue at multilateral meetings including the Gyeongju finance leaders meeting and a G20 leaders' summit next month in Seoul.
"China is well into a very promising and very ambitious program of domestic reforms to strengthen domestic growth because China recognized that it cannot afford to rely as it has in the past on such an export-dependent model for growth," Geithner told a news conference.
"We want to see that progress continue," he said. "Of course as a part of that, it's not ready for its exchange rate to rise more rapidly in response to market forces."
Geithner made a similar stop-off in China on the way home from a trip to India in April, which also took place when the Treasury had delayed its currency report to allow Beijing more time to move on the yuan.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Oct 24, 20106:18am EDT--
