China minister says dollar printing out of control
2010-10-26 00:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Dollar issuance by the United States is "out of control," leading to an inflation assault on China, the Chinese commerce minister said in comments reported on Tuesday.
Chen Deming, speaking at a trade fair in southern China, said that exporters had done a good job of preparing themselves for exchange rate changes as well as rising labor costs, but were suddenly confronted with new challenges.
"Because the United States' issuance of dollars is out of control and international commodity prices are continuing to rise, China is being attacked by imported inflation. The uncertainties of this are causing firms big problems," Chen was quoted as saying by the official Xinhua news agency.
Chinese officials have criticized U.S. monetary policy as being too loose before, but rarely in such explicit language.
At the G20 meeting in South Korea which ended on Saturday, Chinese Finance Minister Xie Xuren said that issuers of major reserve currencies -- code for the United States -- must follow responsible economic policies.
Along with posing an inflationary risk, a weak dollar also places appreciation pressure on China's yuan since its value is so closely tied to the U.S. currency.
China's consumer price inflation rose to 3.6 percent in the year to September, a 23-month high. It has been led mainly by food costs and many economists expect it to crest before the end of the year.
Despite his concern about the impact of U.S. monetary policy, Chen gave a positive outlook for Chinese trade next year. He said export growth would be stable, while imports would increase strongly.
(Reporting by Simon Rabinovitch; editing by Stephen Nisbet)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I have been trying to get the US Congress to cut its spending for decades, but I am just a silly old fool in Minnesota. I try to stay informed. I voted in every election since 1972. I occasionally donated money. I got personally involved in politics at the precinct, district, and state levels. I took the time to give my opinion to political pollsters and to speak with campaigners who came to my door¡­ and in response to my civic efforts, government spending swelled like a raging river in an endless rain. Only once, during the Clinton presidency with a Republican Congress, was spending brought under control. Unfortunately, those few years of fiscal responsibility in the course of decades of runaway spending is a bit like trying to stop a flood with a pickup truck full of sandbags. China (and to be fair, the American citizenry) has been slow to recognize the danger of runaway Federal spending. It appears that I and other fiscal conservatives will have to count on the Bank of China to force the American Congress to behave responsibly. How pathetic is that?
Oct 27, 20108:21am EDT--
breezinthru said everything that needs to be said. Bravo!
Oct 27, 20108:42am EDT--
Currency war is unavoidable! I forecast it¡¯ll start in Spring of 2011 (April) and will reach its peak by Autumn 2011 (Sept). After that world manufacturing industries will shrink until 2015 (seriously affect in 2013, the year of the Snake). Due to the shrinkage of manufacturing sectors (especially the electronic and high tech sectors), commodities price will drop (accept agriculture commodities). Next year food price in the Far East will rise exponentially, and later will haunt the whole world. Large percentage of our income will goes to food. World manufacturing and international trade won¡¯t resume until 2016 and returns to it¡¯s peak by 2020.
Oct 27, 20109:20am EDT--
