American pleads guilty to trying to spy for China
2010-10-23 12:59:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, Oct 10 2010
Thu, Oct 21 2010
Wed, Oct 20 2010
Fri, Oct 15 2010
Thu, Oct 14 2010
ALEXANDRIA, Va.
Sat  EDT
ALEXANDRIA, Va.
Glenn Shriver, 28, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to communicate national defense information. His plea agreement, made public during a hearing in federal court in Virginia, called for a sentence of 48 months in prison.
Shriver acknowledged at the hearing that he met Chinese officials about 20 times beginning in 2004 and that he received a total of about $70,000 from Chinese intelligence officers.
After spending a year in college studying in Shanghai in 2002-2003, he moved there in 2004 to continue his language studies and to work. He responded to an advertisement to write about Sino-U.S. relations and his contact later introduced him to Chinese intelligence agents, prosecutors said.
He agreed to seek a job in the U.S. government and took the U.S. Foreign Service exam at the State Department twice but failed both times. Still the Chinese paid him $30,000 for his "friendship" and efforts, the court papers said.
He applied for a job in the CIA's National Clandestine Service in 2007 and later flew to Shanghai where he again met with Chinese intelligence officers and demanded $40,000 which they gave him, according to the court papers.
Shriver received word to report to Washington in May 2010 for final employment processing activities with the CIA, and it was at that time he failed to disclose his contacts and money from the Chinese, prosecutors said.
"We remain vigilant against threats to our national security and will do everything in our power to find and punish those who seek to betray our country," Neil MacBride, the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, said in a statement.
A spokesman for the Chinese embassy in Washington said that his government "never engages itself in activities that'll harm other countries' national interests, and it's sincere in developing Sino-U.S. relations of mutual benefit."
"Any attempts to defame China with fabricated allegations will prove futile," the spokesman, Wang Baodong, said in a written statement.
One of Shriver's lawyers, G. Allen Dale, called the plea agreement a fair resolution of the case and said his client would cooperate with prosecutors to provide any information they needed, which could reduce his sentence.
Relations between Washington and Beijing have been tense over U.S. concerns over what it sees as the undervaluing of the yuan and over trade ties. China is the largest holder of U.S. debt and has worked closely with Washington on some key foreign policy issues, like reining in North Korea's nuclear program.
U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder visited China this week and said the two countries needed to cooperate more on law enforcement, including fighting international crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.
The case is USA v. Shriver, U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Virginia (Alexandria), No. 10-00402. Stephen Campbell of the U.S. Attorney's Office led the prosecution. Washington, D.C. defense lawyer G. Allen Dale represented Shriver.
(Reporting by Jeremy Pelofsky of Reuters; Additional reporting by Paul Eckert of Reuters and Terry Baynes of Reuters Legal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
That piece of trash should have gotten 20 years¡­. just because they stopped him early, he had full intent of betraying our country¡­. who wouldnt serve 48 months for the possibilty of mega money¡­ if he was spying for France, 48 months¡­but China is right up there with Iran, Venzuella, Russia, Yemen, Pakistan and Libia there are certain countries where traitors should get 20-life and that is one of the countries.We put a coke dealer selling ounces away for 2-5 times longer than traitors and wall street thieves¡­. our priorities are really screwed up¡­.
Oct 23, 20103:49am EDT--
If he should get 20 years, then Bush and Cheney should get 50 years for the treason they perpetrated against America, and another 50 years for the war crimes they committed around the world.
Oct 23, 20105:05am EDT--
If he did nothing more than con Chinese agents out of 70 grand and ¡°conspire to communicate¡±, and then never got any secrets to pass along . . ., there must be more to this story for him to have gotten a prison sentence at all. Wassup?
Oct 23, 20106:20am EDT--
