South China coast battens down as super typhoon nears
2010-10-21 10:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Ports and oil terminals in Hong Kong and southern China shut down operations on Thursday, forcing tankers to anchor offshore to ride out one of the biggest typhoons to threaten the South China coast in years.
53,000 fishing vessels had returned to port, while on the tropical resort island of Hainan, vulnerable to heavy flooding, as many as 200,000 people had been evacuated from low-lying areas along with another 150,000 from the southeastern coastal province of Fujian, the official Xinhua news agency said.
"The storm surge could be so devastating that buildings, docks, villages and cities could be destroyed by it," Bai Yiping, director of South China Sea Forecasting Center of the State Oceanic Administration was quoted as saying by Xinhua.
Typhoon Megi, which killed 19 people in the Philippines, looked set to make landfall on Saturday east of Hong Kong, one of the world's most crowded cities and a key trade and finance hub.
"If we are hit directly it will cause a very serious impact to Hong Kong," said Lai Tung-kwok, a security bureau official.
Cyclonic storms, known as typhoons in Asia, usually threaten between May and September when sea waters are at their warmest.
"At present we estimate its (wind) intensity at around 175 kilometers per hour," Lee Tsz-cheung, a senior scientific officer, told Reuters. "We still cannot rule out the possibility of Megi intensifying further."
) predicted the storm would weaken and make landfall between Hong Kong and Zhangzhou, to the east of the former British colony.
Major shipping ports in southern China, including Shenzhen and Zhuhai, which funnel a flood of goods worldwide from the manufacturing powerhouse of the Pearl River Delta, were closed on Thursday according to shipping sources, bringing possible temporary disruptions to Christmas orders being shipped overseas.
Meanwhile, five of Hong Kong's main oil products terminals on Tsing Yi island were closed ahead of the storm, an official with shipping and logistics agency GAC said.
Oil platforms in the eastern part of the South China Sea were evacuated on Wednesday, a source said. Asia's top oil refiner, China's Sinopec Corp, suspended some small volumes of fuel loading destined for Hong Kong, a source said.
"Tankers are leaving and going for anchorage," he said.
The eastern coast of the South China Sea produces around a quarter of China's offshore oil production.
Neighboring Taiwan warned shipping of high winds and strong waves. A ship sank in the Taiwan Strait earlier this week, with one person on board killed.
Typhoons usually weaken significantly after making landfall in China, but sometimes do a u-turn and regain strength from the warm sea water to threaten once again.
(Reporting by James Pomfret in Hong Kong and John Mair in Manila, additional reporting by Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Editing by Nick Macfie)
