European shares fall after China's rate hike
2010-10-19 00:53:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares fell on Tuesday after China announced a surprise rise in interest rates, raising fears of a slowdown in global growth and pushing miners lower.
index of top shares closed down 0.5 percent at 1,082.96 points. The index had risen since late Friday after U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke hinted more monetary stimulus was on the way.
China's central bank surprised with its first increase in interest rates in nearly three years, a move that reflects concern about resurgent asset prices and could mark the start of a more aggressive phase of monetary tightening in the world's fastest-growing major economy.
The China rates news made investors nervous, Philippe Gijsels, head of research at BNP Paribas Fortis Global Markets in Brussels, said.
"It is now a tug of war between China taking liquidity out the market and the Federal Reserve putting liquidity back in possibly through quantitative easing. It is difficult to predict whether this is the start of a market reversal," he added.
Mining stocks, which have performed well on China's economic growth, slipped as copper tumbled. The STOXX Europe 600 Basic Materials .SXPP fell 2.5 percent, with Xstrata XTA.L also hit by mixed quarterly output figures.
), Infineon (
Meanwhile, British defense firm Babcock (
) slipped 4.8 percent after British Prime Minister David Cameron outlined the extent of defense budget cuts, while BAE Systems (
"Industrials and financials are strong and there's money coming into the market. Sentiment is better among the Greek banks, with EFG Eurobank EFGr.AT being able to use some of the Greek bonds as collateral," Colin McLean, managing director at fund manager SVM in Edinburgh, said.
), Societe Generale (
According to Thomson Reuters StarMine data, the banking sector .SX7P has one of the highest one-year forward earnings growth at 48.7 percent compared with the STOXX 600 .STOXX index at 19.9 percent.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index was down 0.7 percent, Germany's DAX
was 0.4 percent lower and France's CAC 40
(Additional reporting by Brian Gorman; Editing by Erica Billingham)
