Q+A: Why the jitters about China's rare earths exports?
2010-10-25 09:03:00.0
(Reuters) - China's dominance of rare earths used in high-tech products has aroused growing international attention after reports that the government has been choking off shipments, possibly out of political pique.
WHY ARE CHINA'S RARE EARTHS IMPORTANT?
The computer you're possibly reading this on almost certainly contains rare earths, a set of 17 minerals with magnetic, luminescent and other properties that make them useful in hard drives, magnets, lasers and other gadgets important in computing, clean energy and military applications.
China produces about 97 percent of the world's rare earths, and that means its policies in the sector ripple across the world. China mined about 120,000 tonnes in 2008.
It has about 36 percent of the world's known exploitable reserves of rare earths. Since the 1990s, Chinese miners and processors have massively expanded production while foreign competitors in the United States and elsewhere have shut down.
China's dominance has been helped by state support, together with relatively low wages and loose regulation of environmental damage caused by mining and processing rare earths.
HAS CHINA BEEN BLOCKING EXPORTS?
Reports in the New York Times have said that China cut some shipments of rare earths to Japan, possibly out of anger over a sea territory dispute.
China does not have a history of using its economic sway as a blunt political weapon, and nor does it have many resources it can withhold. Perhaps that is changing.
The difficulties some foreign purchasers have had may have arisen from China's stricter enforcement of export quotas and related measures, not out of pressure for political ends, said Gareth Hatch, the founding principal of Technology Metals Research, an Illinois-based company that follows the sector.
China has said it has been alarmed to see its rare earths reserves being mined so voraciously and then sold abroad at prices that it says do not reflect the metals' real importance and the environmental cost of processing them.
That push to control exports has been stoked by China's efforts in green technology, where rare earths can be used to make more efficient batteries, wind turbines and other technology.
"I have heard of a handful of consumers of rare earths outside of China have had a challenge acquiring certain materials -- samarium would be one, used in permanent magnets; compounds of lanthanum and cerium would be others -- used in a variety of applications," Hatch wrote in an email.
"But this has been driven by the traders not wanting to ship lower value light rare earths, in favor of the heavier, more-valuable stuff. Most other folks I've spoken to have not mentioned any issues, beyond grumbling about the price," he wrote.
WHAT DOES CHINA WANT TO DO WITH ITS RARE EARTHS?
Restricting exports will force foreign companies to buy more of the completed products containing rare earths from China until other countries increase their own production. Beijing's quotas do not apply to finished products.
WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS AND WHAT COULD HAPPEN?
China's push has ignited economic and geo-political jitters.
One worry is that Beijing's chokehold on exports could hurt foreign companies and drive up international prices.
Industry players will be waiting to find out what quotas Beijing will set in place next year and beyond, and also want a finer sense of how the quotas will work.
Mining outside China that offers access to rare earths could benefit from this push, including in the United States, Vietnam, South Africa, Australia and Canada.
(Sources: Reuters; Gareth Hatch, Technology Metals Research; U.S. Government Accountability Office, "Rare Earth Materials in the Defense Supply Chain"; John Seaman, "Rare Earths and Clean Energy"; U.S. Congressional Research Service, "Rare Earth Elements: The Global Supply Chain")
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ken Wills and Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°China produces about 97 percent of the world¡¯s rare earths¡­China¡¯s dominance has been helped by state support¡­¡± Protectionism at its finest. What is good for the goose, is good for the gander.
Oct 26, 20107:51am EDT--
Mining rare earths in the US ended because domestic mining operations could not compete with China. In ¡°sending jobs overseas¡± and relying on an undependable source the US compromised it¡¯s self interests, economically and in the area of national security.
Mining rare earths in the US ended because domestic mining operations could not compete with China. In ¡°sending jobs overseas¡± and relying on an undependable source the US compromised it¡¯s self interests, economically and in the area of national security.
Fortunately this can be reversed by some strategic planning. Would love to see China¡¯s heavy-handed actions result in a more open market and development of viable alternatives.
Oct 26, 20102:31pm EDT--
The one small item the author forgot to mention is that in joining the WTO China agreed not to place export quotas on these elements so now is setting itself up nicely to lose another WTO case. China can¡¯t just put aside whatever WTO commitments it decides because now it seems to be in their best interest.
Oct 26, 201010:24pm EDT--
