China says in no rush to talk politics with Taiwan
2010-10-20 05:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China is in no rush to begin talks with historic rival Taiwan over sensitive military or political issues, Beijing's top man in charge of policy toward the self-ruled island was quoted as saying on Wednesday.
Wang Yi, head of China's Taiwan Affairs Office, told overseas Chinese in New York that promoting economic ties with Taiwan was still the priority, state news agency Xinhua said.
"For the time being complex issues of politics or the military cannot be talked about, but various kinds of political dialogue can be opened to increase understanding," Xinhua cited Wang as saying.
"What is important is to seek and maintain the stable development of relations, for only then can setbacks be avoided," he added. "The focus for the time being and to come is still to deepen economic cooperation."
While China has never renounced the use of force to bring the democratic island under its control, the two have signed a series of landmark trade and tourism deals since the election of the China-friend Ma Ying-jeou as Taiwan president in 2008.
Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party has said the two sides must trust each other more before seeking agreements on thorny political or military matters.
Reflecting that position, Taiwan Premier Wu Den-yih said in a statement on Wednesday Ma could not consider meeting Chinese President Hu Jintao as the two sides "still haven't accumulated enough mutual trust."
China offered last week to open talks on military issues with Taiwan in a move that could cool a potential flashpoint in the Asia-Pacific region and help the warming ties, but it drew a cool reaction from the island.
Wang said that forces seeking the island's formal independence remained a threat to peace and stability, an apparent reference to feisty opposition parties which favor setting up a Republic of Taiwan, which China strongly opposes.
That opposition is running a strong campaign for five pivotal seats in local elections next month, with results seen as a precursor for 2012 presidential race results.
If they are not "effectively and completely controlled then it will be hard to basically stabilize the situation in the Taiwan Strait, and relations ... may run the risk of stalling or going backward," Wang added.
"There's definitely a sense of urgency to get this thing going," said Raymond Wu, managing director of Taipei-based political risk consultancy e-telligence
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Additional reporting by Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Editing by Robert Birsel)
