Senate unlikely to follow House on yuan
2010-10-25 07:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The Senate is unlikely to take up pending China currency legislation following a weekend promise by the Group of 20 economic powers to shun currency devaluations for trade advantage, analysts said on Sunday.
Congressional elections will be held in the United States on November 2, and only a few weeks are planned for a post-election session in which Congress has to tackle major spending and income tax issues.
But pressure to act has been mounting from some lawmakers and U.S. manufacturers hurt by China's trade advantages and it has been an issue in some election campaigns in industrial states like Pennsylvania. The G20 agreement buys Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner some time to pursue a diplomatic approach with Beijing over the value of the yuan.
"I think he bought some time with the Congress," said Donald Straszheim, senior managing director for China research at ISI Group in Los Angeles. "The Senate isn't going to take this up in a lame duck session. There is just too much potentially to lose and not enough to gain. They'll leave this until the next Congress."
The November 2 elections will determine which party controls the next Congress, which will be seated in January. Republicans are poised to make big gains and possibly take control of the House. Democrats are likely to retain slim control of the Senate with Republicans expected to pick up a number of seats.
"I don't think they (the Senate) are ever going to take it (the China currency legislation) up," said Paul J. Markowski of Global Strategies-Analysis Group/MES Advisers, a New York consulting group.
Geithner, who met briefly on Sunday with Vice Premier Wang Qishan in eastern China, may have secured some promises from the Chinese to take action on its currency but it will take time, Markowski said.
The main aim of the two days of finance minister talks, which precede a G20 summit in Seoul on November 11-12, was to ease the currency strains that some economists feared could escalate into trade wars.
There was little reaction on Sunday from lawmakers who claim China's yuan is misaligned in value, distorting trade and stealing U.S. jobs.
"We must hold China accountable and stop currency manipulation which hurts Michigan businesses and workers," spokesman Matt Williams said.
A number of international analysts have said threatening China would be counterproductive and Geithner has pursued a more diplomatic approach, trying to convince Beijing it would be in its own best interest to adopt a market-based currency regime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
A flimsy promise on an abstract concept by a loose group of uncommitted G20 members was all that was needed! Wow! Please lie to me some more so I may procrastinate longer. The world economy is gradually debased to the survival level of Chinese peasantry, and the burden of that shameful overpopulation is on us all.
Oct 24, 201012:53am EDT--
I¡¯m not clear on how a global currency would work to the advantage of the more productive and clever. Might just water down everyone¡¯s productivity and seek it¡¯s own level bringing up the lower elements of the economy and diminishing the higher ones. As for the Senate backing away from any truly fair trade activities,,,, How would the top 2% who add no value to anything be able to profit on the efforts and activities of others if fairness were implemented? No one knows this better than politicians who refuse to grasp the concept of ¡°value added¡± because they are not even the game of working and innovating!
Oct 25, 20109:48am EDT--
Mr. Williamson: What worked for a few massively indebted U.S. states with similar interests after the revolutionary war has absolutely no bearing on a modern debate about a global currency. Far from the fact that there is no chance of this happening politically, the economic imbalances this would create would be devastating to certain nations. It¡¯s not even working for the EU let alone the entire world.
Oct 25, 201010:29am EDT--
