Japan rallies against China over disputed islands
2010-10-16 00:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Thousands of protesters marched through Tokyo on Saturday to demonstrate against what they called China's invasion of disputed islands that both countries claim.
This was the second major anti-China rally in Japan since ties between Asia's top economies worsened last month when Japan detained a Chinese trawler captain whose boat collided with Japanese patrol ships near the disputed islands -- called Senkaku in Japan and Diayu in China.
More than 2,000 protesters gathered in Aoyama Park, which is built on what was once a military shooting range, on Saturday afternoon. They marched through the busy Roppongi district to the Chinese Embassy, holding up Japanese flags and shouting slogans.
"The Senkaku islands belong to me and every Japanese. I am angry as our belongings were stolen," said a 23 year-old student, Masato Yoshida.
One of the organizers of the rally was Toshio Tamogami, a former air force chief who was sacked after publishing an essay that argued that Japan was not an aggressor in World War Two.
He also organized an October 3 rally in which around 2,700 people took part, criticizing China and blasting Prime Minister Naoto Kan's handling of the territorial dispute.
Amid the diplomatic row between the two nations, four Japanese citizens employed by construction firm Fujita Corp were detained in China on suspicion of illegally entering a military zone, but they were subsequently released.
Japan and China are trying to arrange a formal summit meeting between the two countries' leaders at the end of October on the sidelines of a regional summit in Vietnam.
Kan and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao both called for better ties at an informal meeting this month, but they also stressed their claims to the uninhabited islands, near potentially huge oil and gas reserves in the East China Sea.
(Reporting by Olivier Fabre and Nobuhiro Kubo; Editing by Alex Richardson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good for Japan! It¡¯s great to see people and nations beginning to stand up and resist china¡¯s bully tactics. china needs to learn that it cannot bully, manipulate, and threaten the international community the same way it bullies, manipulates, and threatens chinese citizens.
Oct 16, 201011:26am EDT--
Study deeper with history before ranting against China. Even Googgle Japan admits those ¡°island¡± rocks are in disputed waters. The Japanese has never formally apologised for their war crimes in WWII and they have a much worse record of bullying other countries.
Oct 16, 201012:55pm EDT--
China obviously made mistake to wake Japanese citizen up, in term of national security, by strong arm action such as detaining four unrelated Japanese and rare earth ¡®embargo¡¯ in retaliation. For more than 60 years, Japanese haven¡¯t taken primary responsibility for their security and relied too heavily on U.S. They may fight without gloves after this. We never forget Pearl harbor and Kamikaze attack.
China obviously made mistake to wake Japanese citizen up, in term of national security, by strong arm action such as detaining four unrelated Japanese and rare earth ¡®embargo¡¯ in retaliation. For more than 60 years, Japanese haven¡¯t taken primary responsibility for their security and relied too heavily on U.S. They may fight without gloves after this. We never forget Pearl harbor and Kamikaze attack.
Once they get really angry, they would be very tough to beat for China. This time, China cannot use nuke. I don¡¯t want to argue over their land dispute, but as a diplomatic game, China did a big mistake and failed to value the situation for their future.
China shouldn¡¯t have done it. They should let ¡¯sleeping Samurais¡¯ sleeping for ever¡­
Oct 16, 20101:27pm EDT--
