Senate unlikely to follow House on yuan
2010-10-24 14:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The Senate is unlikely to take up pending China currency legislation following a weekend promise by the Group of 20 economic powers to shun currency devaluations for trade advantage, analysts said on Sunday.
Congressional elections will be held in the United States on November 2, and only a few weeks are planned for a post-election session in which Congress has to tackle major spending and income tax issues.
But pressure to act has been mounting from some lawmakers and U.S. manufacturers hurt by China's trade advantages and it has been an issue in some election campaigns in industrial states like Pennsylvania. The G20 agreement buys Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner some time to pursue a diplomatic approach with Beijing over the value of the yuan.
"I think he bought some time with the Congress," said Donald Straszheim, senior managing director for China research at ISI Group in Los Angeles. "The Senate isn't going to take this up in a lame duck session. There is just too much potentially to lose and not enough to gain. They'll leave this until the next Congress."
The November 2 elections will determine which party controls the next Congress, which will be seated in January. Republicans are poised to make big gains and possibly take control of the House. Democrats are likely to retain slim control of the Senate with Republicans expected to pick up a number of seats.
"I don't think they (the Senate) are ever going to take it (the China currency legislation) up," said Paul J. Markowski of Global Strategies-Analysis Group/MES Advisers, a New York consulting group.
Geithner, who met briefly on Sunday with Vice Premier Wang Qishan in eastern China, may have secured some promises from the Chinese to take action on its currency but it will take time, Markowski said.
The main aim of the two days of finance minister talks, which precede a G20 summit in Seoul on November 11-12, was to ease the currency strains that some economists feared could escalate into trade wars.
There was little reaction on Sunday from lawmakers who claim China's yuan is misaligned in value, distorting trade and stealing U.S. jobs.
"We must hold China accountable and stop currency manipulation which hurts Michigan businesses and workers," spokesman Matt Williams said.
A number of international analysts have said threatening China would be counterproductive and Geithner has pursued a more diplomatic approach, trying to convince Beijing it would be in its own best interest to adopt a market-based currency regime.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The US has been trying to get China to revalue the yuan upward since Bush was in office with no avail. 80% of the manufacturing jobs have gone to China, so now we will wait longer until they are all gone. The time to put tariffs on all imports is now, not later.
Oct 24, 20103:24pm EDT--
Threatening China would be counter-productive? What utter nonsense. They are hostile and want to dominate our market whether we like it or not. It looks like they are bribing our Senators to help them. Our biggest challenge for reform is to fundamentally restructure our election system to open up to more than two parties and to make it illegal to donate to more than ONE candidate in any race. That is, to make it illegal to buy the Government.
Oct 24, 20103:35pm EDT--
The Senate refuses to make us a laughing stock of the world,
The Senate refuses to make us a laughing stock of the world,
or make the currency issue an ¡°Economic Iraq¡±. The American Congress has already lost credibility and respect from the world. It gives the world that we act like spoiled brats that bully, and think that others should be grateful.
Oct 24, 20104:16pm EDT--
