China leaders grapple with rifts threatening growth
2010-10-15 05:57:00.0
(Reuters) - China's leaders will seek ways to narrow the economic and social rifts threatening long-term growth at a conclave which could also signal who will succeed them in running the world's most populous country.
The ruling Communist Party's Central Committee meeting in Beijing will set key parts of the next five-year development plan starting in 2011, which President Hu Jintao has said must promote "inclusive growth," and encourage more domestic household demand to shore up GDP growth as external demand flags.
That will not be easy for an economy grown used to expanding on the back of cheap labor and exports. Workers and farmers will need higher wages, improved welfare and more affordable housing, making greater demands on the government to deliver.
"China has entered a different stage now," said Nicholas Bequelin, a researcher on China for Human Rights Watch, an international watchdog group.
"Now we're getting into the difficult part when it's much more difficult for the Party to satisfactorily respond to popular demand."
The four-day meeting in west Beijing, which started on Friday, may also approve promotions to firm up officials' prospects in an emerging leadership to succeed Hu and Premier Wen Jiabao.
Much of the guessing in Beijing is about whether Vice President Xi Jinping will be promoted to the Vice Chairmanship of the Central Military Commission, cementing his status as favored successor to Hu, who gives up the presidency in early 2013.
But whatever their eventual pecking order, China's emerging leaders are likely to stick to the government's current formula of refocusing the economy on domestic demand and avoiding bold political experiments.
"In a way, all these fifth-generation leaders are groomed as a group, as a cohort," said Bo Zhiyue, a researcher at the National University of Singapore's East Asian Institute, referring to the next generation of leaders such as Xi.
IT'S THE ECONOMY, COMRADE
But there are no signs the Party meeting will head down that path. The government's vehement condemnation of the Nobel Peace Prize for dissident Liu Xiaobo has shown how far the Party is from embracing the democratic changes some critics want.
"Significant political reform is not on the agenda," said Li Datong, a political commentator and former newspaper editor in Beijing. "Especially at this time, they'll be extra careful."
China's one-party elite will be focused on securing unity to meet economic challenges, said Wang Zhengxu, a Chinese politics expert at the University of Nottingham's China Policy Institute.
China's next five-year plan "will reflect how deeply the Party wants to change the economic model, toward more environmentally friendly ways of production, more internal consumption instead of export dependence, and toward more equitable growth, reducing income inequality," Wang said.
China is edging past Japan to become the world's second biggest economy, and keeping growth aloft will remain a priority.
But generating the more balanced, domestically sustained growth the leadership wants will demand a shift in priorities from provincial and local officials, often more worried about keeping up GDP rates to generate revenue, jobs and kudos.
Last month, Hu said the country should "achieve inclusive growth and truly address the social problems that have emerged in economic development."
"We must accelerate their integration into cities," China's Minister of Agriculture, Han Changfu, said this week.
This five-year plan, and the next one from 2016 to 2020, will also include targets to cut the chief greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, emitted for each dollar of economic activity. That will also be a demanding job, say officials.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Yesterday I was reading People¡¯s Daily blog and there was, for once, a critical *opinion* column (obviously authorised!) on Yuan currency debacle with US. I forgot Central Committee meeting was conv ening ov er the weekend ¨C reason for the critical commentary which dealt with galloping inflation and retrenchment across the macro front. Bottom line, the opinion column demanded immediate revaluation of Yuan to protect employment of the rural migrants¡­and on and on. Inevitably mainland China finds itself at cross-roads of a financial bubble as a by-product of its policy to peg the Yuan to dollar! In fact, US/Fed is literally managing monetary policy of mainland China. Chinese leadership will have serious q¡¯s to answer during the weekend meeting.
Oct 15, 20104:48am EDT--
