Japan PM: desirable for China to free Nobel winner
2010-10-14 04:37:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sat, Oct 9 2010
Mon, Oct 4 2010
Sat, Oct 9 2010
Tue, Oct 5 2010
Mon, Oct 4 2010
Thu  EDT
Ties between Asia's top economies worsened after Japan held a Chinese trawler captain whose boat collided with Japanese patrol ships near disputed islets, but signs of improvement followed recent informal talks between Kan and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao.
"It is desirable for him to be released," Kan told a parliamentary committee, referring to Liu.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu did not directly comment on Kan's remarks, but repeated that China viewed Liu as a criminal and did not welcome attention on his case.
"Some foreign politicians and governments have supported awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo. I do wonder what their intent is. Could it be that they object to China's path of development, object to China's political system?" Ma said.
The award has strained China's ties with Norway, home to the Nobel Peace Prize committee, even though the government there has no say in who receives it. China has canceled several meetings with Norwegian officials since last week.
Managing ties with China, which is edging past Japan to become the world's second-biggest economy, poses a headache for Kan. Japan needs good relations with its biggest trading partner but Kan has already come under fire domestically for appearing to cave in to Beijing's demands by releasing the trawler captain.
China, infuriated by the Nobel Peace Prize that was awarded this week to jailed dissident Liu, has loudly criticized foreign governments over the issue.
Japan greeted the award by stressing the importance of respecting human rights, but unlike some countries, has not specifically called for Liu's release.
Japan and China are trying to arrange a formal summit meeting between the two countries' leaders at end-October on the sidelines of a regional summit in Vietnam, Japan's Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshito Sengoku said.
Japan, China and South Korea may also hold a trilateral summit there, Japanese media reported.
Kan and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao both called for better ties at an informal meeting this month but they also stressed their claims to the uninhabited islands in the East China Sea, called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China.
The recent bilateral row underscored the fragility of ties, plagued by bitter Chinese attitudes toward Japan's wartime occupation and Japan's jitters about China's military buildup.
(Reporting by Yoko Kubota; Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Nobel Prize committee must have used up all their credibility by now. Obama¡¯s peace prize, and now this. What next?
Oct 14, 20109:41am EDT--
