China's SAIC does not rule out taking part in GM IPO
2010-10-15 03:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China's top automaker SAIC Motor Corp (
) does not rule out the possibility of investing in General Motors' GM.UL initial public offering, the chairman of the Chinese automaker said.
When asked by reporters at a conference in Shanghai about SAIC's interest in the GM IPO, SAIC's Chairman Hu Maoyuan said the company was undecided but would not rule out taking a stake.
"We will study and pay close attention to it, and yes, this is such a big IPO, and GM is moving to a very positive direction. I believe demand in the U.S. will pick up as the economy recovers," Hu said on Friday.
"We are positive on GM, we believe the restructuring is very good for GM. We can see that it is moving to a healthy direction of development," he said.
In September, sources told Reuters that SAIC had reached out to GM to explore the prospect of taking a stake in the U.S. automaker. The two companies have a 13-year old relationship.
"SAIC and GM have had a solid partnership all these years. Many expect SAIC to take a stake in GM when it goes public again," said Huatai Securities analyst Chen Liang.
"An equity tie will bring the partnership to the next level and GM could possibly step up its technology input in the joint venture," he said referring to Shanghai GM, GM's flagship car venture with SAIC in the Chinese city.
The GM IPO has been closely watched both because of its expected scale and because of the involvement of the U.S. government, which is looking to the landmark stock offering to reduce its nearly 61 percent stake in the automaker.
No dollar amount has been set for the IPO and that will not be determined until GM files the final prospectus in early November, sources told Reuters.
Singapore-based GIC GIC.UL and Temasek Holdings TEM.UL, Kuwait Investment Authority, Qatar Investment Authority and the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority were all approached as part of those meetings, one of the sources said.
The firm, which runs vehicle manufacturing ventures with General Motors and Volkswagen (
), sold 324,831 vehicles last month, it said in a statement to the stock exchange on Monday.
China, which overtook the United States as the world's biggest auto market last year, has been a major bright spot as the global industry struggles to recover from a steep downturn.
SAIC shares were up 1.2 percent at 0650 GMT, underperforming a broader market, which was up about 2.9 percent.
(Additional reporting by Fang Yan in Beijing; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Dhara Ranasinghe)
