Fast yuan rise will be short-lived: report
2010-10-18 06:38:00.0
(Reuters) - The accelerated yuan appreciation of recent weeks will not last long because China's trade surplus will soon peak, an official state newspaper reported on Monday.
An article in the overseas edition of the People's Daily said there had not been sufficient improvement in the economy at home or abroad to justify a speedy rise in the exchange rate.
China freed the yuan from a 23-month peg to the dollar in June and has let it gain about 2.8 percent against the dollar since then, with most of its rise coming after August.
The article cited Wang Jun, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, as saying that China should not and would not bow to foreign pressure.
"If the yuan rises quickly under joint pressure from the United States and some other nations, that will mean China is manipulating its currency, won't it?" the report cited Wang as saying.
Wang's phrase appeared to be a reference to a decision that the Treasury Department had been due to make last week about whether to classify China as a currency manipulator. The United States opted to delay that decision until late November after U.S. congressional midterm elections and a G20 summit are out of the way.
The People's Daily said that pressure on the yuan to rise would soon decline because China's trade surplus was topping out. It dipped to $16.9 billion in September, a five-month low.
In a separate commentary, Bu Deying, a researcher at a state economic forecasting institute played down the prospects of the yuan soon becoming an international reserve currency, and said China should stick to its current trade settings.
"Our country does not possess the means to make the renminbi an international reserve currency at this stage," Bu, an economist at the State Information Center, wrote in the China Economic Times.
The renminbi is another name for China's yuan currency.
"We must still use non-monetary policies to encourage some exports and limit some imports to ensure balanced development of the domestic economy and constant industry upgrading," Bu wrote.
(Reporting by Langi Chiang and Simon Rabinovitch; Additional reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The official rhetoric vacillates from ¡°now we are rich and powerful¡± to ¡°now we are still poor and vulnerable¡±, going from one to the other strictly as a matter of circumstantial convenience. What really perspires is a great insecurity in front of all mechanisms of free market economics, and the Middle-Kingdom is congenitally opposed to them since such mechanisms bring about uncertainties. Other than being a balm over this national insecurity,they haven¡¯t yet figured out a real use for their massive reserves in foreign currencies. How pathetic!
Oct 17, 201012:34am EDT--
China is not yet rich on a per capita base even through it is now reckoned as a force because it is the world¡¯s second largest economy. From the US point of view, China YMB should appreciate 20% or more. This can be confirmed by the Purchase Price Parity GDP on the US Government¡¯s CIA website. Nevertheless China has a lot of problems. The fact it is already consuming 50% of the world¡¯s Iron ore and 40% of the world¡¯s copper ore means growth will slow down considerably in the median term. China must cut back its natural resource consumption to be on par with its share of the world¡¯s population.
Oct 18, 20105:39am EDT--
China¡¯s re-evaluating the yuan is not likely to help middle America. Consumer prices will rise proportional to the yuan increase. Overall exports will only rise slightly, since our exports to China is far less than imports (rough 1:4 ratio). Agricultural exports and raw materials will probably increase somewhat. Capital goods compete primarily with Europe (especially Germany), Japan and Korea. All these regions will likely find their own currencies revalue similarly to the $. So there will be no relative advantage except in specific situations. Consumer goods will increase, higher end brands especially, shared again as above. The greater Chinese purchasing power will increase overall purchases and we will gain marginally together with other countries. However, the job impact on middle America will be far far less than the % currency change. The above outline shows that our increases will come from segments where large companies benefit, large farmers, Caterpillar, GE, Tiffany, for example. All these companies mostly use foreign suppliers, so there is not much direct $ flow to U.S. suppliers. In sum, even a 20% re-valuation of the yuan will not yield many jobs due to resurgence of 2nd tier suppliers. Catapillar and GE may hire some new union workers for final assembly. There will be some more back office white collar jobs. Some restaurants and local services may see increase in business. But it is not likely to solve our middle class jobs dilema. And for most people everything will cost more. Are we thinking things through? or am I missing something?
Oct 18, 201010:52am EDT--
