Obama waiver of China sanction draws questions
2010-10-13 18:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Sun, Oct 10 2010
Tue, Oct 12 2010
Tue, Oct 12 2010
Mon, Oct 11 2010
Mon, Oct 11 2010
Wed  EDT
The waiver has put the White House on the defensive amid questions about its timing, who requested it and any unannounced agenda related to the anti-China sanctions overall.
Obama said on Friday he was lifting the curb in the U.S. national interest. His decision, sent to House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, cleared the way for the U.S. government, on a case-by-case basis, to issue "temporary munitions export licenses" for C-130s to be used in oil spill response operations at sea.
A senior administration official who asked not to be named said the waiver was granted at the request of an unidentified European company that operates the aircraft, a four-engine turboprop military transport. The request was part of contingency planning so that the planes could be landed in China if necessary for oil spill work, the official said.
Various C-130 models are flown by European countries, including Britain, Denmark, France, Italy, the Netherlands and Norway.
As much as 600,000 metric tons of heavy crude could have been spilled into China's northeast coastal waters after an explosion at the port of Dalian on July 16, the environmental advocacy group Greenpeace has said.
Several U.S. China watchers called into question the official explanation for Obama's C-130 waiver.
"The whole rationale for this thing makes no sense at all in my opinion," said Larry Wortzel, a member of the congressionally mandated U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission and a retired Army colonel who served two tours as a military attache in China.
He said it only made sense if it were meant to set the stage for a meeting that took place on Monday in Hanoi between U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates and Liang Guanglie, his Chinese counterpart.
Otherwise, China has planes of its own that are similar to the C-130, are used for fire-fighting and could be equipped to spray chemical dispersants in an oil cleanup, said Wortzel.
He called Obama's waiver an "ill-considered and foolish way" to try to defuse Chinese anger over U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
Gates has made rebuilding military ties with Beijing a priority after China cut them off in January in protest at U.S. plans for a weapons package worth up to $6.4 billion for Taiwan, regarded by China as a rogue province.
The meeting in Hanoi, at an Asian defense forum, marked the first between Gates and his counterpart since Beijing imposed the freeze on military ties. Since then, Asian nations have appeared to be moving to ease the risk of any showdown over territorial disputes in the South China Sea, where concern has risen over China's growing military reach and assertiveness.
Shirley Kan, a specialist in Asian security at the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, said the administration should provide more details on why the waiver was necessary "and why at this time."
She questioned why the C-130s would have to land in China with many other potential refueling places available in other nearby countries. The C-130 is capable of using even unprepared runways for takeoffs and landings, according to Lockheed Martin, the Pentagon's No. 1 supplier by sales.
The U.S. Congress adopted additional sanctions against China after its bloody 1999 crackdown on dissidents at Beijing's Tiananmen Square. The legislation formalized suspensions of export licensing for items on a U.S. munitions list, including the C-130.
The legislation included waiver authority, allowing the president to end a sanction if he determined it was in the U.S. national interest to do so or that China's progress on human rights warranted a change.
The United States has pressed Europe to stick to sanctions on high-tech items with potential military applications as well, pending changes in China's human-rights record.
Peter Simmons, a spokesman for Lockheed Martin's C-130 program in Marietta, Georgia, said the company was unaware of any plans to use the planes in an oil spill cleanup near China.
He said, however, the C-130 had been used to spray chemical dispersants in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill.
Lockheed had no knowledge of the reasons behind Obama's waiver other than what was contained in his letter to Congress, Simmons said.
(Additional reporting by Alister Bull in Washington; Editing by Gary Hill)
