We must keep politics out of trade, China tells U.S.
2010-10-14 13:00:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the United States must nurture their relationship and ensure trade and economic issues do not become politicized, Chinese Vice Premier Wang Qishan was quoted as saying on Thursday.
"The two nations should further enhance understanding and mutual trust to avoid politicizing economic and trade issues," Wang told former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright in Beijing, the official Xinhua news agency said.
U.S.-China relations are "moving forward through difficulties," Xinhua quoted him as saying.
Pressure has grown over the value of China's currency, the yuan <CNY=CFXS, which was released from a de facto peg to the dollar in June and has been gradually appreciating in the past few weeks.
The Treasury Department is due in the coming days to decide in a semi-annual report on exchange rate practices whether to formally label China a currency manipulator, a designation that would anger Beijing.
Wang added that China would not reverse its policy of opening up its economy and said the investment environment would be improved, Xinhua said. There has been concern among some foreign businesses that China's reforms have stalled.
Earlier this week, China canceled trade talks in Shanghai with a Norwegian minister after the Norwegian Nobel Committee awarded the Peace Prize to jailed dissident Liu Xiaobo.
(Reporting by Jason Subler; editing by Andrew Dobbie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Chinese should not soften their tone..the U.S. is a bully and no longer that power. ¡°the worst is to come.¡± China is not weak, however, it must not think hard to play with the United States..just go. As if the United States has started to deal with the idea that it is falling apart. I feel sad when I see the Great China sometimes reacts respectfully to U.S. irresponsible acts, threats or idiots¡­ China has proven to the world it is a great country and can tell the U.S. what others want to say¡± we know the U.S. and their intensions and ¡¯smart¡¯ ways.¡± China has overtaken Japan to become the world¡¯s second largest economy, and the world hopes it kicks the United States and go to stars soon.
Oct 14, 20103:01pm EDT--
¡°China and the United States must nurture their relationship and ensure trade and economic issues do not become politicized.¡± This is why China has a 70% localization policy, that is restricting foreign investment in China. 70% labor and materials, must come from China. But, at the same time they won¡¯t afford other Nations that same 70% localization. If America insisted that any Chinese goods entering America, 70% of those goods must be made by American workers, the we would see people put back to work and economic prosperity return. It¡¯s not a tariff, but 70% localization, the same as China has. They live on a one way street, they take but don¡¯t what to give. And other Nations are STUPID for not insisting on a 70% localization, like China has. This is the primary reason why America¡¯s companies can¡¯t compete in China and it must end or it must be adopted by other Countries.
Oct 14, 20103:12pm EDT--
And this after China just cancelled talks with Norway (about, guess what¡­ gasp! economics!) because of Xiaobo winning the Nobel. What a country!
Oct 14, 20104:04pm EDT--
