Asia stiffens resolve to resist capital inflows
2010-10-12 14:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Thailand slapped a tax on foreign investment in government debt on Tuesday, Japan said it could intervene anew to weaken the yen and China again talked down the prospects of a faster rise in the yuan.
After the failure of a weekend International Monetary Fund meeting to defuse escalating foreign exchange tensions, Asian governments are redoubling efforts to resist capital inflows that are boosting their currencies and undercutting the competitiveness of their exporters.
Thailand's cabinet agreed to impose a 15 percent withholding tax on capital gains and interest income from foreign investment in government debt in a bid to curb the baht, which is at its highest since the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
With the dollar hovering near 15-year lows against the yen, Japan said it would wade into the foreign exchange market again if need be, despite widespread disapproval by its peers of a bout of dollar buying last month.
And the People's Bank of China applied the brakes to the yuan by setting a weaker midpoint reference rate for the day's trading, while its foreign exchange arm said currency reform did not equate to yuan appreciation.
China's insistence that the yuan's rise must be gradual is a huge obstacle to the appreciation in Asian exchange rates policymakers say is needed to reduce global imbalances.
It, and other countries, counter that the prospect of the Federal Reserve printing money again will flood the world economy with more liquidity, weaken the dollar and push emerging currencies yet higher as investors search for returns with interest rates in the developed world at record lows.
Minutes released on Tuesday from the Fed's most recent policy-setting meeting showed officials thought the struggling recovery might need further help soon and discussed how best that might be done.
"It is not obvious what the next direction for monetary policy is," David Miles told a conference in Dublin. "We do have a policy tool, quantitative easing, which ... remains a potentially powerful tool and one that we might come to use."
"What we need today is not 'wars' of any kind, but a strong and renewed commitment to confident and resolute cooperation," Trichet said in a speech to the Economic Club of New York.
The announcement by Thailand followed a week after Brazil doubled a tax on foreign portfolio inflows into bonds and some other financial instruments to 4 percent to reduce upward pressure on the real, its currency.
The baht has risen 11 percent this year, the second strongest currency in Asia after the yen, pushed up in part by foreign inflows into Thai assets.
"The G7 reaffirmed that excessive currency moves would hurt stability in the economy and in the financial system ... From this standpoint we will take decisive steps, including intervention, when needed," Noda told a news conference.
With many governments acting against currency appreciation, fears are mounting of a "race to the bottom" that may trigger protectionist trade tariffs that would hobble global growth.
"The financial crisis could escalate into a currency crisis," the China Securities Journal said in a front-page editorial. "There will be no winner.
G20 finance ministers gather in South Korea on October 22-23 to prepare the ground after a largely fruitless flurry of exchanges at the weekend during the International Monetary Fund's meeting.
But, far from advocating faster appreciation to help dampen price pressures, the paper said Beijing would have to control the yuan's rate of climb and refrain from raising interest rates in order to ward off inflows of speculative capital.
"Currency reform does not equate to yuan appreciation. The emphasis is more on the improvement of the currency formation mechanism," the State Administration of Foreign Exchange, an arm of the central bank, said in a report.
(Writing by Alan Wheatley and Mike Peacock; Editing by John Stonestreet and Andrew Hay)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a silly game. China is the problem and we, the U.S., should deal directly with China and fix it or punish them in our market. Driving down the value of the dollar is better than doing nothing but it is not the best solution. We should put tarrifs on all Chinese goods until they stop manipulating their currency, PERIOD. Let them whine. Who cares. This current approach is punishing the rest of the world for what China is doing. That is just wrong.
Oct 12, 201012:56pm EDT--
Despite the risk of protectionist retaliation, I THINK Stock-MD is right. The Dollar is the world currency and its devaluation risks a flight to an alternative currency. Iran suggested using the Euro a few years back. The BRIC countries lead by China are looking for alternatives. So we really can¡¯t go on devaluating the currency. The trade imbalance should work in a way that finds a currency valuation equilibrium. If the currency is kept from adjusting in the free market, tariffs are a natural tool to use to bring the trade into balance. The risk of a trade war with China must be reduced through WTO mechanisms. This is where I¡¯m struggling. If there were WTO mechanisms to do this, why haven¡¯t they been tried already? Is it because the benefit of cheap Chinese goods is greater than the cost of the trade imbalance? Can anyone else comment on this idea?
Oct 12, 20105:05pm EDT--
Stock-MD may very well be right. The devaluation of the world¡¯s currency is affecting more than just China. But if China¡¯s manipulation of its currency isn¡¯t against WTO rules why haven¡¯t we done something about it already? ¡°U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner is due to determine by October 15 whether China is ¡°manipulating¡± its currency to gain an unfair trade advantage.¡± Isn¡¯t this already common knowledge? If their Yuan is pegged against our dollar and our dollar is undergoing devaluation because of a dramatic loss in our money supply, then THEIR currency is being devaluated, too without having the same causality. Their GDP is growing at 8% while ours is at 2%. So theirs should be increasing in value, not decreasing. Furthermore as their currency declines with the Dollar, it puts pressure on other countries to devalue their currencies or face unfair trading conditions. Common sense, right? Lastly, since we have a trade imbalance with China their currency would typically be under pressure to adjust higher. These factors hurt our other trading partners by keeping Chinese goods artificially cheaper. A tariff seems like a natural way to combat this. But if that were the case, wouldn¡¯t we be pursuing this option already? I know the idea of charging a tariff is politically bad since the US promotes free-trade and tariffs are anti-free-trade. But can¡¯t we all see that this is an exceptional situation? Is it because the exact value is hard to calculate? Is it because cheap goods are a greater benefit to us than a truly free market? Can anyone else comment on this?
Oct 12, 20105:35pm EDT--
