China offers Taiwan military dialogue, island wary
2010-10-13 07:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China offered on Wednesday to open talks on military issues with rival Taiwan, a move that could cool a potential flashpoint in the Asia-Pacific region and help warming ties, but it drew a cool reaction from the island.
"We advocate conducting contacts and exchanges on military issues, including the cross-Strait military deployment issue, in a proper way at a proper time," Yang Yi, spokesman for China's Taiwan Affairs Office, told a regular news briefing in Beijing.
"(We will) discuss setting up a cross-Strait security mutual trust system to stabilize the cross-Strait situation and ease military security worries," he added.
China has as many as 1,900 short- and mid-range missiles aimed at Taiwan, defense officials on the island say, and Taiwan has urged China to remove them. Beijing has never renounced the threat of force to bring Taiwan into its fold.
Taiwan Premier Wu Den-yih, however, told parliament that the time was not yet right to discuss disarmament because the two sides needed more trust.
"I'm afraid the time is not ripe," Wu said, according to the semi-official Central News Agency reported.
With elections on the island coming up this year and in 2012, Taiwan officials can be reluctant to rush into talks with China, and risk raising suspicion among voters nervous about the mainland.
Taiwan's stock and currency markets would welcome any reduction of military tension as a sign of long-term stability for growth in trade ties between the island's $416 billion export-led economy and powerhouse China.
Military suspicions remain deep on both sides. Taiwan, beginning to lag in the balance of power, has upset China by asking the United States for sales of advanced weapons systems.
A Taiwan government official said on Wednesday trade issues would still top Taiwan's agenda in talks with China.
But analysts say Beijing is getting anxious to discuss political matters, having put them to the side for now to concentrate on less contentious problems. The two sides plan to meet again before the end of the year.
"Before the next presidential election, the status quo with China will be an optimal choice for the ruling party," said Liu Yi-jiun, an international affairs professor at Foguang University in Taiwan.
(Reporting by Ralph Jennings in Taipei and Huang Yan in Beijing; Editing by Ben Blanchard)
