Chinese seek nod from Ottawa for Potash Corp bid
2010-10-08 14:53:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Sinochem (
) won't bid for Potash Corp (
) unless the Canadian government gives a positive signal that it would approve a deal led by the state-owned chemicals group, a source familiar with the matter said on Friday.
Earlier on Friday, the Globe and Mail reported that Sinochem is willing to make extraordinary concessions to both the federal and Saskatchewan governments to ease concerns over Chinese ownership of the Canadian resource company. The report cited sources close to Sinochem.
Officials in Potash Corp's home province of Saskatchewan have voiced concerns about Chinese ownership of the world's largest fertilizer supplier. The government, which relies on the company for billions of dollars in royalty revenue, fears the Chinese would work to hold down prices for the agricultural input that the country needs to feed its growing population.
For that reason, the Chinese government has put pressure on its state-owned industries to lead a challenge to BHP Billiton's (
) $39 billion hostile bid, which Potash has rejected as inadequate. Sinochem is seen as the most likely enterprise to do so.
New York-listed shares of Potash Corp rose 3.2 percent on Friday to $145.45 on a bullish data on the U.S. corn crop. The shares are well above BHP's $130-a-share bid, suggesting investors believe a richer offer will eventually surface, or that BHP itself will sweeten its proposal.
Aware of the concerns over Chinese ownership, Sinochem would not consider participating in a bidding group for Potash Corp unless the Canadian government welcomed such a move, according to the Reuters source, who was not authorized to speak on the record.
To proceed, Sinochem would need assurances from the prime minister's office that Ottawa will fairly consider a Chinese-led deal, the Globe and Mail reported.
Among the concessions being discussed is a "golden share" in Potash Corp that would give the government a veto over any major changes in the fertilizer maker's operations.
Legal experts say a golden share would make a Chinese-led bid more palpable to regulators, but it was only a matter of time before Canada would have grounds to exercise it. If Ottawa chose to do so, bilateral tensions are likely to surface, they say.
"Since this is an essential commodity for food security, it is inevitable that the rights attached to the golden share will one day be invoked," said Darryl Levitt a lawyer with Macleod Dixon in Toronto. "If Canada exercises its rights ... it could harm trade and bilateral relations between the two countries."
A second possible concession that Sinochem may make is a binding mechanism to allow Canada to enforce remedies if the new owners fail to live up to their commitments, said the Globe and Mail report.
The Chinese company would also promise to continue to sell Potash Corp.'s production to China through the Canpotex marketing arm, the report said.
BHP has signaled a desire to market Potash Corp's output independently rather through Canpotex, the overseas potash marketing arm of Potash Corp, Mosaic Co (
That's a concern for Saskatchewan officials, who fear the demise of Canpotex would drive down global prices for a commodity that generates billions of dollars in royalty revenue for the province.
Conversely, there is concern that any bid led by a Chinese state-owned enterprise would work toward keeping prices as low as possible to assure a cheap supply for China, one of the biggest potash consumers in the world.
A golden share might ease Saskatchewan's concerns about Chinese ownership, but may not be enough to win political approval, said David McGrane, a professor of political studies at University of Saskatchewan.
The Saskatchewan Party seems to be quite against a Chinese bid," said McGrane, referring to Premier Brad Wall's ruling party.
the Industry Canada Act, which stipulates that a takeover has to offer a "net benefit" to the country.
"We are currently in the process of formulating our recommendations to Industry Canada and won't be commenting further at this time," the spokesman said in an e-mail.
(Reporting by Michael Erman in New York, Euan Rocha and Pav Jordan in Toronto, Rod Nickel in Winnipeg and David Ljunggren in Ottawa; Editing by Frank McGurty)
