Geithner sees no risk of currency war
2010-10-13 03:14:00.0
Track China's Leaders
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Wed, Oct 13 2010
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner speaks on U.S. economic policy at the Brookings Institution in Washington, October 6, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Jason Reed
Wed  EDT
"I'm very confident over time that this is going to happen," he said of Chinese currency appreciation. "We just want to make sure it's happening at a gradual but still significant rate."
Asked to respond to talk and media reports of a "currency war," with multiple countries taking action to stem the rise in their currencies, Geithner said, "No risk of that."
Asked to explain, the Treasury chief said that many other emerging markets were seeing major capital flows.
"And that's unfair to them because what's happening is, as China holds its currency down, their currencies are moving up," Geithner said. "And they're having to work very hard to make sure they're not at an unfair disadvantage with China. And that's why this issue, which people like to frame as uniquely an American preoccupation, is really much more important to the rest of the world and is really a global problem as a whole."
Turning to a domestic scandal involving allegations that some mortgage lenders used shoddy paperwork to justify thousands of home foreclosures, Geithner said that declaring a national foreclosure moratorium would be "very damaging" because it would halt the recovery process for many neighborhoods hard-hit by the housing collapse.
Some Democratic U.S. lawmakers, including Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who faces a tough re-election battle in Nevada, have called for the largest lenders to halt foreclosures in all 50 states.
"What it means is those communities will be living longer with houses unoccupied, with more pressure on their house prices for the people still in their houses," he said
(Reporting by David Lawder; Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Geithner said that declaring a national foreclosure moratorium would be ¡°very damaging¡± because it would halt the recovery process for many neighborhoods hard-hit by the housing collapse¡± And just how damaging is it to our nation for our government leaders to continually wink and nod to all of the fraud, self-interest, incompetence, stupidity, and unlawful greed that brought about our financial crisis and continues to plague us every step on our way to achieving some sort of recovery? Just sweep it all under the rug with the rest of the trash. Nothing to see here folks, let¡¯s just move on.
Oct 13, 20103:34am EDT--
Significant long term unemployment and underemployment in the USA brings significant social, political, and military risks with it. Our global ambitions are damaging our society in a fundamental way. For nothing of NATIONAL value.
Oct 13, 20103:44am EDT--
Seriously there is something wrong with Geithner (and BOJ) because they¡¯re using QE to manipulate dollar and yen against yuan and euro. Mainland China will not be held responsible for dollar/yen manipulation. Yuan revaluation will take may be a decade before it reaches its competitive market unit rate(s). Principally because of Chinese demographics and poverty irradication.
Oct 13, 20105:11am EDT--
