Canada disadvantaged by currency policies: Flaherty
2010-10-09 14:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Canada's economy is at a competitive disadvantage because other exporting nations like China keep their currencies artificially weak, Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty said on Saturday.
Flaherty joined the United States and others who escalated pressure on China to let its currency appreciate more quickly, saying the undervalued yuan has unfairly pressured other economies and could lead to a crescendo of protectionist action around the world.
"We're concerned about our own exports which are relatively weak," Flaherty told reporters on the sidelines of International Monetary Fund meetings.
"To have some countries non-cooperatively, artificially creating export subsidies for themselves by holding down the value of their currencies is dangerous in the longer term," he said.
Canada's crucial export sector has been hard-hit by sagging demand from its top market, the United States, but also by a floating currency that has strengthened for six straight weeks to approach parity with the U.S. dollar.
The Canadian dollar finished on Friday at C$1.0113 to the U.S. dollar, or 98.88 U.S. cents, up from Thursday for an 0.8 percent rise on the week.
"It's a self-evident reality that if other countries are subsidizing their exports and we're not, then we're at a competitive disadvantage," Flaherty said.
The trade deficit widened to a record high in July as imports far outpaced exports, and economists say trade will drag on third-quarter growth. China is the second-largest source of Canadian imports, after the United States.
But intervention or retaliatory action, such as a U.S. House of Representatives measure that opens to the door to punitive tariffs on Chinese products, is not on Flaherty's mind.
"We're always prepared for what might come but no we're not contemplating any specific actions."
Instead, global policy makers should work together to draft some common "rules of engagement" on managing currencies, he said.
(Reporting by Louise Egan; Editing by Andrea Ricci)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The whole world should go back to the gold standard so as to minimize the dispute among countries, and the welth of common people could be better protected from the ¡°artifical¡± inflation.
Oct 09, 20108:49pm EDT--
