ChemChina in talks to buy MA Industries
2010-10-11 00:18:00.0
(Reuters) - China National Chemical Corp is in talks to buy control of MA Industries MAIN.TA, in a deal parent group Koor Industries (
) said would value the world's No.7 agrichemicals maker at $2.7 billion.
), both state run companies, have each made failed bids for Australian farm chemicals group Nufarm (
"It's no secret that Chinese agrochemicals producers are interested in acquiring distribution activities and ... MA presents a natural target given its wide range of registrations," said UBS analyst Roni Biron.
China also has its eye on the potash industry as it tries to outdo BHP Billiton's (
) $39 billion bid for Canada's Potash Corp (
) for a joint bid to buy Potash Corp, according to a report.
Koor, which also owns 3.24 percent of Credit Suisse (
), said on Monday the two sides were discussing ChemChina taking 70 percent of MA, including 17 percent purchased from Koor, which would retain 30 percent.
ChemChina would buy all of the shares publically traded and delist MA from the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, Koor said.
Koor owns 47 percent of MA, while 47.75 percent is traded on the exchange.
Analysts said the deal for MA, which makes herbicides, fungicides and insecticides, made sense but they were skeptical it would be completed.
They said the price MA gave for the deal put the share price at about 21 shekels per share, which is a 60 percent premium to Sunday's closing price.
Shares in MA, which competes with Monsanto (
), Bayer BAYG.DE and Syngenta (
), rose on Monday, closing 26.9 percent higher at 17.00 shekels in heavy trading. Koor rose 11.8 percent.
"The strategic rationale for ChemChina to acquire MA makes sense," said Barclays Capital analyst Joseph Wolf. He said that while MA has some problems in North and South America, "it is still a good business."
However, he drew attention to several hurdles to the deal.
"The early stages of the due diligence, the high premium being paid, the tough market conditions, and the ChemChina experience with NuFarm are all reasons that we do not have 100 percent certainty that this deal will be completed," Wolf said.
Koor, too, was cautious, saying the talks were at an early stage.
"At this stage, there is no assurance as to the signing and timing of any binding agreement between Koor and ChemChina regarding the transaction, nor as to the structure and terms of the transaction," the company said in a statement.
Last month, MA halted talks to acquire Albaugh for about $1 billion, blaming findings during due diligence.
MA, also known by its former name, Makhteshim Agan, said separately on Monday it expected to post a 20 percent gain in third-quarter revenue but its net loss would widen due to higher tax expenses. MA said it could not say what that loss will be.
A year ago, the company posted revenue of $436 million and a net loss of $17.5 million.
"The profit warning was wrapped in a Chinese fortune cookie," said Gilad Alper, an analyst at the Meitav brokerage.
MA also said it was restructuring its Brazil subsidiary, with a significant reduction in its head count and scale-down of its manufacturing operations.
(Additional reporting by Ari Rabinovitch; Editing by Karen Foster)
