U.S., Vietnam ties blossom, but with constraints
2010-10-12 07:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Ties between the United States and Vietnam are blossoming in the face of shared concern over China's growing military muscle, but political differences will ultimately limit how far detente between the former foes can go.
Drawn together by political expediency and market forces, both states praise the speed with which political and economic ties have grown in the 15 years since diplomatic relations were normalized and the 35 years since the Vietnam War ended.
Economically, the relationship is booming.
Trade between Vietnam and the United States has risen in value more than eightfold under a trade pact in force since 2001, and totaled nearly $16 billion last year. The United States was Vietnam's biggest source of new foreign investment last year.
Sovereignty disputes over the South China Sea have emerged in recent months as a key point of convergence as Hanoi, Washington and others seek to counterbalance China's growing military might and increasingly assertive behavior in the region.
On Tuesday in Hanoi, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates mentioned the South China Sea by name and put maritime security front and center in comments at a defense summit of the 10-member Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) plus eight dialogue partners, including the United States and China.
Gates said he had been the first of the eight partners to accept Vietnam's invitation to attend the meeting.
"First was I thought it sent an important signal to Vietnam and to ASEAN that we were willing to participate; and second, I thought it offered an opportunity to sit down with these nations and China and begin to address these issues in a collective way," he told reporters.
Analysts, however, say proximity to China and a shared communist ideology will keep the overt development of political and military ties with the United States in check. And concerns over Vietnam's human rights record will be a drag in Washington.
"There is a convergence, but both sides are very careful," said Ian Storey, a fellow at the Singapore Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and an expert in China's relations with the region.
Just as it hedged its bets with the Soviet Union and China during much of the Cold War, Vietnamese officials are deft at balancing Beijing, Washington and other players in the region.
On the South China Sea, Vietnam has lobbied the United States to play a vocal role while trying to internationalize the issue to undermine China's aim of handling each dispute bilaterally.
Ho Chi Minh City hosts next month a conference of scholars on the topic, which analysts see as part of that effort.
"Having these companies hitch their commercial interests to its own strategic needs, Vietnam seems to hope that these companies' backing will drive the internationalization agenda forward," said Jacob Ramsay, a Southeast Asia specialist at consultancy Control Risks.
China, for its part, has put pressure on foreign oil companies to back out of deals with Vietnam in disputed waters.
Vietnam has a history of conflict with China that dates back millennia and the two fought a brief border war in 1979. Since the 1990s, relations have flourished as the two sides rebuilt trust, demarcated their land border and expanded trade.
Suspicion of China remains widespread in Vietnam. But analysts say an influential swathe of the leadership favors deeper ties with Beijing and remains wary that the United States is ultimately interested in "peaceful evolution schemes" that would lead to the Communist Party's loss of power.
Chinese officials have labeled the South China Sea claims a "core interest," putting them on par with Tibet and Taiwan and signaling their sensitivity.
"Vietnam can't be seen to be siding with a country like the United States on this issue," Storey said.
