China digs in on rich-poor climate pact divide
2010-10-07 08:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed, Oct 6 2010
Wed, Oct 6 2010
Wed, Oct 6 2010
Wed, Oct 6 2010
Wed, Oct 6 2010
Executive Secretary of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Christiana Figueres speaks at the opening session of the United Nations Climate Change Conference, in Tianjin October 4, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
TIANJIN, China
Thu  EDT
TIANJIN, China
Envoys from 177 governments are holding week-long talks in the northern Chinese city of Tianjin on the shape of a successor pact to the Kyoto Protocol, the U.N.'s main weapon in the fight against climate change.
Kyoto's first phase, which binds about 40 rich nations to meet emissions targets, expires in 2012 and there's no clarity on what happens after that, worrying investors in clean-energy projects who want long-term certainty on climate policies and financing.
"Of course, now we're discussing the legal issues if it happens," said Su Wei, a senior Chinese climate change negotiator, referring to a possible gap in Kyoto.
"I think that from a practical angle that is necessary, but it seems a bit early, prejudging the negotiations," he added.
The United Nations has been stepping up efforts to convince countries to avoid a gap after 2012 and to ensure certainty for the U.N.'s $2.7 billion carbon market that is part of Kyoto.
But the bitter negotiations are largely stalled over lack of trust between rich and poor nations, particularly over the issue of how to share the burden in emissions cuts to avoid dangerous climate change, which scientists say could trigger more extreme weather, crop failures and much higher sea levels.
Nearly all wealthy countries have signed up to legally binding emissions goals under Kyoto, with the big exception of the United States, which refused to become a party.
Developing nations, including the world's top carbon emitter China, are only obliged to take voluntary steps to curb the growth of their emissions.
The United States and other rich nations want a new global pact to do away with that either-or division to reflect the surge in emissions from the developing world, which is now responsible for more than half of mankind's annual greenhouse gas emissions.
Rich nations also want China, India, Brazil and other big emitters to agree to make their voluntary emissions reduction efforts legally binding, regularly reported and verifiable.
It also exposes game of "chicken" between rich economies and emerging powers that could trouble higher level negotiations in Cancun, Mexico, in less than two months that are intended to lay the foundations for a new, legally binding climate deal.
"The developed countries are delaying and delaying," he said.
"Even if Cancun makes no decision on the developed countries' emission targets in the second phase (of Kyoto), then after Cancun we'll accelerate the process. I think that at the most we can't delay it beyond a year."
Negotiations last year failed to agree on a binding treaty and climaxed in a bitter meeting in Copenhagen, which produced a non-binding accord that later recorded the emissions pledges of participant countries.
The chief U.S. negotiator at the Tianjin talks, Jonathan Pershing, said on Wednesday that Washington was opposed to a treaty that preserved the divide between rich and developing economies, which he called outmoded.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China should be commended for being a world leader in developing green energy sources, particularly solar and wind. China is to be condemned to want to treat it emerging leadership role as a trip to a buffet: they want to be treated as a poor, pitiful developing, Third World country in the context of climate change, even though they lead the world, in absolute terms, in greenhouse emission. But in other contexts ！ such as manipulating their currency and their (ludicrous) claim over the entire South China Sea, they want to be treated as a top dog, First World power. In those contexts, when they say, for instance, ＾Back off!￣ ！ as they just did the EU over currency manipulation ！ they expect others to leap to obey and kowtow. I lived and worked in China a number of years, and there¨s much I admire about the country. I even admire certain actions by the government ！ green power, for example, as I already mentioned. And I love the culture and people ！ I even married a native of Beijing when I lived there. But the Janus approach by the Old Men of Zhongnanhai is downright irritating, to say the least. Either act like world leaders ！ or act like Third World thugs. But make a choice.
Oct 07, 201010:01am EDT--
Is China a First World country ！ or a Third World one (as it wishes to be regarded when it comes to climate change)? The leadership needs to choose a position consistent across all contexts, then stick with it.
Oct 07, 201010:06am EDT--
