Climate talks marred by bickering, progress on finance
2010-10-09 07:16:00.0
(Reuters) - China hit back on Saturday at U.S. claims it was shirking in the fight against climate change, likening the criticisms to a mythic pig preening itself.
Frustration between the world's two top carbon polluters overshadowed week-long U.N. talks seeking progress on the shape of a new climate pact, with negotiators making some progress on financing but failing to dispel fears the process could end in deadlock.
Su Wei, a senior Chinese climate change negotiator, swiped at comments from top U.S. climate envoy Todd Stern as the climate change talks drew to a close in the north Chinese city of Tianjin.
Stern, in remarks at a U.S. university, said Beijing could not insist rich nations take on fixed targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions while China and other big emerging nations adopt only voluntary domestic goals.
Su countered that Stern's claims were a diversion from the United States' failure to make big cuts in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases causing global warming.
Su likened the U.S. criticism to Zhubajie, a pig in a classic Chinese novel, which in a traditional saying preens itself in a mirror.
"It has no measures or actions to show for itself, and instead it criticizes China, which is actively taking measures and actions," Su said of the United States.
The talks in Tianjin reached firmer agreement on funding for poor countries hit by global warming, green technology transfers, and other steps intended to build momentum for more high-level treaty talks in Cancun, Mexico, from the end of next month.
"We're moving in the right direction, but we certainly need to put our foot on the accelerator," said Julie-Anne Richards of the Climate Action Network, which monitored the talks.
Progress this week should lead to some decisions in Cancun, said Wendel Trio, Greenpeace International climate policy director, but he pointed to the bickering that has dominated the Tianjin meeting. "At times it has been like watching children in a kindergarten," he said.
The first phase of the Kyoto Protocol, the U.N.'s main weapon against climate change, ends in 2012 and what follows from 2013 is under contention.
The Protocol makes an either-or distinction between rich countries, which take on fixed targets to cut emissions, and developing countries, including China. The U.S. is not a party.
China also demands that advanced economies, responsible for most of the industrial pollution fuelling global warming, must commit to deep cuts in emissions, giving poorer societies more room to grow their economies and greenhouse gas output.
The top U.S. negotiator in Tianjin, Jonathan Pershing, demanded China and other big emerging nations expose their domestic emissions goals to tighter international scrutiny and put them in a new binding pact that succeeds Kyoto.
"These elements are at the heart of the deal and the lack of progress on them gives us concern," Pershing told reporters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I wonder how the exchange rate issue is boiling over into climate meetings. Expect the relationship to get a lot colder under the next US senate. While the US consistently fails to address climate change in any realistic manor, it is hard to ignore the fact that China has not addressed the issue at all. Unless you have been here, or maybe Mexico City, there is no way you could fathom just how dirty the air, water and soil has already become. For example, the reservoir that feeds the Chinese city I live in, has several factories on the banks, including a battery factory. Cancer rates are through the roof here, and nobody knows it because poorer people could never afford western medicine. Lead poisoning is prevalent 99% of children. All water sources within the three nearest counties consistently have a yellow chemical scum floating on it, including the drinking supply. The river by my home usually smells like a tire fire. And nobody under the age of 30 knows how to swim out of fear of the water.
Oct 09, 20106:52am EDT--
