Chinese pharma firm seeks up to $741 million in HK IPO
2010-10-11 03:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Sihuan Pharmaceutical Holdings Group Ltd, China's largest cardio-cerebral vascular drugmaker, seeks to raise up to $741 million through its Hong Kong initial public offering, according to a term sheet seen by Reuters on Monday.
Hong Kong has become a top choice for healthcare companies seeking to raise cash, thanks to the high valuations investors give new listings, as China promises to spend billions to reform its antiquated medical system.
Sihuan is selling 1.25 billion new shares, or 25 percent of its enlarged share capital, at HK$3.88-HK$4.60 each, the term sheet said, representing the equivalent of 2011 price to earnings multiple of 22.5 times to 26.7 times.
The company has also signed up six cornerstone investors, including billionaire investor George Soros, China Life Insurance (Overseas), CCB International, Yun Feng Fund, which set up by Alibaba's 1688.HK Chairman Jack Ma, for a combined $190 million worth of shares, a source close to the deal said.
Investor appetite for Chinese medical stocks has grown as Beijing promises to create a national healthcare safety net and as the sector's relative immunity to economic cycles offers shelter in times of turmoil.
"It is a very hot issue for investors who aim for quick profit," said Alex Wong, a director from Ample Finance.
Wond said the stock was seen favorably, thanks to the strong market momentum as liquidity continues to flow into the local market due to a weak U.S. dollar, and because of the company's own growth prospects.
Sihuan offers products in China covering several major medical therapeutic areas, namely cardio-cerebral vascular, anti-infective, metabolic, oncological and nervous system, according to the company's website.
The company markets its products through a network covering about 10,000 hospitals and medical institutions across China.
Sihuan, which delisted in Singapore last year, will kick off a formal marketing roadshow on Oct 12 and is set for a trading debut on Oct 28. The offering to institutional investors will close on Oct 20.
), according to the term sheet.
(Reporting by Kennix Chim; Editing by Ken Wills)
