U.S. praises Japan PM over China row, stresses ties
2010-10-06 06:03:00.0
(Reuters) - A senior U.S. official praised Japan's handling of a dispute with China that has slashed the prime minister's voter support, and said a changing security environment made modernizing the U.S.-Japan alliance vital.
Concern about a rising China and an unpredictable North Korea, however, appear to be bolstering incentives to strengthen the U.S.-Japan alliance as it enters its second half-century.
"The truth is, we are living through a period of very consequential developments, not just in Northeast Asia but Asia as a whole, and it's extremely important that the U.S.-Japan relationship not be left behind," U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Campbell told reporters.
"I would say that there is now full recognition in both Washington and Tokyo of the task at hand," he said.
The U.S. diplomat lauded Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan for his handling of the row with China, which has sparked worries about fallout on business in Asia's two biggest economies. China became Japan's biggest trading partner last year.
The frost thawed a bit when Kan met Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao at an Asia-Europe summit on Monday, but Kan's support rates are still sliding due to voter anger at a decision to release the Chinese captain after intense pressure from Beijing.
"Japan and Prime Minister Kan in particular and Foreign Minister (Seiji) Maehara handled this issue with statesmanship," Campbell said. "I think in retrospect, that will become clearer."
A Kyodo news agency poll published on Wednesday showed support for Kan's government sank to 47.6 percent, down 16.8 points from last month. More than 70 percent thought the Chinese skipper's release was inappropriate.
Nor is all rosy for Kan on the U.S.-Japan alliance front, despite an easing of friction that stemmed from his predecessor's efforts to revise a 2006 pact to shift a U.S. Marine air base at Futenma to a less crowded part of the southern island of Okinawa.
Kan has said he would implement the 2006 agreement, but the outlook is cloudy given strong opposition from residents, who associate U.S. bases with noise, accidents and crime.
"The desire to successfully conclude an agreement and move forward is high in Washington and we've conveyed that sense of urgency to our Japanese colleagues," Campbell said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Why do we have 40,000 U.S. troops in Japan?
Oct 06, 20109:00am EDT--
