China releases Japanese man on bail as ties ease
2010-10-09 07:00:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Saturday released on bail the remaining Japanese employee of a construction firm who had been detained on suspicion of illegally entering a military zone, Xinhua news agency said, in a further sign of improving ties.
The employees of unlisted Fujita were detained in northern China's Hebei province last month while Beijing and Tokyo were embroiled in a territorial row sparked by Japan's detention of a Chinese fishing boat captain in disputed seas.
China on September 30 released the three others, after they acknowledged "having violated Chinese law and showed regret for their mistake," state-run Xinhua said at the time.
The fourth, named as Sadamu Takahashi, was released on bail, according to authorities in Hebei's provincial capital of Shijiazhuang, cited by the brief Xinhua report.
He was instructed "to write a statement of repentance" and has already "left the place where he was residing under surveillance after going through legal procedures," Xinhua added.
China and Japan, Asia's two largest economies, have acted to ease tension following the stand-off over a group of uninhabited islets in the East China Sea, called Diaoyu in China and Senkaku in Japan.
On Saturday, four Japanese lawmakers inspected the islands from the air, Japanese media reported.
The Chinese and Japanese prime ministers met on the sidelines of a summit in Belgium this week, saying they both wanted to improve relations, though they also stressed their respective claims to the islands.
The spats have underscored the fragility of a relationship long troubled by bitter Chinese attitudes toward Japan's wartime occupation as well as by present-day mistrust as China edges past Japan as the world's second biggest economy.
China canceled diplomatic meetings and student visits in protest against the trawler captain's detention, and industry sources cited concerns that Beijing appeared to hold back shipments of rare earth minerals vital for electronics and auto parts.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Additional reporting by Kaori Kaneko in Tokyo; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Scary that the Chinese gov, would go out of its way to arrest a random Japanese man, just to use as a bartering piece.
Oct 09, 20106:40am EDT--
