Wen says some in Congress politicize trade gap
2010-10-02 15:48:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Sep 30 2010
Thu, Sep 30 2010
Wed, Sep 29 2010
Wed, Sep 29 2010
Wed, Sep 29 2010
Visiting Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao addresses reporters during a news conference in Athens October 2, 2010. Credit: Reuters/John Kolesidis
Sat  EDT
Wen, in an interview with U.S. TV news network CNN taped on September 23, also said he hoped for a "quick recovery of the U.S. economy" and said the Obama administration's economic stimulus package was the right move to help the U.S. economy.
The Chinese premier's comments were made before the U.S. House of Representatives on Wednesday passed legislation to pressure China to let its yuan currency rise more quickly.
"Some in the U.S. Congress do not know fully about China. They are politicizing the problems in China-US relations -- in particular, the trade imbalance between our two countries," Wen said in the interview taped when Wen was at a U.N. meeting in New York.
"I don't think this is the right thing to do," he told CNN's "Fareed Zakaria GPS" program.
Many U.S. lawmakers argue that China's currency is undervalued by as much as 40 percent, giving it an unfair advantage in international trade and stealing U.S. jobs. The U.S. trade deficit with China is projected to approach $250 billion this year.
Wen and U.S. President Barack Obama discussed China's currency and huge trade surplus with the United States during a meeting on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly last month.
Wen acknowledged during the interview China's trade surplus with the United States and the European Union, but said it runs a deficit with Japan and other Asian countries.
And he said that if the United States were to cut imports from China, he said, this would not help the U.S. trade imbalance.
"Many of the Chinese exports to the United States are no longer produced in the U.S., and I don't believe that the United States will restart the production of those products -- products which are at the low end of the value-added chain."
"Even if you don't buy those products from China, you still have to buy them from India, Sri Lanka or Bangladesh. And that will not help resolve the trade imbalance between our two countries," he said.
The Chinese premier said the Obama administration's plan of investing in infrastructure and goal of doubling exports would keep the U.S. economy "on the right track."
"I think these passes and measures are the ones on the right track, moving in the right direction," Wen said. "Although they came a little bit late, they still came in time."
"I hope that there will be a quick recovery of the U.S. economy, because, after all, the U.S. economy is the largest in the world," he said.
"I believe corruption and inflation will have an adverse impact on stability of power in our country," he said. "And these two both concern the trust and support of people in the government. And this is the perspective that I see the issue of inflation in China."
(Writing by Philip Barbara; Editing by Will Dunham and Eric Walsh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It is becoming more clear that china lacks an understanding of global attitudes towards china¡¯s mercantilist economic policies. Instead of going around pointing fingers at trading partners, maybe china should look at how their own policies are causing trading partners to look for other options, in order to avoid having to do business with china. chinese businessmen and politicians are the most corrupt, immoral and untrustworthy people I have ever met.
Oct 02, 20104:34pm EDT--
Well, if our politicians can¡¯t fix the China policies then it is left up to the people to fix them. Just quit buying the junk and boycott the merchants who pedal the stuff. Goodby Walmart.
Oct 02, 20104:47pm EDT--
There is nothing ¡°politicizing¡± about trade imbalance. There is a direct correlation between trade imbalance, weakened economy and the ensuing political instability.
There is nothing ¡°politicizing¡± about trade imbalance. There is a direct correlation between trade imbalance, weakened economy and the ensuing political instability.
If China refuses to engage in honest ¡°level playing field¡± economic practices, maybe we should ban them from our markets.
America is still ¡± the bread basket of the world¡±. We should be able to pay farmers to grow food as opposed to NOT grow food. We should be able to leverage our food production to close the trade gap somewhat.
Oct 02, 20105:55pm EDT--
