Vietnam-China row over detained sailors intensifies
2010-10-06 02:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Vietnam has asked China for the unconditional release of nine fishermen detained last month near disputed islands, Vietnamese media reported on Wednesday, raising tension a week before regional defense ministers meet.
Chinese embassy officers in Hanoi told Vietnamese Foreign Ministry officials the sailors had broken the law by fishing with explosives and would be released with their boat only after the captain paid a fine, Vietnamese state media reported.
Vietnamese officials dismissed China's accusation against the fishermen as "absurd" and said the crew and boat, detained on September 11, had been "operating normally in the seas around the Paracel Islands, which fall under Vietnam's sovereignty."
The dispute highlights mounting tension over China's assertiveness in the potentially oil-rich South China Sea, where China, Vietnam, Malaysia, the Philippines, Brunei and Taiwan all have competing claims.
The Vietnam-China dispute could add fuel to discussions when defense ministers from the 10-member Association of South East Asian Nations plus eight other countries, including China, Japan and the United States, meet in Hanoi next week.
"The Foreign Ministry again requested the Chinese side ... immediately and unconditionally release all fishermen and the boat," Vietnamplus.vn, a website of the state-run Vietnam News Agency, said in a report.
It said Vietnamese and Chinese officials had met several times since the boat was captured. On September 21, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's consular department sent a formal diplomatic note to the Chinese embassy.
Scores of Vietnamese fishermen have been detained by Chinese maritime patrols over the years in the South China Sea, according to Vietnamese media.
Analysts say China appears to have intensified the campaign in recent months, hardening its tone on the importance of its territorial claims in the waters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is typical war monger and it has been slowly over last 30 yrs ceding land whever it can started with 14 days Tibet war and acquired it by force, then xiajing and parts of Inner monglia, parts of India this is all during Mao zedong tactics of war monger and occupying land..
China is typical war monger and it has been slowly over last 30 yrs ceding land whever it can started with 14 days Tibet war and acquired it by force, then xiajing and parts of Inner monglia, parts of India this is all during Mao zedong tactics of war monger and occupying land..
China is responsible for failures of many communist and democratic counteries eg. NKorea and destablizing pakistan now with arms to keep check on poor muslims in China, Nepal is next
Oct 06, 201010:20am EDT--
Seems there were some foreign powers sniffing around China¡¯s borders weren¡¯t there. Even though Tibet tried to keep them out they just had to come in looking for the back door to China. You don¡¯t really think they were interested in learning non-violence do you¡­ and so went Tibet and the first CIA agent killed in the line of duty¡­
Oct 06, 20104:42pm EDT--
These fishmen were fishing in the Chinese waters with explosives. The Chinese shall and have treated them according to Chinese domestic laws. This is perfectly fine. Everybody needs to obey the law. We don¡¯t encourage unlawful behavior like the Bush invaded Iraq disregarding any international laws.
Oct 06, 20107:03pm EDT--
