Republicans aim to slash education spending: Obama
2010-10-05 16:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Sep 24 2010
Thu, Sep 23 2010
Thu, Sep 23 2010
Wed, Sep 22 2010
Wed, Sep 22 2010
President Barack Obama makes remarks at the Community College Summit in the East Room at the White House in Washington, October 5, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Jim Young
Tue  EDT
Ramping up his pre-election rhetoric, Obama said Republicans would jeopardize long-term U.S. prosperity to finance tax cuts for the rich, and pay for this with steep cuts in spending on schools and colleges.
"China isn't slashing education by 20 percent right now. India is not slashing education by 20 percent. We are in a fight for the future -- a fight that depends on education," he told a White House meeting to boost community colleges.
"That's like unilaterally disarming our troops right as they head to the frontlines."
His remarks were a rallying cry to Democrats ahead of the November 2 congressional midterm poll, with the White House warning that cherished programs like education would be on the chopping block if Republicans make gains as expected.
They favor extending Bush-era tax cuts for all Americans to support a tepid economic recovery, while Obama wants to let the tax break expire for wealthier Americans.
"You don't eat your seed corn. We can't accept less investment in our young people if our country is going to move forward," he said.
Obama's estimate is based on figures by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a Washington think tank. It calculated that Boehner's proposal would require an immediate $101 billion cut in 2010 spending to keep the deficit in check.
"The President's untrue talking points don't change the fact that the American people are asking, 'where are the jobs?' and he has no new answers," said Boehner spokesman Michael Steel.
Republicans argue Obama's claim of 20-percent cuts in education is based on invalid assumptions that the reductions in spending would be across the board, and targeted at programs that have increased in the last two years.
Obama proposes letting tax cuts expire for American households earning more than $250,000 and individuals making more than $200,000 a year. He says extending the breaks would cost $700 billion that the country does not have.
"What we can't do is fund tax cuts for those that don't need them by slashing education for those who do. There is a better way for us to do this," he said.
