EU urges faster yuan rise
2010-10-05 11:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Oct 5 2010
Tue, Oct 5 2010
Tue, Oct 5 2010
Mon, Oct 4 2010
Mon, Oct 4 2010
A worker checks the authenticity of a yuan banknote at a restaurant in Hefei, Anhui province September 30, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Tue  EDT
The chairman of euro zone finance ministers, Jean-Claude Juncker, told a news conference after talks with Wen on the sidelines of an EU-Asia summit in Brussels: "China's real effective exchange rate remains undervalued."
He said the 16-nation European currency area had urged an "orderly, significant and broad-based appreciation" of the yuan.
Asked how Wen had responded, Juncker said the message came as no surprise to the Chinese delegation, but added in French: "The Chinese authorities do not share our view."
The United States and the European Union accuse China of keeping the yuan artificially low to boost exports, undermining jobs and competitiveness in Western economies.
"This process needs to take into account the realities of today's world economy -- the shifts that have been taking place, and the strong growth in dynamic emerging markets and in developing economies," EU President Herman van Rompuy said.
The EU offered last week to give up two of the eight seats its members hold on the 24-member IMF board, to make room for emerging nations, but analysts called the gesture insufficient. The United States wants the board cut back to 20 seats, with fewer Europeans. The issue is set to go to a Group of 20 major economies summit in Seoul next month.
Wen did not attend the news conference after the monetary talks. However, he had told the opening summit session on Monday that China's objective was to ensure relative stability of the major reserve currencies.
However, after President Nicolas Sarkozy met Wen later on the sidelines of the summit, a French source said China seemed ready to discuss how to avoid "erratic" exchange rate variations.
"CURRENCY WAR?"
The annual EU-China monetary dialogue came amid fears of a global "currency war" as key trading powers, such as the United States and Japan, seek to weaken their currencies while emerging economies such as Brazil and South Korea raise or threaten tougher controls to limit capital flows.
Europeans are worried that they will be saddled with an overvalued currency, stifling their recovery, because they have few tools to contain the euro's rise, even if they wanted to.
France, which takes over the presidency of the Group of 20 major economic powers next month, has put reforming the international monetary system at the top of its agenda, hoping to draw China into multilateral talks on currency coordination.
"It is not appropriate at this point in time that China is never involved in discussions about currencies," French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde told a forum in Moscow on Tuesday.
Juncker said the euro area welcomed China's June 19 decision to make the yuan's exchange rate more flexible, but that policy had not yet been sufficiently turned into reality. He and European Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn both said Wen had reaffirmed China's commitment to the decision.
However, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet told the same news conference: "We noted that the evolution in terms of effective exchange rates, and also vis-a-vis the euro, were not exactly what we would have hoped ourselves."
Since Beijing scrapped a peg to the dollar on June 19, the renminbi has gained 2.15 percent against the U.S. currency but weakened 9.4 percent against the euro.
EU Trade Commissioner Karel de Gucht told French newspaper Le Monde the yuan's undervaluation was a factor in trade flows. "It is not the only problem in our trade relations, but it is one of them," he was quoted as saying.
Trichet welcomed Wen's offer on a weekend visit to Greece to buy Greek government bonds when debt-stricken Athens, which received a 110 billion euro ($151 billion) IMF-euro zone rescue package in May, returns to capital markets.
"As a first priority, the demand for goods and services as well as investments have to be encouraged since they are the drivers of economic growth and job creation across countries," they said. "To this effect, the progressive liberalization of domestic and international markets must be pursued."
Chinese concerns about Europe were reflected in a passage in which leaders pledged to move away from "patterns that created fragilities in the pre-crisis period, including excessive public deficits, non-sustainable debts and development gaps."
(additional reporting by Jan Strupczewski, David Brunnstrom and John O'Donnell; writing by Paul Taylor, editing by Mike Peacock)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If US/EU want mainland China to revalue Yuan, it¡¯s imperative, first, to make room at IMF/IBRD which reflects emerging economic and financial power of PRC. There is no way US/EU can manipulate Yuan, as global debtor¡¯s who¡¯re able to manage their sovereign debts because China¡¯s Central Bank is underwriting as their creditor. Geopolitics aside, China will not seek to undermine the exisiting imbalances ¨C the FX market will!
Oct 05, 201012:08pm EDT--
Either let the currencies float, or block the goods (¡±bads¡± more like) coming from China. The Chinese will never let the currencies float, so¡­. Go to the store and try to buy a real brass lock (to be used in a maritime environment). All of the vaguely brass-colored offerings are made in China, and they all are labeled as having dangerous lead content (with a warning to wash hands immediately after touching). Many of the locks, generally dull in appearance, don¡¯t even use the word ¡°brass¡± anymore¨CI guess the alloy is so tainted that it can¡¯t be labeled as brass. I would pay 3x as much for a real brass lock. But I¡¯m not given that option. I left the store empty-handed, and ended up buying an old brass lock at a neighbor¡¯s garage sale. A quick rub made it shinier than the junk on sale at the store. Maybe the reason people aren¡¯t buying stuff these days is we¡¯re tired of the decline in quality? These poisonous flimsy Chinese imports are a wretched plague! China will never adhere to any agreement ever. Let¡¯s just give up, stop this one-way flow of garbage out of China in exchange for a one-way flow of technology into China, and call it a failed experiment.
Oct 05, 20105:25pm EDT--
hariknaidu expresses clearly what the PRC wants, to be able to exert more control without cooperating or assuming more global responsibility.
hariknaidu expresses clearly what the PRC wants, to be able to exert more control without cooperating or assuming more global responsibility.
China¡¯s rapid growth has been partly a result of US assistance and of beneficial trading policies. They made promises to cooperate and hinted at future cooperation but there is always a reason why they can¡¯t do it now. Meanwhile they support North Korea¡¯s aggression as they try to put on a regional show of power while hacking into the computers of their supposed trading allies. They will take anything offered while delaying any reciprocation.
They have been able to offer cheaper goods because their companies don¡¯t have to follow environmental guidelines, pay competitive wages or provide health coverage. Chinese goods have earned a reputation for being of low quality and possibly toxic. Do we really need to keep extending them favored status as trading partners?
Let them unload their US debt. The first hint at their dumping US securities will drop the prices and the US will be able to buy the debt back at a discount, a good deal. So much for Chinese control of our economy.
If they are indeed our largest trading partner (and we theirs) it is time for us to finally treat them as equals, rather than an emerging economy that needs our help.
Oct 07, 20109:30am EDT--
