Climate talks struggle as China, U.S. face off
2010-10-06 00:38:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and EU said on Wednesday that U.N. climate talks were making less progress than hoped due to rifts over rising economies' emission goals, while China pushed back and put the onus on rich nations.
Negotiators from 177 governments are meeting this week in the northern Chinese city of Tianjin, trying to agree on the shape of the successor to the current phase of the Kyoto Protocol, the key U.N. treaty on fighting global warming, which expires in 2012.
Midway through the talks, however, initial hopes that they can deliver progress on trust-building goals have become snared in procedural skirmishing that boils down to feuding over how far rich and emerging nations should curb their greenhouse gas emissions and how they should check on each other's efforts.
Negotiators said the contention could damage prospects for negotiations late this year in Cancun, Mexico, which are intended to lay the foundations for a new, legally-binding climate pact.
"There is less agreement than one might have hoped to find at this stage," said Jonathan Pershing, the United States' lead U.S. negotiator in Tianjin.
"It's going to require a lot of work to get to some significant outcome by the end of this week, which then leads us into a significant outcome in Cancun," he told reporters.
Fraught climate negotiations last year failed to agree on a binding treaty and climaxed in a bitter meeting in Copenhagen, which produced a vague and non-binding accord that later recorded the emissions pledges of participant countries.
Fearing deadlock in efforts to reach a binding pact by late next year, governments have been pushing in Tianjin for broad agreement on less contentious objectives: a fund for climate action, a scheme to protect carbon-absorbing rainforests, and policies to share clean energy technology with poorer nations.
Pershing said he still hoped that the makings of a deal can come together at Cancun, and warned that failure in Mexico could damage the whole U.N. climate negotiations.
Big developing nations -- such as China, India and Brazil -- should take on firmer emissions reduction obligations as part of a new treaty that would abandon a simple division between rich and developing countries, said Pershing.
A European Union official at the Tianjin talks said they had made headway on some issues, but also voiced worry for Cancun.
"We are very concerned with the procedural blockages and we find it simply inexplicable that they keep on popping up on the issues that are of vital importance for the final deal," Jurgen Lefevere of the European Commission climate action office told reporters. "There is still hope," he added later.
China is the world's top greenhouse gas emitter from human activity, with the United States second.
China and India have pledged emissions reduction steps under the Copenhagen accord, but want Kyoto to be extended to lock in commitments by rich countries and to ensure their own emissions are not subject to binding international caps.
China's greenhouse gas emissions will keep rising for years yet, but its top climate change negotiator Xie Zhenhua said it was unfair to press the country on when its emissions would peak while rich nations failed to slash theirs.
"When the world's emissions peak depends on developed countries leading with dramatic cuts in their emissions, making space for developing countries," said Xie.
China and other emerging nations will accept international "consultation and analysis" of their emissions, but not anything equal to the standards expected of rich economies, said Xie.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I agree with many of the criticisms leveled by the Chinese, especially those against my own country, which never hasn¡¯t even signed aboard Kyoto and even under President Obama has set goals far short of what scientists say are necessary. That said, China¡¯s attitude is irksome and counterproductive. Basically, they¡¯re saying, ¡°Hey! You WESTERNERS peed and crapped in the village well for a couple of hundred years, so now it¡¯s OUR turn!¡± How disingenous. We didn¡¯t *realize* what we were doing in the West. China, however, has the benefit of full knowledge of our experience ¡ª and they want to ignore it. Yes, they¡¯re forging ahead at full speed in developing wind and solar energy sources ¡ª even while they open 1-2 coal-fired power plants every WEEK. When I first lived in China in the 1980¡¯s, the relevant authorities weren¡¯t the least bit hesitant in imposing rolling brownouts, sometimes even blackouts ¡ª and I never found those power moves truly onerous. They could do that now, given their command economy, though of course there are places that have to be exempt from such moves, such as hospitals. Sometimes I¡¯ve almost jealous of China¡¯s command system when I consider it side-by-side with ours. If we had a command system, we could tell the Inhofe¡¯s and people of his ilk to go home and dig a coal mine in his back yard and drill and oil or gas well in his front yard while the *rest* of the country began the shift away from an oil economy, a shift that will take decades, during which we will, of course, still *need* oil, natural gas, and coal. Then we might be able to get on the moral high ground is dealing with China (and India, Brazil, Indonesia, Russia, etc.).
Oct 07, 201010:19am EDT--
The only problem with your assessment of their attitude is that we westerners continue to pee and crap on the village too. Its not like we stopped at all. Moreover, the idea of carbon consumption is more useful than emissions. Poor countries produce and export for westerners to consume so we get the products and they get the blame. The solution lays in the highest per capita emitters (or even better, consumers) to cut back. I don¡¯t see too many chinese with 3000 sq ft homes driving SUVs, taking daily showers, and staying cool with central air.
Oct 08, 20107:30pm EDT--
