China's Sinopec buys Repsol Brazil stake for $7.1 billion
2010-10-01 11:22:00.0
China's Sinopec buys Repsol Brazil stake for $7.1 billion | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
China's Sinopec buys Repsol Brazil stake for $7.1 billion
Fri, Oct 1 2010
Fri  EDT
) will buy 40 percent of Spanish oil major Repsol's (
) Brazilian arm for $7.1 billion, strengthening resource-hungry China's presence in Latin America.
China has invested heavily in mining and oil assets in the region as well as in Africa in recent years and Friday's deal puts it on course to be the biggest foreign direct investor in Brazil for 2010.
Sinopec is also bidding for oil and gas assets of Brazilian startup firm OGX worth a potential $7 billion, sources told Reuters last month.
For Repsol, the move delivers funds it needs to develop its deposits in Brazil, one of the world's most important exploration markets since the discovery of massive subsalt oil reserves off its coast.
"We are delighted to share the development of the Brazilian projects with a partner with recognized prestige in the sector like Sinopec," Repsol Chairman Antonio Brufau said in a statement.
Analysts and investors welcomed the deal, saying it valued the Brazilian assets at a premium to market consensus.
), which holds a stake of around 20 percent in Repsol, jumped 12.7 percent.
), which holds offshore assets in Brazil. Analysts said the giant Tupi field where Galp has a 10 percent stake is in a more advanced stage of development than Repsol's blocks.
China's push into Latin America has focused on oil-producing Brazil, mineral-rich Peru and oil- and soy-producing Argentina.
Merrill Lynch analysts in a note said the implied value of $10.7 billion for the 60 percent Repsol stake compared to analysts' consensus value for the whole unit at $8-10 billion.
"It's clearly positive, not only for Repsol but for all oil companies that have interests in Brazil," said Jordi Padilla at Madrid-based fund manager Popular Gestion Privada. The firm, with 1.4 billion euros ($2 billion) of assets under management, holds Repsol shares.
Sinopec said the company was targeting the production of 200,000 barrels per day oil equivalent from the mostly offshore blocks.
"It's a large-scale asset of premium quality and potentially with more discoveries to be made in the future," a Sinopec official told Reuters.
Repsol expects production of more than 50 million barrels per year by 2018-2020 from the Brazil deposits it currently holds, Chief Operating Officer Miguel Martinez told Reuters Insider.
The deal, which will require approval from competition authorities, is on a par with Sinopec's acquisition of Swiss oil and gas explorer Addax for some $7.24 billion, with assets in Nigeria and Iraq's Kurdistan region.
Repsol, in partnership with Brazilian state-run oil company Petrobras (
), has a stake in some of the larger deep-water subsalt blocks off Brazil's southern coast, including a 25 percent stake in BM-S-9 which holds the Guara and Carioca fields.
Repsol's Brazilian unit requested permission from the market regulator to issue shares on the Brazilian stock exchange in August. The initial public offering is now off the cards, Repsol's Martinez said.
(Additional reporting by Tracy Rucinski; Writing by Sonya Dowsett; Editing by Dan Lalor, Jason Neely)
