China growth risks in focus as first quarter data falls short
2013-04-15 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - China's economic recovery unexpectedly stumbled in the first three months of 2013 with slowing factory output and investment spending forcing analysts to start slashing full-year forecasts despite official insistence that the outlook was favorable.
The world's second-biggest economy grew 7.7 percent in the first quarter from a year ago, slower than 7.9 percent hit in Q4 2012, below the Reuters consensus forecast of 8.0 percent and confounding expectations of a surprise uptick that emerged after surging credit and export data were published last week.
"This number may well explain why there was so much liquidity support in Q1," Tim Condon, head of Asian economic research at ING in Singapore, told Reuters.
"Industrial production is unexpectedly weak and that's the source of weakness in GDP. Based on this, the consensus forecasts for GDP are going to be headed lower and we'll certainly be looking at ours," Condon added.
RBS duly obliged, cutting its full year forecast to 7.8 percent from 8.4 percent before the data.
"This is both due to the impact of the weaker start of 2013 and because the Q1 data shows slower quarter-on-quarter growth momentum than expected," Louis Kuijs, chief China economist at RBS in Hong Kong, wrote in a note to clients.
Sheng Laiyun, spokesman at the National Bureau of Statistics which released GDP in a flurry of other data on Monday, told a news conference that such worries were unfounded.
"China's economic fundamentals haven't changed. We are confident about future growth and optimistic about achieving this year's growth target," Sheng said.
China has set a 7.5 percent GDP growth target for 2013, a level Beijing believes will create sufficient jobs while providing room to deliver structural reforms the government -- and international policy advisers -- believe are necessary to put growth on a more sustainable long term footing.
"Employment is very stable," Sheng said. "Stable employment is a basic indicator of China's economic stability," he added, quoting Ministry of Labour and Social Securities data showing that China created over 3 million new jobs in the first quarter.
Commodities from crude oil to copper, wheat and corn all fell after the data, share prices were knocked lower and the Australian dollar slid as investors reprised expectations of import demand from China.
A 0.1 percent downgrade of the World Bank's 2013 China growth forecast to 8.3 percent following last week's cut to the global trade outlook from the World Trade Organization, was a further blow to economists anticipating that broadly brighter global economic data in Q1 would underpin China's recovery.
The most sluggish increase in power generation in six months, up 2.1 percent year on year in March, and a 3.2 percent fall in daily crude steel output in the same period, were taken as signs of cooling activity.
That data, released alongside GDP, overshadowed a gentle uptick in retail sales growth to 12.6 percent year-on-year in March from 12.3 percent in February and expectations of 12.5 percent.
The rapid rise of a new consumer class in China is a factor that keeps investors broadly optimistic about the longer-term future of the economy, provided policymakers can rebalance the drivers of growth away from the investment spending and exports to which it is currently tilted.
Domestic consumption was the biggest driver of growth in Q1, delivering 4.3 percentage points of the 7.7 percent total. Capital formation delivered 2.3 percentage points while exports generated the 1.1 percentage point balance.
But as construction is a major component of domestic consumption, economic activity is still largely dependent on investment spending which is currently worth around 50 percent of GDP and a level which worries the International Monetary Fund, among others.
China's real estate investment rose 20.2 percent Q1 on a year earlier, while revenues from property sales rose 61.3 percent, adding to worries of an unsustainable house price boom -- though a profit warning from construction equipment maker, Zoomlion, was a sign that Beijing's property cooling measures are biting.
The key question for economists is whether China's recovery momentum from its weakest full year of growth since 1999 has been reversed -- and not simply slowed -- and sees the government tinker with policy settings in response that create problems further down the road.
"I hope they don't ease because policy is already very easy," Tao Wang, China economist at UBS in Hong Kong, said.
"I don't think this is a turning point for slower growth. I think the recovery is probably delayed, but I think the recovery is still coming."
(Additional reporting by China Economics Team; Writing by Nick Edwards; Editing by Eric Meijer)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The global economy has never stopped slowing. Governments have been artificially propping up the economy. We were near an all out collapse in March 2009. How can things come back so quickly? No one seems to want to face that reality. We¡¯ve come back way too high way too fast.
The global economy has never stopped slowing. Governments have been artificially propping up the economy. We were near an all out collapse in March 2009. How can things come back so quickly? No one seems to want to face that reality. We¡¯ve come back way too high way too fast.
The rebound does not reflect the actual improvement. US debt is now at $17 trillion, that¡¯s 5 times more than 2009. Europe is in a deeper recession and more countries need bailouts that in 2009. The EU is closer to breaking up than before. Japan remains in recession as they gasp for ways to survive. China¡¯s economy is slowing. Therefore, imports will slow and exports will slow because who is going to buy their products. For sure interest rates have been so low for so long and people continue to spend and increase their debt to record levels but they are also waking up to this unsustainable strategy. Unemployment is still at record levels in North America and Europe. Inflation will be on the rise soon. Everyone seems to be oblivious to all this as they focus on their toys (cells phones, SUVs, tablets, big screen TVs).
Apr 15, 20134:41am EDT--
I will retain my 9% GDP growth forecast for three reasons: all of China¡¯s data for the 1st quarter has not been reported yet; all of China¡¯s trade data has not been reported yet; and China¡¯s consumer reforms that started in 2011 should begin to hit most strongly in the second half of 2013 until the end of 2015, the end of the 12th Five Year Plan. 480 million Chinese live in rural areas in the west and south, and infrastructure, that will increase the speed of reporting, remains in varying levels of construction in these areas. Although the EU and US are China¡¯s 1st and 2nd biggest trade partners, China has developed trade with ASEAN and Africa to make them China¡¯s 3rd and 4th biggest trade partners. China¡¯s trade with ASEAN and Africa grows by double digits per year and by triple digits every five years. China includes infrastructure projects in its contracts with countries because China trades more with rich countries than with poor nations, so China develops its ¡°customer base¡± for more trade in the future. However, some less developed countries have not given complete reports on trade, so upward revisions will come. Most important, in 2011, China increased the minimum tax deduction by 75%, reinstated old age pensions, and began low cost housing projects that should house 138 million Chinese, 10% of the population, by 2015. These programs, among others, should raise China¡¯s domestic spending with the biggest rises starting in mid-2013. The comprehensive reports should appear beginning in August of 2013 and continue through February of 2016 when another five year plan likely will be under way. In addition, China will continue to trade with the US and EU; it can¡¯t control their economic mistakes; but it can develop alternate foreign and domestic markets.
Apr 15, 201312:32pm EDT--
