U.S., China agree to work together on cyber security
2013-04-13 11:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China and the United States will set up a working group on cyber-security, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said on Saturday, as the two sides moved to ease months of tensions and mutual accusations of hacking and Internet theft.
Speaking to reporters in Beijing during a visit to China, Kerry said the United States and China had agreed on the need to speed up action on cyber security, an area that Washington says is its top national security concern.
Cyber security, Kerry said "affects the financial sector, banks, financial transactions, every aspect of nations in modern times are affected by the use of cyber networking and obviously all of us - every nation - has an interest in protecting its people, protecting its rights, protecting its infrastructure".
Earlier, China's official Xinhua news agency quoted Foreign Minister Wang Yi as telling Kerry in their meeting that China and the United States should make joint efforts to safeguard cyberspace.
Cyberspace should be an area where the two countries can increase mutual trust and cooperation, Wang told Kerry, according to Xinhua.
Beijing and Washington have traded accusations in recent months of massive cyber intrusions. The United States says hacking attacks emanating from China have targeted U.S. government and corporate computer networks among others, stealing government and commercial data.
China claims it is the victim of large-scale cyber attacks from the United States, though it has given few details. Wang repeated to Kerry the Chinese government's oft-stated position that it opposes any form of hacking.
"It's important to have a dialogue on this, but it's also important that the dialogue be a means to an end, and the end is really ending these practices," Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Robert Hormats, who spoke at the forum, told Reuters in an interview.
Last month China's premier, Li Keqiang called for both sides to stop the war of words over hacking.
(Reporting by Terril Yue Jones; Editing by Jonathan Standing and Jon Hemming)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Ooo¡­, what¡¯s this ¡ª common sense prevailing? How quaintly idealistic (if however fleetingly¡­.)
Apr 13, 201312:55pm EDT--
For years the US has ignored the obvious evidence. In the 1970¡äs, 60 Minutes did a program about Pakistani computer programmers selling pirated US business programs, with concealed viruses, to US business tourists, so the US has known for 40 years of Pakistani cyber attacks on US businessmen. Today, 13% of Chinese computers are infected with BOT programs that let people in foreign countries to hack into the Chinese computers and use them to hack into other computers in China or in other countries, such as the US, and Pakistan shares a border with China. Can any American name 2 groups in Pakistan (hint: al Qaeda and the Taliban) who might want to hack into the US and provoke a conflict between the US and China? Fortunately, the current discussions may help dispel some of the myths about Chinese hacking. Some hacking is likely because US and Chinese military cyber units will have people who will disobey orders and use their skills for ¡°fun¡± or to fight those they regard as the ¡°enemy.¡± We had people like that in Special Forces who wanted to test their skills in ¡°clandestine¡± activities against ¡°enemies¡± of the US, but they didn¡¯t last. Both countries want to clear up any problems they have because the US and China are each other¡¯s 2nd biggest trade partners.
Apr 13, 20132:44pm EDT--
Apr 14, 20133:43am EDT--
