South Africa's Zuma looks to China to boost trade
2010-08-22 23:13:00.0
(Reuters) - South African President Jacob Zuma, struggling with sluggish growth and worker discontent at home, seeks to boost trade on Monday on a trip to China, the last of the four "BRIC" economies he has visited in little over a year since taking office..
South Africa aims to tap trade and investment in "BRIC" economies Brazil, Russia, India and China to make up for the downturn in traditional markets in weakly recovering Europe.
"There is a national consensus in South Africa that wants the country to be part of the BRICs, and this visit to China is part of achieving that goal," said Xu Weizhong, an Africa expert at the China Institute of Contemporary International Relations.
"South Africa also wants to be the bridge between Africa and China," he added.
For Beijing, the visit by Zuma will be an opportunity to consolidate ties with African countries, where China is increasingly turning for resources, markets and diplomatic support.
Late last year, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao offered Africa $10 billion in concessional loans over three years.
Yet with GDP growth forecast at 2.3 percent this year, South Africa stacks up unfavorably against China and India, and Zuma will be looking to narrow his country's trade deficit with Beijing.
"South Africa wants Chinese investment, but at the same time is worried about the competition this will bring. South Africa is not well prepared for that," said Xu, the Chinese expert.
South Africa's ruling African National Congress (ANC) is soul-searching over development policies, in particular how to boost the economy, which has failed to grow at the pace needed to dent chronic unemployment.
While Zuma is in Beijing, China and South Africa are expected to sign agreements that will include cooperation on mineral resources and transport, and to address lopsided bilateral trade flows.
China is South Africa's largest trading partner, but last year South Africa ran a $2.7 billion trade deficit with China.
A Comprehensive Strategic Partnership Agreement that Zuma will sign is expected to address that, a South African government spokesman said.
"This agreement is expected to deal with the trade imbalance between the two countries and with the fact that South Africa still exports raw materials to China while importing finished products into our market," the government spokesman, Themba Maseko, said ahead of the visit.
More than one million public sector workers in South Africa launched a strike last week, the latest in a wave of labor protests to hit the country since May and has involved teachers, police, health workers, customs officials and office staff.
(Additional reporting by Ed Cropley in Johannesburg; Editing by Chris Buckley)
