Blackstone, Great Eagle in China housing deal: report
2010-08-22 21:50:00.0
Blackstone, Great Eagle in China housing deal: report | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Blackstone, Great Eagle in China housing deal: report
Sun, Aug 22 2010
Sun, Aug 22 2010
Sat, Aug 21 2010
Thu, Aug 19 2010
Thu, Aug 19 2010
Sun  EDT
) has agreed to a deal with Great Eagle to build high-end apartments in China, where the housing market is booming, the Financial Times said.
Blackstone will back Great Eagle's plan to develop more than 1,000 new homes in the north-eastern port city of Dalian, its first significant investment in China, the newspaper said on Monday, without citing sources.
Great Eagle Group posted a core profit after tax of about HK$1.276 billion ($164 million) and had a net asset value of around HK$22 billion in financial year 2009, according to its web site www.greateagle.com.hk.
Foreign companies have been trying to tap the Chinese housing market, which has seen prices rise sharply over the past year mainly due to healthy domestic consumption as the economy grew strongly and the country lacks investment products.
However, the government has been trying to curb rises, unveiling a slew of measures earlier this year and requiring banks to conduct stress tests to ensure the sector, a key pillar of the Chinese economy, does not suffer from overheating.
(Reporting by Lee Chyen Yee and Megan Davis in New York; Editing by Jonathan Hopfner)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°mainly due to healthy domestic consumption¡±¡­ well i don¡¯t think so. Most of the sharp increase is linked to groups of people pushing accomodation¡¯s price to make money. As it is pretty easy to push the price of this kind of assets, both real estates agents and local governements have taken advantage of it. The worst is that western companies will now try to push prices even higher, contributing to assets which are already overvaluated
Aug 23, 201010:48am EDT--
