Philosopher banker credited with Everbright IPO
2010-08-18 12:18:00.0
(Reuters) - When China Everbright Bank debuts on Shanghai's stock exchange next week, Chairman Tang Shuangning is likely to mark the event in his signature way -- with a Chinese poem, composed on the spot and written out in his trademark flowing calligraphy.
The roughly $3 billion offering of the bank means so much to the 56-year-old bespectacled central banker-turned-executive that those who know him say the IPO ceremony, complete with the striking of a gong, will propel the poet and calligrapher in him into action.
"In his meetings with foreign visitors, he's fond of citing Chinese ancient poems and sometimes lines from Hegel," said a source who has worked with Tang. "He probably has the deepest knowledge of literature and philosophy among Chinese bankers."
Everbright's debut will mark the culmination of Tang's three-year toil to transform the bank from a mismanaged lender, saddled with billions in bad debts, to a healthy institution that is now China's 11th-largest bank.
Tang, a strong admirer of former Chinese leader, Mao Zedong, compares his reform of the group to the Communist Party's famous Long March of the 1930s, as he streamlined its businesses and brought the bank to the black after receiving a $20 billion bailout from Beijing.
Founded in Hong Kong in 1983 early in China's reform era, Everbright Group, which Tang also chairs, began as a conglomerate with sprawling businesses ranging from trade to banking.
But reckless expansion and mismanagement resulted in huge losses by the time Tang arrived in 2007 from his previous post as vice-chairman of the China Banking Regulator Commission. At that time Everbright Bank, the biggest of the group's more than 100 units, had an accumulated loss of 3 billion yuan ($295 million) and nearly 15 billion yuan in bad loans.
Some say Tang will have his work cut out delivering on his promise last week to double his bank's net profit in two years.
"The brightest spot of Everbright Bank is that it has big room to improve, but that requires unshakable determination from the management," said Qiu Zhicheng, an analyst at Guosen Securities, in a note to clients.
"Chairman Tang is 56 years old, and will retire at 60. From this perspective, major reform at Everbright Bank to improve its operations is not likely."
Born in 1954 in China's industrial heartland in northeast Liaoning province, Tang obtained an economics degree then worked for seven years at China Construction Bank (
), a policy lender focused on real estate development at that time.
He later worked at the People's Bank of China, China's central bank, before landing his post as CBRC vice-chairman in 2003 soon after the banking regulator was set up.
He has described himself as an "expert in poetry and calligraphy, but with only a little bit of understanding in finance."
Many observers say Tang's experience at the banking watchdog paved the way for his top role at Everbright Group, where his experience in risk-management proved crucial to resuscitating the ailing conglomerate and stopping its bleeding.
Tang may be demure in nature but the calligraphy he is famous for is anything but, reputed for its forceful and flowing "wild cursive" style.
The author of more than 1,000 poems also blends finance with his other passions, as evidenced by a selection from his book "Groping for Answers," published in January.
"Finance is about managing the economy with tools such as interest rates, reserve ratios and open-market operations; Calligraphy is about managing Chinese characters within a limited space using one's emotion," he wrote in the collection of essays. ($1=6.77 Yuan)
