U.S. says SE Asia concerned by China assertiveness
2010-08-18 09:19:00.0
(Reuters) - The head of the U.S. military Pacific Command said Chinese assertiveness in the South China Sea was causing concern in the region, and said the United States would work to ensure security and protect important trade routes.
The United States military had been present in the region for 150 years and would remain there for many more, Admiral Robert Willard told reporters on Wednesday after meeting the head of the Philippine military, Lieutenant-General Ricardo David.
"We discussed the assertiveness that we're experiencing by the Chinese in the South China Sea and the concerns that that has generated within the region," he said, saying the United States did not take sides in the territorial disputes in the region and adhered to international conventions.
"Our purpose there is to maintain security, when you consider the sealines of communication that criss-cross this very strategic and important region of the ocean, they carry the majority of commerce for this part of the world," he said, saying the U.S. Navy would work with "our partners in the region."
"The overall security, the maritime security and security of the airspace, in these international waters is vitally important."
The United States and South Korea last month held a joint naval drill in the Sea of Japan off the Korean peninsula, which brought condemnation from China, which answered with its own heavily publicized military exercises.
Captain Rudy Lupton, commander of the USS Blue Ridge, the command and control ship of the U.S. Navy's 7th Fleet based in Japan, said earlier this month China should act "responsibly" in the South China Sea.
Brunei, Malaysia, Vietnam, the Philippines, China and Taiwan all stake claims over territory in the South China Sea, which is rich in energy and a major shipping route. All except Brunei have a military presence in the area, and the boundary claims have sparked deadly naval clashes.
Southeast Asian states have become worried by China's increasingly aggressive stance on the complex set of disputes. In late July, Chinese naval forces carried out drills in the disputed southern waters amid tension with Washington over security on the Korean peninsula and in the South China Sea.
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton upset China when she raised the issue of territorial claims at the ASEAN regional forum in July, and supported a multilateral approach to resolving them.
"What the U.S. opposes is any resort of force or forms of coercion to stake this claims on the part of any single nation at the expense of the others," Willard said.
Asked about recent build-ups of military and naval capabilities by countries with claims on the South China Sea, both Willard and David said it was understandable self-interest to protect their interests, and it could help ensure peace.
"So this is about preventing conflict, not allowing any of the circumstances in the region to lead up to a shooting war," Willard said.
(Writing by John Mair; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Let¡¯s face it, the government of China is now a big bully. It¡¯s like any kid with a big belly ¨C it thinks it can throw it¡¯s weight around and grab what it wants, oppress whomever it wants, because, after all, ¡°we¡¯re the Chinese Communist Party, and we don¡¯t answer to anybody¡±. It is truly awful when illegitimate governments like the CCP gain power and wealth that they only care about enriching themselves instead of truly helping their own people. There is no need for China to spend all that money on its military. Instead they should use that money to build schools that don¡¯t collapse, dams that really work, and better prisons for all their dissidents. Did I mention health care, better education, better food saftey, etc.?
Aug 18, 20106:13am EDT--
Not convince of the manner of US participation in South East Asia is good for South East Asians. None of the economies over there depends on arms trade or need a war. The only one if US ever steps in will be the US economy. If peace prevails in South East Asia assuming that South East Asia loses a bit without firing a shot what will that loss be compared to if South East Asia is turned into Afganistan. Having dealt with China, most of the time China do take into consideration South East Asians¡¯ concerns and make concessions. Like during the 1997 financial crisis, had the RMB devalued then South East Asians including South Korea would have perished. Hence it is unlikely that South East Asians will always end up losing. What will happen to the US arms industry and military budgets if peace prevails? Both arms sales and military budget cannot be increased plus there won¡¯t be much for the US to show in its relationship with the South East Asians. Does it sound as if US has more to lose if peace prevails? US may have misread. South East Asians still welcome and respect the US very much not any lesser than China. But they do not wish for a fight not even on the accord for them nor do they wish for a sourish relationship. If US¡¯ entry sours everything, that is detrimental to the US. South East Asians are sophisticated and do not live in trees or jungles. They will judge each and every move and word by China and US, including their media. It will be good to have an open market between China-US-South East Asia, totally open with no restriction either way on products and human flow.
Aug 18, 20107:04am EDT--
You¡¯re absolutely right, marisa. And who is going to stand up to the schoolyard bully? Not the cowardly fat kid with a big stomach for consumption and little stomach for confrontation. Chinese language should be a mandatory US school requirement, (along with Spanish). God knows our children will need it.
Aug 18, 20107:06am EDT--
