China bank property stress test finds risk: report
2010-08-21 22:44:00.0
(Reuters) - A 50-percent drop in China's property prices will lead to a surge in bad real estate loans for Chinese lenders, a local newspaper reported, citing the results of the latest round of a Chinese bank stress test.
Many Chinese banks reported less-than-1-percent ratio in non-performing loans (NPL) to home buyers, but halved housing prices may expand the volume of such loans, pushing up the ratio by another 1-2 percentage points, the 21st Century Business Herald reported, citing banking sources.
), which reported a tiny NPL ratio of 0.12 percent in mortgage loans at the end of June, would see the ratio jump by up to 2 percentage points, the paper reported.
Loans to finance purchase of existing homes, especially those granted in 2009 and 2010 when housing prices surged in major Chinese cities, are particularly vulnerable, it added.
Outstanding loans to property developers and home buyers stood at 8.71 trillion yuan ($1.28 trillion) at the end of June, or 18 percent of the overall loan books, according to statistics from the Chinese central bank.
China's banking regulator has instructed lenders to test the impact of a fall in house prices of up to 50 percent in key cities in early August, but the regulator added that hypothetical scenarios examined in stress tests did not reflect its forecasts nor did they herald any change in policy.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin, editing by Miral Fahmy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Boy this article is REALLY misleading the way it¡¯s written, clearly on purpose. Says ¡± A 50-percent drop in China¡¯s property prices will lead to a surge in bad real estate loans for Chinese lenders¡±¡­¡­That makes it sound like a housing crisis is going on in China, but really it was just: ¡°China¡¯s banking regulator has instructed lenders to test the impact of a fall in house prices of up to 50 percent in key cities in early August¡±
Boy this article is REALLY misleading the way it¡¯s written, clearly on purpose. Says ¡± A 50-percent drop in China¡¯s property prices will lead to a surge in bad real estate loans for Chinese lenders¡±¡­¡­That makes it sound like a housing crisis is going on in China, but really it was just: ¡°China¡¯s banking regulator has instructed lenders to test the impact of a fall in house prices of up to 50 percent in key cities in early August¡±
I mean, CLEARLY this was written to mislead, this is ridiculous, terrible reporting/news.
Aug 21, 201012:39am EDT--
This article may be confusing as financial matters sometimes are and could be written better to accommodate readers less familiar with the finance world, but there is no clear intent to mislead anyone. Stating that something ¡°will¡± happen if certain conditions are met, does not infer that those conditions are currently true. Particularly when the article states this was a test, which was proven in a quote you used yourself. A housing price drop, for whatever reason, will lead to a surge. This was the finding of the test conducted by the Chinese and reported in their You only found this article misleading because you wanted to, and thus you yourself intend to mislead others.
Aug 22, 20101:27am EDT--
How is it possible for anyone to believe that only up to 3 percent of homes will foreclose if the value of homes decreases by 50%!!!! They may argue that home owners must put down considerably more in order to by a home, but the fact of the matter is, there are 67,000,000+ surplus homes in China. All of which are owned by investors who have continually stretched their means in the hopes that the bubble will continue to grow. When the market pops, its gonna be way worse than anyone is willing to acknowledge. I am currently renting a 31st floor penthouse in a brick sky scraper in China. My rent is roughly 550 dollars a month. The home is valued in the millions. When rents are substantially lower than the loan interest rate on the proposed value of a property, its a bubble in a bad kinda way. Any economist worth his weight in gold (safer bet), can tell you that.
Aug 22, 20104:22pm EDT--
