Factbox: Taiwan's trading partners' positions on trade deals
2010-08-17 22:08:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's approval of a free trade-style deal with its top export destination China opens doors for the island to seek pacts with other countries.
A deal with No.6 trade partner Singapore [ID:nTOE67400Q] is a likely first, though a lot depends on the reaction of China, which has long sought to suppress Taiwan's international profile.
Following are other major trading partners' positions on trade deals with Taiwan.
Taiwan's No. 2 export destination is not considering an FTA with the island. The main reason is lack of interest in Congress, where a similar deal with South Korea is struggling. Washington also insists on full market opening rather than tariff cuts in a few sectors.
Taiwan's No.3 trade partner is researching the prospects of an agreement as it seeks closer economic ties. The two sides have discussed the topic but reached no decision on where to go next.
Taiwan has sought to start talks with its No.4 market. The two sides have discussed "trade enhancement measures" as the European Union waits to gauge China's reaction to Taiwan's talks with Singapore.
The 10 country bloc, collectively worth more for Taiwan's exports than the United States, has noted Taipei's interest in a trade deal but has yet to take action as member states are wary about a backlash from China.
Thailand is a priority for Taiwan, but an official from Bangkok has been quoted as saying the matter needs careful study. Less formal existing agreements have already helped expand of trade and investment between the two.
Vietnam has signaled no intention to negotiate an FTA, but the director-general of Taiwan's foreign trade bureau and an architect of the China trade pact has been designated as Taiwan's next representative to Vietnam.
Taiwan has approached this slightly larger economy which has a similar export portfolio but declines to say what's on the minds of officials in Seoul. Korea's representative office in Taipei declined to comment.
Sources: Taiwan foreign ministry, U.S. representative office in Taiwan, Taiwan's Central News Agency, diplomats
