U.S.-S.Korea drills anger North, worry China
2010-08-16 08:30:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. and South Korean militaries will stage their second joint exercise in less than a month from Monday, fuelling tensions with the prickly North and angering regional power China.
Responding with the same rhetoric as it has in the past, the reclusive North said the latest exercise was a "dangerous act to light the fuse of a new war."
But U.S. officials have said further provocations by the North are possible in coming months, especially as Pyongyang tries to build political momentum for the succession to leader Kim Jong-il, expected to hand power to his youngest son.
Unlike the show-of-force drills in July which involved a U.S. aircraft carrier, this month's exercises are lower key.
Last week's tit-for-tat military actions occurred near the Northern Limit Line, the site of several deadly clashes since the 1950-53 Korean war, and the location of the torpedoing of a South Korean warship earlier this year.
Seoul blames the sinking of the Cheonan corvette, which cost 46 lives, on Pyongyang. The North denies responsibility.
"Taking into consideration the exceptionally tense security situation following the Cheonan attack, the (latest) drills this year will be conducted throughout the whole country so that it is as similar as possible to actual battle," the South's defense ministry said.
The exercises have also sparked regional tensions, with the North's only major ally China calling the U.S.-led drills a threat to both its security and regional stability.
Following last month's U.S.-South Korea joint naval drill in the Sea of Japan off the Korean peninsula, China conducted its own heavily publicized military exercises.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
One day, this will be a part of the wikipedia pre-text for World War 3.
Aug 16, 20108:41am EDT--
Aug 16, 201010:43am EDT--
tipu420, you must be joking. The US is having its button pushed by all comers: illegal aliens march across our borders and claim a right to do so; Muslims want to build a mosque next to the site of the WTC, and claim a right to do so; the North Koreans sink an allies ship; the Chinese steal American markets with their undervalued Yuan; the Iranians build nukes even after the US and the world said it was a bad idea; the Pakistanis take our money and fund our enemies with it¡­. It is about time the US stood up for itself.
Aug 16, 201011:44am EDT--
