Philosopher banker credited with Everbright IPO
2010-08-18 08:01:00.0
(Reuters) - A poetic touch was added to China Everbright Bank's trading debut on Wednesday in Shanghai as Chairman Tang Shuangning recited a poem by former Chinese leader Mao Zedong to mark the occasion.
The 56-year-old bespectacled central banker-turned-executive also took the opportunity at the IPO ceremony, complete with the striking of a gong, to show off his skills at calligraphy.
"In his meetings with foreign visitors, he's fond of citing Chinese ancient poems and sometimes lines from Hegel," said a source who has worked with Tang.
Everbright's debut, after raising roughly $3 billion, marks the culmination of Tang's three-year toil to transform the bank from a mismanaged lender, saddled with billions in bad debts, to a healthy institution that is now China's 11th-largest bank.
Tang, a strong admirer of Mao, compares his reform of the group to the Communist Party's famous Long March of the 1930s, as he streamlined its businesses and brought the bank into the black after receiving a $20 billion bailout from Beijing.
Everbright Bank shares jumped 18 percent in the first day of trading on the Shanghai Stock Exchange on Wednesday, handsomely beating market expectations of a subdued performance.
"Some say we deserve five scores for our market performance, but I personally think it's best to have some reservations, this is just the first day," Tang said in a speech at the listing ceremony on Wednesday.
"My way ahead is long; I see no end in sight," Tang added, quoting another line from a famous poem, this one from Qu Yuan, an ancient patriotic poet.
Founded in Hong Kong in 1983 early in China's reform era, Everbright Group, which Tang also chairs, began as a conglomerate with sprawling businesses ranging from trade to banking.
At that time Everbright Bank, the biggest of the group's more than 100 units, had an accumulated loss of 3 billion yuan ($295 million) and nearly 15 billion yuan in bad loans.
Some say Tang will have his work cut out delivering on his promise to double his bank's net profit in two years.
"The brightest spot of Everbright Bank is that it has big room to improve, but that requires unshakable determination from the management," said Qiu Zhicheng, an analyst at Guosen Securities, in a note to clients.
"Chairman Tang is 56 years old, and will retire at 60. From this perspective, major reform at Everbright Bank to improve its operations is not likely."
Born in 1954 in China's industrial heartland in northeast Liaoning province, Tang obtained an economics degree then worked for seven years at China Construction Bank (
), a policy lender focused on real estate development at that time.
He later worked at the People's Bank of China, China's central bank, before landing his post as CBRC vice-chairman in 2003 soon after the banking regulator was set up.
He has described himself as an "expert in poetry and calligraphy, but with only a little bit of understanding in finance."
Many observers say Tang's experience at the banking watchdog paved the way for his top role at Everbright Group, where his experience in risk-management proved crucial to resuscitating the ailing conglomerate.
Tang may be demure in nature but the calligraphy he is famous for is anything but, reputed for its forceful and flowing "wild cursive" style.
The author of more than 1,000 poems also blends finance with his other passions, as evidenced by a selection from his book "Groping for Answers," published in January.
"Finance is about managing the economy with tools such as interest rates, reserve ratios and open-market operations; Calligraphy is about managing Chinese characters within a limited space using one's emotion," he wrote in the collection of essays. ($1=6.77 Yuan)
(Additional reporting by Soo Ai Peng in Shanghai; Editing by Valerie Lee and Jon Loades-Carter)
