China Everbright shines on debut day, banks attractive
2010-08-18 08:00:00.0
China Everbright shines on debut day, banks attractive | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
China Everbright shines on debut day, banks attractive
Tue, Aug 17 2010
Tue, Aug 17 2010
Mon, Aug 16 2010
Wed, Aug 11 2010
Wed, Aug 11 2010
Wed, Aug 18 2010
A pedestrian walks past a branch of China Everbright Bank in Hefei, Anhui province August 6, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Wed  EDT
) shares closed up 18 percent on their Shanghai debut, trumping first-day performance forecasts for the $3 billion IPO, boding well for at least $20 billion in China bank fundraising in the pipeline.
), the world's biggest IPO. AgBank's Shanghai shares rose less than one percent on their first day of trade in mid-July and have stagnated since.
Analysts attributed Everbright's strong performance to investor's optimism about the smaller Chinese banks and their strong earnings reports as well as Everbright's IPO pricing at a lower valuation than many of its peers.
"Everbright's debut surprised me," said Dorris Chen, analyst at BNP Paribas in Shanghai.
"We're in the earnings season, and we do see some very punchy numbers from smaller banks such as China Merchants (
), Minsheng (
), and Everbright. Because it's a new listing, so the number has to be good."
The bank launched its offering in market conditions significantly different from just over a month ago when AgBank launched its IPO, with the Shanghai stock index
"Investor sentiment toward banks has improved, as there's less concern over further monetary tightening, while bad loan risks will vanish if economic growth is healthy," said Yu Wei, analyst at Guoyuan Securities in Shanghai.
Analysts surveyed by Reuters had estimated Everbright shares would rise 5 percent or less on their first day of trade, saying worries over the banking sector's health could sap some demand among investors toward China's No. 11 lender.
In the event, Everbright Bank's shares closed at 3.66 yuan ($0.54), up 18 percent from the IPO price of 3.10 yuan. The broader Shanghai Composite Index
Chairman Tang Shuangning, for whom the listing marked the culmination of a three-year toil to transform Everbright into a healthy institution, marked the occasion by reciting a poem by Mao Zedong and giving exchange officials a gift of calligraphy, a craft for which he is well known.
Tang will likely be pleased with his bank's share performance, which came after it set the IPO price at the top of an indicative range of 2.85-3.10 yuan that itself was lower than many analysts had expected.
Everbright Bank's IPO, which could raise as much as $3.2 billion if it exercises a greenshoe, or over-allotment option, is set to be China's second-biggest this year, after AgBank's world record $22.1 billion offering.
The lender is the last of China's major national banks to go public after Beijing commenced in 2006 a major reform of the country's bad loan-ridden banking sector.
Everbright Bank's debut is being watched closely as a barometer of investor enthusiasm toward banking shares amid rising concerns over lenders' asset quality due to a weak real estate market and massive local government borrowings.
All major lenders, including Bank of China (
), are tapping investors for additional funding to shore up their balance sheets.
In the latest such move, the securities regulator is set to review Industrial and Commercial Bank of China's (
With more than 400 branches across the country, Everbright Bank is controlled by Central Huijin, the investment arm of China's $300 billion sovereign wealth fund. Hong Kong-listed China Everbright (
), the Beijing-based financial conglomerate, directly owns 6.4 percent of Everbright Bank, company data showed.
(Writing by Jason Subler; Additional reporting by Anita Li; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Valerie Lee)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Not many places more dangerous to invest than in a Chinese Bank. At least Everbright has some Government investment in it. Quarterly earnings from Chinese companies, regardless of their affiliation with the Chinese Fed, are too similar to production reports from the Soviet Union in the 1980¡¯s. Every quarter, the leadership of the company, picks a number, slightly better than the previous quarter, and pretends that it is real data.
Aug 19, 20102:02pm EDT--
