Wider trade gap trims growth estimates
2010-08-11 18:34:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. trade gap widened a surprising 18.8 percent in June on a wave of consumer imports from China and other suppliers, suggesting U.S. second-quarter economic growth was weaker than previously thought.
The monthly deficit jumped to $49.9 billion, the highest since October 2008, as imports rose 3.0 percent to $200.3 billion, the Commerce Department reported on Wednesday.
U.S. exports, which President Barack Obama has hoped would help drive economic recovery and job growth, fell 1.3 percent in June to $150.5 billion.
In financial markets, U.S. stocks erased the year's gains, the dollar rose the most in nearly two years and benchmark Treasury yields hit 16-month lows as a gloomy U.S. outlook and weak Chinese data suggested the world economy was slowing and led investors into safe-haven assets.
The much-wider-than-expected gap prompted economists to scale back estimates of second-quarter U.S. economic growth, and reignited calls by some business and labor groups for Congress to get tough with China over its currency policy.
"June's U.S. international trade figures suggest that the U.S. economy cannot rely on a boost from overseas demand to offset the current domestic weakness. In fact, overseas effects are exacerbating the domestic downturn," said Paul Dales, U.S. economist with Capital Economics in Toronto.
In its first estimate of second-quarter gross domestic product growth late last month, the Commerce Department said the economy grew at a 2.4 percent annual rate in the April to June period.
On Tuesday, the Federal Reserve said the pace of U.S. economic recovery has slowed in recent months, resulting in the Fed -- the U.S. central bank -- outlining a plan to nurture growth by using cash from maturing mortgage bonds to buy more U.S. government debt.
The U.S. trade data was "spectacularly terrible" said Ian Shepherdson, chief economist with High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, New York, and he said it knocked 0.4 percentage point off their second-quarter growth estimate.
Others were even more glum. Harm Bandholz, chief U.S. economist at Unicredit Research, ratcheted his second-quarter GDP forecast down to just 1.0 percent based on the trade data, weaker construction spending and less inventory build-up.
"Our economy has fallen into the habit of buying from overseas and not selling the way it needs to, but it is vitally important that we reverse that trend," said Obama, who set a goal early this year of doubling exports.
The National Association of Manufacturers, a top industry group, has said the Manufacturing Enhancement Act of 2010 signed by Obama would boost U.S. manufacturing output by $4.6 billion and support about 90,000 jobs.
Senator Charles Grassley, an Iowa Republican, urged Obama to build on today's signing by pushing "without delay" for congressional approval of long-stalled free-trade agreements with South Korea, Colombia and Panama.
U.S. imports of goods and services in June were the highest since October 2008, fueled by record imports of consumer goods and an uptick in imports of other nonpetroleum products.
Imports from China soared to $32.9 billion, the highest since October 2008. The closely watched U.S. trade deficit with the major East Asian manufacturer widened to $26.2 billion, also the highest since October 2008, while U.S. exports to China fell slightly.
The big jump in the U.S. trade deficit followed Chinese government data on Tuesday that showed China's trade surplus surged to $28.7 billion in July, an 18-month high.
Senator Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, seized on that report to renew calls for legislation threatening China with duties on some of its exports to the United States.
"The House and Senate must now step in and pass strong legislation to penalize China's currency manipulation and bring down our trade deficit," said Scott Paul, executive director of the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
However, some analysts said the June surge in imports from China was due to manufacturers and exporters there trying to ship as many goods as possible before July 15, when government export rebates were reduced.
China loosened its yuan currency from a nearly two-year peg to the dollar in June, but it has barely risen since then. Many lawmakers believe it is undervalued by at least 25 percent.
Although U.S. automotive exports were the highest since October 2008, other important export categories such as capital goods, industrial supplies and materials, and food, feeds and beverages posted declines.
Mortgage purchase and refinancing applications rose less than 1 percent in the first week of August, even as 30-year loan rates fell to 4.57 percent, the lowest in 20 years of record keeping by the Mortgage Bankers Association.
(Additional reporting by Emily Kaiser; Editing by James Dalgleish and Philip Barbara)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Hope this serves as a reminder for consumers. During this recession, you can do your part by buying American & buying local! Don¡¯t order things online, and avoid making purchases at large retailers that have locations overseas. Go for companies that manufacture in America, especially when making large purchases like cars and electronics. If the business aren¡¯t going to make the right decisions here, let¡¯s vote with our dollars and buy only from those companies that are helping to rebuild here in the states.
Aug 11, 201010:02am EDT--
@TrueIronPatriot Don¡¯t order online??
@TrueIronPatriot Don¡¯t order online??
My product is a big ticket item that¡¯s 100% made in USA, and I sell it online.
Why shouldn¡¯t people order it?
Aug 11, 201011:07am EDT--
Ordering online removes people from the process, which means the money does less for the economy. If I buy online, my money goes to manufacturer & the shipping company (possibly also the online retailer, if you don¡¯t buy straight from the manufacturer¡¯s website). If I buy from a local store that sells the same product, my money goes to that retailer, their distributor, the shipping company that delivered it to the store, and the original manufacturer. Those extra steps means more people get to benefit from my purchase. It¡¯s also easier to be sure your products really are 100% American made when you buy them locally. You¡¯re right: buying American made products online is still better than buying imports in any form, but if you want to do as much as you possibly can, buying local is always the way to go.
Aug 11, 201011:30am EDT--
