Analysis: China and U.S. playing risky game on the high seas
2010-08-17 02:45:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Aug 16 2010
Fri, Aug 13 2010
Thu, Aug 12 2010
Mon, Aug 9 2010
Wed, Aug 4 2010
National flags of U.S. and China wave in front of an international hotel in Beijing in this February 4, 2010 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
Tue  EDT
China has been investing big slices of its growing wealth in modernizing its military, and turning its once creaky navy into a blue water fleet that can project power far from its shores, with nuclear submarines and, maybe one day, aircraft carriers.
China is sending naval vessels further afield, to the waters off Somalia to fight pirates, and most recently through the southern Japanese islands, to Tokyo's angst.
That also worries Washington, the world's dominant power, which keeps a hefty military presence in the Asia-Pacific.
While war between the two economically intertwined powers remains a remote possibility, the Pentagon warned on Monday of risks of "misunderstanding and miscalculation" getting out of hand in this trade-driven part of the world plied by thousands of ships daily carrying cargo and oil.
"The U.S. military and the Chinese military don't have a common understanding, a rules of the road, for navigation. That's a major cause for concern," said Drew Thompson, a China expert at the Nixon Center in Washington.
Through missteps or miscalculations, the shadowing and jostling between the two sides could flare into a crisis drawing in other governments around the region and rattling investors who fear discord between Beijing and Washington.
The past few years have seen a number of incidents between the two sides, most seriously in 2001, when a U.S. spy plane made an emergency landing on Hainan after a collision with a Chinese fighter jet over the South China Sea. China released the 24 crew after a U.S. apology and a tense couple of days.
With the two militaries not speaking after Beijing cut off contacts over U.S. plans to sell arms to Taiwan, the self-ruled island that China claims as its own territory, the risk of something bad happening is now elevated further.
"The biggest potential for conflict between China and the United States is in a naval face-off," Wang Jisi, a prominent international relations professor at Peking University, said recently, according to a Chinese current affairs magazine.
"The United States is increasing its surveillance and patrols. As neither have established crisis prevention or management systems, a military clash could morph into a political crisis."
Now Beijing is making noise about the contested South China Sea, long claimed by China, along with Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei, and has been incensed by U.S. comments on the problem last month.
China's determination in asserting sovereignty over the strategic waterway and its scattered atolls, located on major shipping lanes and potentially rich in energy reserves, has unnerved southeast Asia.
"The threat of conflict is elevated, and the fundamental reason is that China's attitude toward the Eastern Sea has grown stronger by the day, more defiant," Duong Danh Dy, a former Vietnamese diplomat and China expert, told Reuters.
The Eastern Sea is Vietnam's name for the South China Sea.
A U.S. aircraft carrier visited Vietnam this month in a show of force to remind China that Washington will safeguard the right to free navigation in the sea, through which flow oil imports to the economies of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
"We all have a right to operate here together and not at the exclusion of anybody else. These waters belong to nobody, yet belong to everybody," Captain David Lausman of the USS George Washington told reporters as F-18s catapulted into a grey sky.
Xu Guangyu, a retired People's Liberation Army major general and now a researcher at the China Arms Control and Disarmament Association, said the country had to become firmer on stating its claims as its maritime interests have grown.
"We were once the sick man of Asia, and now our health is returning. This may make some people abroad uncomfortable and lead to misunderstandings," he told Reuters.
China has also been angered by joint U.S.-South Korean naval exercises, ostensibly aimed at deterring North Korea, but which Beijing sees as happening too close to home for comfort.
"The United States appears to want to declare to the world, 'The Asia-Pacific and the oceans remain under the United States'," Communist Party mouthpiece the People's Daily said in a commentary on Tuesday.
But ultimately China is likely to pull back from any showdown over military influence. Outright confrontation would shake China's own economic prospects, which the ruling Communist Party sees as key to social stability and keeping itself in power.
"The prospect for these higher political tensions perhaps raises the stakes, but I don't think that the senior Chinese leadership is looking to manufacture or instigate an incident," said Thompson, the researcher at the Nixon Center.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley, and John Ruwitch in Hanoi and Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This problem goes back to the fundamental axiom of “Do to others as you would have them do to you.” I saw it first when I was a young Marine in the 1962 October Missile Crises where the Soviet Union sought to place weapons as close to the US as the US had placed close to the Soviet Union. How close will we allow China to come to our shores and, in the long history of the world, how close will China allow the US to come to its shores. Indeed, just where the hell does the “shore” begin. Obviously the “hell” begins by defining the shore and continues in a search for equity. The American Navy is stronger that all of the rest of the world combined and therefore issues the definitions, but that is certainly being challenged by our creditor.
Aug 17, 20103:38am EDT--
China has dammed up the Mekong river, and what water does get through is terribly polluted, ruining the historic cultural lifestyles of people living in Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. China is behaving like an arch criminal, taking, and polluting all land and sea within its grasp. We, in the West are buying all of this garbage from China, and empowering this communist government that cares about nothing but staving off rebellion from the countryside, and clinging to power at any cost. Empowering irresponsible people is an act of stupidity. We need to stop doing it.
Aug 17, 20104:09am EDT--
在@件事件背後，一定有著美大火商的推樱否t，美要削pM_支什麽阻力@N大！f到底，是火商在推印
Aug 17, 20105:10am EDT--
