China paper warns military thinking outmoded
2010-08-15 02:12:00.0
(Reuters) - China's military thinking is outmoded and should learn from others, especially the United States, when it comes to modernizing its vast armed forces, a leading armed forces newspaper said on Sunday.
A commentary in the Liberation Army Daily said modernizing China's military was central to reforms which have seen heavy investment in high-tech weapons like advanced fighter jets.
China has been slimming down its military, the world's largest by number, for the past few years, trying to build a more effective force to face U.S.-supplied Taiwan and Japan, as well as the United States itself.
But this needs creativity and more open thinking, the newspaper said, which could be a problem.
"As there is a rather large influence of conservative thinking in traditional Chinese culture, the task of renewing the culture and thinking of our military will be extremely arduous," it wrote.
China had to "audaciously learn from the experience of the information cultures of foreign militaries," it said.
The United States was a good example to follow in two regards, it added.
The U.S. military buys technology already available on the open market when it can, such as global positioning systems used in the Gulf War, a cheaper and more practical method than trying to develop such equipment itself, the commentary said.
And the United States pays a lot of attention to training, "enlisting large numbers of able men and boldly using them."
The Chinese military looked on with horror during the first Gulf War in 1990-1991, when U.S. guided missiles and precision bombs easily took out Iraqi equipment such as tanks, much of it similar to what China was using at the time.
Since then the People's Liberation Army has come on in leaps and bounds, though analysts say poor training and coordination among different branches of the military remain serious challenges.
During last year's national day parade, China showed off its Dongfeng 21C missile, which could force U.S. aircraft carriers to keep a greater distance if it is successfully developed into an anti-ship ballistic missile.
That would make it harder for the United States to come to Taiwan's aid in the event of a conflict. China claims the self-ruled, democratic island as its own.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard, editing by Jonathan Thatcher)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Wow. I will never endorse military practice of any countries but this article is very distributing and misleading. The US military practice should be the most unwanted. Our military expenses is 7 times of China. We failed miserable twice at Afghan and wouldn¡¯t learned from it. Now, we are moving out of Afghan but want to stir up the Far East. A super power country with global view is the most dangerous. If 83.33% of our military expenses can be used to fuel up the economy and job market; everyone will just be so much better. Our political system is a mess, most politicions will try to stay in by scarifying the true public well being. America may win some wars, but never the world¡¯s people hearts.
Aug 15, 20101:10am EDT--
Aug 15, 20101:48am EDT--
Well, remember, what is true is that the PLA Armed Forces do need to concentrate on training and organization. The most important part of future warfare (and contemporary warfare), is coordination between armed forces. The US, as well as many other militaries, are focusing on being more organized and providing good intelligence. I don¡¯t care if China has 50 million soldiers, if they cant shoot and they don¡¯t know where their enemies are they loose. But they are smart to develop (or buy from Russia) missiles to counter US carrier battle groups. However, I am sure, if the US Navy does what out tax payer dollars are suppost to do for them, they will progress their systems to further protect the 4.5 billion dollar aircraft carriers.
Aug 15, 20108:40am EDT--
