Factbox: Six-party talks & North Korea's nuclear ambitions
2010-08-19 23:33:00.0
Factbox: Six-party talks & North Korea's nuclear ambitions | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Factbox: Six-party talks & North Korea's nuclear ambitions
Tue, Aug 17 2010
Fri, Aug 20 2010
Tue, Aug 17 2010
Mon, Aug 16 2010
Fri, Aug 13 2010
Thu  EDT
Here are facts about the six-party talks, and the North's nuclear program:
The irregular negotiations bring together North and South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia, seeking to end the North's nuclear weapons ambitions in return for aid.
The Yongbyon complex is at the heart of the North's plutonium weapons program. It consists of a five-megawatt reactor, whose construction began in 1980, a fuel fabrication facility and a plutonium reprocessing plant, where weapons-grade material is extracted from spent fuel rods.
When fully operational, Yongbyon can produce enough fissile material for one nuclear bomb a year, experts say. Yongbyon was being taken apart under a disarmament-for-aid deal and there have been no signs the North has restarted the reactor whose operations have been suspended for about three years.
U.S. officials said prior to the North's May 25, 2009 nuclear test it had produced about 50 kg (110 lb) of plutonium, which proliferation experts said would be enough for six to eight nuclear weapons.
The North has since said it extracted more fissile material from spent fuel rods cooling at Yongbyon, which experts said could provide it with material for one more bomb.
Its first test in October 2006 produced a relatively low yield in its explosive force, indicating problems with the North's bomb design or plutonium at its core, experts said.
The 2009 test was stronger, but experts believe it may have only been about one-fifth to one-fourth as powerful as the plutonium bomb the U.S. dropped on the Japanese city of Nagasaki in 1945 at the end of World War Two.
Even though it has exploded nuclear devices, North Korea has not shown it has a working nuclear bomb.
Experts say they do not believe the North has the ability to miniaturize an atomic weapon to place on a missile, but the secretive state has been trying to develop such a warhead. It needs more nuclear testing to build one.
North Korea's aging fleet of Soviet-era bombers would also have difficulty evading the technologically advanced air forces of regional powers the United States, South Korea and Japan to deliver a nuclear bomb outside the country.
North Korea last year said it was enriching uranium, giving it another path for making atomic weapons and confirming long-held U.S. suspicions that Pyongyang had such a program.
Experts said the North is several years away from having a full-scale enrichment program and may never be able to achieve one. It is easier to design a nuclear bomb with highly enriched uranium than plutonium, experts say, but more difficult to make a nuclear warhead with HEU to mount on a missile.
(Reporting by Seoul bureau; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
