Lawmakers urge action on China currency policy
2010-08-04 21:53:00.0
(Reuters) - A group of Senators raised concerns about China's currency practices on Wednesday, urging the Obama administration to do more to combat "unfair trade" practices abroad.
In a letter to U.S. President Barack Obama, 11 senators called for stronger action to level the playing field for U.S. businesses.
"There is no doubt that the Chinese government is manipulating its currency to keep its value lower than it otherwise would be which gives its exports a significant price advantage over U.S. manufactured goods," the senators wrote.
"We are gravely concerned by the administration's failure to address China's currency practices and other predatory actions," the letter said.
"During this economic recovery, it is critical the administration use all trade enforcement tools available to ensure U.S. industries the opportunity to compete fairly and export goods and services."
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said earlier on Wednesday the United States will be focused on how fast and how much China lets its yuan currency appreciate after Beijing's new commitments to foreign exchange flexibility.
"China, as you know about six weeks ago ... took the essential step of restoring flexibility to (its) exchange rate and making it clear that they're going to allow that exchange rate to appreciate in response to market forces over time," he said in response to questions at a forum held by two public policy groups.
Import-sensitive U.S. industries like steel and textiles in particular want Congress to pass a bill that would require the Commerce Department to treat China's "undervalued" currency as a subsidy under U.S. trade law.
That would allow companies to request countervailing duties to offset the amount of China's currency undervaluation.
Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd has said he wants to hold a hearing on China's currency policy, but has not yet set a date. The House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee has scheduled a hearing on the issue the week of September 12.
The People's Bank of China fixed the yuan's daily mid-point CNY=SAEC at 6.7715 versus the dollar on Wednesday, the reference rate's highest since the Chinese currency's landmark July 2005 revaluation, after the dollar index .DXY hits a more than three-month low in global markets.
(reporting by JoAnne Allen, Editing by Bernard Orr)
