China consumer confidence rises in second quarter
2010-08-12 01:34:00.0
(Reuters) - China's consumer confidence index rose in the April-June period for the fifth quarter in a row, boosted by a growing willingness in the countryside to spend as incomes rise, the National Bureau of Statistics said on Thursday.
"The survey results show consumer confidence has been rising since the second quarter last year, based on people's optimistic judgment of the macro economic outlook," the NBS and Nielsen, which conducted a joint survey of 3,500 people, said in a statement.
In contrast to growing confidence in rural China, urban residents were less optimistic last quarter, the survey found.
As a result of intensified efforts to cool the property sector since April, respondents in major cities expecting property prices to fall outnumbered those anticipating a further rise, the survey found.
Sixty-eight percent of respondents expected the employment outlook to improve, down from 71 percent in the previous survey, but an unchanged 67 percent of those surveyed were optimistic about their income prospects over the next 12 months.
Chen Quansheng, an adviser to the State Council, China's cabinet, said at a news conference to release the survey results that he expected consumer inflation to accelerate in the next few months due to higher food prices.
Food makes up a third of China's consumer price index, which rose 3.3 percent in the year to July, up from 2.9 percent in the 12 months to June.
(Reporting by Langi Chiang and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Love these reports! Only 32 minutes ag0
Love these reports! Only 32 minutes ag0
China was slipping, stocks down, oil down yada yada, it sure would be nice if you reporters, would get your act together, Claims new research in a new study by aging experts released only minutes ago. New study question? When investors pull out all of their borrowed money, just where do they put it?? Follow up question, whom sets the targets for how much money each country has to play with. Growth in currency quantity has never ¡®ever¡¯ been explained¡­
Aug 12, 201012:27am EDT--
