Macquarie, Providence bid for Taiwan's CNS: sources
2010-08-06 12:56:00.0
Macquarie, Providence bid for Taiwan's CNS: sources | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Macquarie, Providence bid for Taiwan's CNS: sources
Thu, Aug 5 2010
Mon, Aug 2 2010
Thu, Jul 29 2010
Mon, Jul 26 2010
Mon, Jul 26 2010
Fri  EDT
) and U.S. buyout fund Providence Equity Partners are among the parties to have submitted first-round bids to buy China Network Systems Co Ltd from MBK Partners, sources said on Friday, a deal that could value CNS at about $2 billion.
North Asia-focused MBK Partners is selling CNS after buying the asset in 2007 for $1.5 billion. If successful, MBK's sale would mark the biggest private equity exit in Asia Pacific region this year.
Taiwan conglomerate Ruentex Group had also submitted an indicative bid, while private equity fund Bain Capital may also have submitted a first-round bid, sources said. Bids were due earlier this week, the sources said.
Taiwan's cable market has among the highest profit margins in the region, some analysts estimate, which is the main appeal of the asset to many private equity funds. A high cable penetration rate of about 80 percent and steady cash flow also makes the industry attractive for investors.
While bankers expect the process to generate strong interest, some are concerned about the stiff asking price.
"It's a good asset but the price expectations are high," one source familiar with the process said.
"The asking price is 10 times EBITDA plus, while MBK paid 13 times EBITDA for that," the source added.
Some banks have also spoken to Taiwanese lenders to arrange staple financing for the winning bidder of CNS. The financing size could be NT$35-40bn (US$1.1-1.2bn) based on CNS' 2009 earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of NT$5.337bn and a debt-to-EBITDA ratio of around seven times, Basis Point reported last month.
), which is advising CNS on the auction, declined to comment. MBK officials were not available to comment.
"This will be one of the larger auctions, no doubt. But how many people can get across the finish line, or even take it seriously into the second round, is to be seen," the source added.
But the sale is expected to find some support from Carlyle Group's CRY.UL sale last month of Taiwan's largest cable operator Kbro to the controlling shareholder of Taiwan Mobile (
That deal was done at around 11 times EBITDA, sources said, which could help justify MBK's asking price for CNS.
The planned sale of CNS, along with Lone Star's LS.UL 51 percent stake sale in Korea Exchange Bank 004940.KS, valued at about $3.5 billion, are the two big private equity exits set for Asia this year.
(Additional reporting by Stephen Aldred, Faith Hung, Megan Davies and Stephanie Tong)
