Experts urge U.S. to press China harder on rights
2010-08-03 19:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China's crackdown on critics and ethnic minorities, amid reversals in the rule of law since 2008, warrants redoubled U.S. efforts to press Beijing on human rights, experts told a congressional panel on Tuesday.
In testimony to the Congressional-Executive Commission on China, human rights and legal experts said Washington had played down human rights as it sought Beijing's help with the global financial crisis and diplomatic crises with North Korea and Iran.
The vague and catch-all charge of "endangering state security" has been applied to a series of cases involving writers and lawyers as well as ethnic minorities from Tibet and Xinjiang, regions roiled by violent protests in 2008 and 2009.
"Roughly since the beginning of 2008, there has been a palpable sense that earlier progress toward rule of law in China has stalled, or even suffered a reversal," said researcher Joshua Rosenzweig of the Dui Hua Foundation.
"There is mounting evidence that a crackdown is under way, one particularly targeting members of ethnic minorities, government critics and rights defenders," he told the panel.
The Dui Hua Foundation, which works to win medical parole or early release for political prisoners, has compiled a list of 5,800 people imprisoned in China for nonviolent expression of religious and political beliefs, Rosenzweig said.
The Chinese legal system's lack of transparency prevents a full tally of the political prisoners, but available statistics show a "troubling trend" that the crackdown has targeted not only political activists but the lawyers who defend them, said Jerome Cohen of the New York University School of Law.
The experts told the panel that Washington should turn what are now annual human rights talks with Beijing at least twice a year, raise the rank of officials participating and raise specific prisoners' cases rather than engage in the abstract discussions the Chinese have preferred to date.
The Congressional-Executive Commission on China, a panel comprised of U.S. lawmakers and senior administration officials, was set up in 2000 under legislation accompanying China's entry into the World Trade Organization.
