Factbox: China comment: finmin rules out big stimulus
2013-07-17 06:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China's new leaders have promised to keep the economy on an even keel in 2013 with flexible policy settings while accelerating free-market reforms to sustain long-term growth.
Beijing would tolerate quarterly growth slipping as far as 7 percent year-on-year before looking to lift the economy, according to government economists from top think-tanks. The government is projecting growth this year of 7.5 percent.
LOU JIWEI, FINANCE MINISTER
"We will unveil some tax reduction policies, especially for small-sized firms, to better increase employment."
"We will adjust the expenditure responsibilities of central and local government and increase central government's spending appropriately."
"China will expand the value-added tax reform program to the whole service industry." (Lou made the comments during the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Washington.) Source: The website of the Ministry of Finance, July 17
LI KEQIANG, PREMIER
"Neither should we change policy orientation due to temporary economic fluctuations, which may affect the hard-won restructuring opportunity, nor should we lack vigilance and preparations when the economy might slide below the reasonable range,"
"We are confident, having the necessary means and the ability (to achieve this year's growth targets).But we need to pay a lot of efforts."
"When the economy operates within reasonable range, we will focus on transforming of the mode of economic development."
Source: the central government website, July 16
LI KEQIANG, PREMIER
"China's economic situation is generally stable so far this year with main economic indicators within reasonable range and annual expectations."
"But the economic environment is becoming more complicated and faces favorable and adverse conditions, while the economy still has growth momentum and faces downward pressure."
"We will quicken reforms in key areas including administrative management, the fiscal system, finance and prices."
Source: Xinhua, July 9;
XI JINPING, PRESIDENT
"We should improve our way of evaluating officials' performance. We should not only look at (economic) development but also fundamentals, not only at obvious achievements but also at potential results."
"We will include indicators including welfare improvements, social development and ecological benefits as important measures in evaluating officials. We should no longer evaluate performance of officials simply against GDP growth."
Source: Xinhua, June 29;
LIU SHIYU, DEPUTY CENTRAL BANK GOVERNOR
"I am worried that the 'shadow banking' capital may flow into the property market, outdated industries and some local government financing vehicles with poor qualifications, which might lead to relatively high risks."
"Personally, I think we could complete the two reforms naturally over the next 10 years if we the international financial crisis won't take a turn for the worse."
Source:Sina.com, March 18
(Reporting by China Economics Team; Editing by Sanjeev Miglani)
