China Everbright IPO hugely subscribed by key investors
2010-08-04 08:22:00.0
(Reuters) - Strategic investors have made a rush for China Everbright Bank's IPO shares, leading to a huge oversubscription and signaling strong demand for its potentially $2.9 billion IPO and other offerings in the pipeline as stock markets recover.
Thirty key investors have committed up to 60 billion yuan ($8.9 billion) for their portion of the 6.1 billion-share offering, or roughly $1.37 billion of the IPO, China's 11th biggest bank by assets said in a statement on Wednesday.
It could be the second-largest Chinese offering this year after Agricultural Bank of China's (AgBank) more than $20 billion initial public offering last month.
"Everbright Bank is healthier than AgBank by many standards and is selling much fewer shares, so if the pricing is reasonable, it would be natural for the lender to attract more interest from potential strategic investors who are often state-owned and cash-rich," said Ye Yunyan, analyst at Galaxy Securities in Beijing.
"The recent rebound in the stock market also helps boost demand for the IPO, as investors get less pessimistic about the long-term prospects of the banking sector."
All major state-owned Chinese lenders have announced massive fundraising plans after they lent a record 9.6 trillion yuan last year to support Beijing's economic stimulus and as the banking regulator tightened capital rules to pre-empt a rise in bad loans.
Everbright Bank's initial public offering is its second major fundraising since August last year. The bank raised 11.5 billion yuan in a private placement then but said it could still face a big capital shortfall without the public offering.
Its capital adequacy ratio, a key measure of lenders' ability to absorb potential losses, stood at 10.39 percent at the end of last year, compared with the 11 percent minimum required for mid-sized listed lenders.
Everbright hopes to price the IPO at between 3 and 3.2 yuan apiece, two people familiar with the deal told Reuters on Monday.
Assuming the shares were sold at 3 yuan apiece, the strategic placement in the IPO was about 6.7 times oversubscribed, based on a Reuters calculation.
Chinese companies typically do not disclose oversubscription figures for strategic share placements, but Galaxy Securities' Ye said the ratio was very high compared with previous Chinese IPOs.
Everbright, controlled by Central Huijin, a unit of China's $300 billion sovereign wealth fund, plans to sell 6.1 billion yuan-denominated A shares, and could expand its IPO by 15 percent to 7 billion shares through an overallotment.
It is placing about half the total amount of IPO shares to strategic investors who include its long-term customers, shareholders and some reputable Chinese companies.
Everbright Bank Chairman Tang Shuangning, a former vice chairman of the China Banking Regulatory Commission and a well-known calligrapher, had said the strategic placement and the over-allotment option were designed to limit any negative impact that the IPO could have on the stock market.
China's stock markets fell nearly a third in the first half of this year, making it the second-worst performer globally after Greece, as a flurry of giant share offerings and the government's tightening in the real estate sector spooked investors.
The Shanghai Composite Index jumped 10 percent last month, as investors bet that Beijing will ease tightening measures on signs of an economic slowdown.
Everbright Bank this week kickstarted investor roadshows in four major Chinese cities, including Beijing and Shanghai. The bank aims to list on the Shanghai Stock Exchange on August 18.
It will also consider selling shares to overseas strategic and public investors after its Shanghai listing to raise more capital, the bank has said.
The lender is 60 percent owned by Central Huijin and its second-biggest shareholder is China Everbright Group, one of China's biggest financial conglomerates with businesses ranging from banking, insurance, asset management and securities to real estate.
The lead underwriters for the IPO are China Jianyin Investment Securities, Shenyin & Wanguo Securities Co, and China International Capital Corp (CICC), in which Morgan Stanley holds a stake that it is planning to sell.
