China and HK stocks slide as imports disappoint, CPI eyed
2010-08-10 08:40:00.0
(Reuters) - China's key stock index fell 2.9 percent on Tuesday after weak trade data spurred concerns domestic demand was cooling faster than thought while while inflation might creep up in July.
1.6 percent lower to 21,473.60, pulling back from Monday's 3- month high.
"Import growth is weaker than expected, indicating that China's investment is slowing," said Eliza Liu, macroeconomist with CCB International Securities in Beijing.
Talk of possibly higher-than-expected inflation, which could persuade the authorities to keep policy tight despite slowing economic growth, also weighed on sentiment.
"The market is pricing in that CPI could be higher than the expected 3.3 percent, prompting concerns of tighter policy in the coming months," said Xu Yinhui, analyst at Guotai Junan Securities in Shanghai.
Large cap issues were among the most active stocks, with property heavyweight Gemdale (
) fell 4.5 percent after it said a government-ordered production suspension affecting two of its mines in China's Shandong province would affect its annual output target.
Crude fell to near $81 on Tuesday as China's crude and overall imports slowed in July, raising the prospect of lower crude purchases by the world's second-largest energy consumer as its economic growth cools in the second half.
) slumped 4.8 percent and was the top loser on the index. Foxconn shares are top Hang Seng decliners this year, down over 35 percent.
A median of 27 forecasts for China's July consumer price index suggests the number could come in above the government's 3 percent target for the full year as widespread floods likely boosted inflation by pushing up vegetable and fruit prices.
"Expectations of policy easing in China may wane," said Daniel So, analyst at Sun Hung Kai Financial, adding that he expected the central bank to maintain the status quo for now.
Tuesday's slide on the Hang Seng Index took it below the medium-term resistance of a downward trendline from the November 2009 peak.
