Gold rises on physical demand as technicals improve
2010-08-03 15:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold rose slightly on Tuesday as investors steered clear of U.S. stocks after weak economic data, China moved to make trading gold easier and physical demand improved after bullion's recent slide.
Scott Meyers, senior analyst at New York-based Pioneer Futures Inc, said that gold's direction hinged on the stock market's performance, as a possible equities sell-off could spark higher gold prices.
He said an improved technical picture should also lift prices, after the metal tried and fail last week to break below a rising trendline in place for two years.
"There was a three-day bottom formed at $1,160 last week, and the market held there well. From a short-term technical perspective, it is indicative of a market that does perform well and will possibly advance to another level" above $1,200 an ounce, Meyers said.
Spot gold was $1,186.45 an ounce at 2:32 p.m. EDT, against $1,181.25 late in New York on Monday. U.S. gold futures for December delivery settled up $2.10 at $1,187.50 an ounce.
Spot gold lost upward momentum after hitting a record $1,264.90 an ounce in June as concerns over euro zone sovereign debt levels abated.
Gold exchange-traded funds saw net outflows last month, and net long positions in COMEX gold futures fell.
"With the rejuvenating confidence in the health of the global economy, gold's role as an investment asset seems to be fading," said Richcomm Global Services analyst Pradeep Unni.
But broader physical demand for gold has risen, particularly in Asia, as prices fell. Traders in India, the world's biggest gold consumer, are buying ahead of festivals. The stronger rupee was another incentive for local buyers.
China's central bank said in a statement it will allow its banks to import and export more gold as part of a program to push forward the development of the country's market in the precious metal.
"This is largely positive news for gold," said UBS analyst Edel Tully. "It looks like an effort to further liberalize the gold market and integrate it into China's financial framework."
She added that the move highlighted the importance of the Chinese gold market both for the broader Chinese economy and for the global gold trade. China is the world's top producer and No. 2 consumer of gold behind India, but its trade is largely domestic.
Among other precious metals, silver was at $18.44 against $18.34, platinum at $1,578 an ounce versus $1,586.75 and palladium at $499 versus $509.70.
(Additional reporting by Jan Harvey in London; Editing by Alden Bentley)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Has anyone else heard rumors of Chinese gold farming?
Aug 03, 20102:17pm EDT--
