U.S. urges China not to take advantage of Iran sanctions
2010-08-02 05:31:00.0
(Reuters) - A U.S. arms control official on Monday urged China, which has always promoted dialogue with Iran over its nuclear program, to observe sanctions against Tehran aimed at forcing it to drop its nuclear ambitions.
China said on Friday it did not approve of tougher new sanctions imposed by the European Union on Iran and welcomed Tehran's offer to return to negotiations on a nuclear fuel swap without conditions.
China also denounced the United States earlier this month for imposing its own sanctions on Iran, saying Washington should not unilaterally take such steps outside of U.N. resolutions.
"We want China to be a responsible stakeholder in the international system," Robert Einhorn, special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control at the State Department who oversees sanctions against North Korea and Iran, told a news conference.
"And that means cooperating with the U.N. Security Council resolutions and it means not backfilling, not taking advantage of the responsible restraint of other countries."
U.S. officials have expressed concern that Chinese companies are aggressively investing in Iran's energy sector despite the threat of sanctions.
Tensions on the Korean peninsula have reached new heights after the sinking of a South Korean navy ship in March, killing 46 sailors, that the South blames on the North, prompting Seoul to impose sanctions against Pyongyang.
South Korean and U.S. militaries held large-scale drills last month to deter North Korean provocations, drawing an angry response from Pyongyang, which has repeatedly denied involvement in the ship sinking.
"Our hope is that these measures will be effective, that they will provide strong incentives for North Korea's leaders to abide by their international obligations, not to pursue any provocative activities and fulfill completely their commitments to denuclearization on the Korean peninsula," Einhorn said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Probably the American administration should remember this, China is a stakeholder of International System, China is not a stakeholder of United States. International System does not equal to United States. There are many countries out side of U.S.A. There are much more populations out side of U.S.A.
Aug 02, 201011:04am EDT--
True, but lately the Chinese attitude has been one of entitlement, just like the American administration, especially within a rock¡¯s throw of it¡¯s borders. Not just by the government, but also by the wider media. Act as though they are still the ¡°little guy¡± with the chip holding them back but demand big league status. Can¡¯t have it both ways. Make a call.
Aug 02, 20104:59pm EDT--
