Pro-Cantonese protesters scuffle with China police
2010-08-02 12:19:00.0
(Reuters) - Hundreds in China's southern export hub of Guangdong scuffled with police at a weekend protest to support the local Cantonese dialect, a witness said, with a small group of reporters and protesters briefly detained by police.
The second rally in as many weeks -- sparked by a proposal to switch much programing on local television to mainstream Mandarin Chinese -- had kicked off largely peacefully on Sunday afternoon in Guangzhou until several hundred police officers showed up and tried to break up proceedings, triggering scuffles.
About two dozen people were taken away by police and detained, including eight Hong Kong journalists, said one reporter at the scene who was held and questioned for several hours before being released.
Guangzhou police posted a statement on the department's website accusing the protesters of holding illegal gatherings, saying they would "punish those who were unreasonable and created trouble," the South China Morning Post reported.
Observers said the sensitivity of Guangzhou authorities to such public protests may be linked to the city's hosting of the Asian Games in November, one of Asia's largest sporting events, which has also led to a tightening of immigration policies for the city's large community of African and Middle Eastern traders.
Stability-obsessed Communist Party officials in Beijing tend, however, to be wary of any public demonstrations that challenge official policy, however minor the issue might appear to be.
In neighboring Hong Kong, around one hundred people held a rally on Sunday and marched to the city's government headquarters to show support for the mainland protests.
Beijing has promoted Mandarin Chinese, the country's official language, for decades to unite a nation with thousands of dialects and numerous minority languages.
But Cantonese is still widely spoken in large swathes of southern China including Hong Kong, Macau and the booming province of Guangdong, with people there fiercely proud of their unique linguistic culture and identity, thanks in part to the spill-over influence of Hong Kong's wildly successful and racy vernacular "Cantopop" culture.
An influx of outsiders seeking work in China's coastal export hubs has bolstered the case for more Mandarin both on television and in daily life, its supporters say.
(Reporting by Emma Graham-Harrison in Beijing and James Pomfret in Hong Kong; Editing by Ken Wills & Kazunori Takada)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HWNL1MEtUH0
Aug 02, 20104:14am EDT--
Power, control and domination are the goals of the Chinese communists, not a flourishing populus and rich culture. Supression and subjugation are but their usual methods. Their power-lust and unchallenged authority is what matters most to them. They constantly exclaim and propgandize for benefit of the country and the people, how hypocritical and untrue. Consider this. Most counties and regions of the world are multi-cultural, multi-lingual and multi-dialected yet are stable, cohesive and cultured. Take a look at the Europen Union, the United States, Central and South Americas. Written Chinese characters are universal. Whatever is official and necessarily recorded can be done so with universal recognition. What business is it of the Chinese communists how people speak, sing, celebrate and revere it in their own regions, villages and local cultures, other than to force their own will and preferences on others and deprive others of their own.
Aug 02, 20104:54am EDT--
WOW!!! The chinese communists want to control EVERYTHING! Even something as minor as how people speak. The chinese government needs to start realizing that they cannot control and dictate how people live their lives.
Aug 02, 20109:28am EDT--
