AgBank shares up as Morgan Stanley lifts stake
2010-07-23 11:18:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Jul 23 2010
Fri, Jul 23 2010
Thu, Jul 22 2010
Fri, Jul 16 2010
Thu, Jul 15 2010
Fri  EDT
Morgan Stanley raised its holding in AgBank's H-shares to 16.31 percent from 15.28 percent earlier this week, according to data on the website of the Hong Kong stock exchange.
"This has helped boost confidence among retail investors that the bigger players are interested in buying into the bank," said Jonathan Siu, an analyst at Core Pacific-Yamaichi in Hong Kong. "There was some uncertainty during the first couple of days, but this has helped improve sentiment."
A greenshoe option, also known as an overallotment, allows companies to expand an offering if there is enough demand for the stock within the first month of trade.
Underwriters typically hold the shares in trust on behalf of the issuer, ultimately either releasing them to the allocated holders or returning them to the company.
The remainder of the shares that Morgan Stanley holds include holdings related to client activity, positions held separately by the firm's investment management division and positions held for its trading book, the bank said.
AgBank's Hong Kong-listed H shares closed the session up 5.45 percent at HK$3.49. The benchmark Hang Seng Index
AgBank's (
) Shanghai-listed A shares closed up 2.9 percent at 2.81 yuan, beating the Shanghai Composite Index's .SSCE 0.38 percent advance.
Morgan Stanley, and rivals Deutsche Bank AG (
), Goldman Sachs Group Inc (
), JP Morgan Chase & Co (
), Macquarie Group (
) and China International Capital Corp (CICC), handled AgBank's Hong Kong offering that raised about $10.5 billion.
While it is common for underwriters to buy the shares of a company they helped list, only Goldman Sachs has received the mandate to stabilize AgBank shares during the first month following its offering, according to the lender's prospectus.
AgBank made modest debuts in Hong Kong and Shanghai last week, reflecting wider concern over valuations and investor cautiousness amid market volatility.
(Reporting by Kelvin Soh and Kennix Chim; Editing by Sharon Lindores)
