House approves bills to boost manufacturing
2010-07-28 18:03:00.0
(Reuters) - Lawmakers moved closer on Wednesday to creating a commission to find ways to cut the huge trade deficit with China and other countries, while also pushing a strategy to promote U.S. manufacturing.
The House of Representatives passed the bill on the commission as part of a "Make it in America" agenda promoted by Democrats before November's congressional elections to address voters' concerns about persistently high U.S. unemployment.
"Make it in America is not just a slogan. It is an objective to make that a reality," House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer told reporters after the vote.
"We must take action to support domestic manufacturing and end the outsourcing of American jobs," said that bill's chief sponsor, Representative Dan Lipinski. "A strong manufacturing sector is critical to leading America out of recession."
The Senate passed a bill on Tuesday to help manufacturers by temporarily suspending import duties on a long list of raw materials used to make finished goods, as well as some foreign products made with U.S. inputs.
That legislation now goes to Obama, who is expected to sign it. The National Association of Manufacturers estimates the bill would raise U.S. manufacturing output by $4.6 billion and support almost 90,000 jobs.
The U.S. trade deficit was $375 billion in 2009, down sharply from $699 billion in 2008 as result of the global financial crisis that badly damaged world trade.
But with U.S. economic growth on the rebound, the trade gap has started widening again and already reached nearly $200 billion in the first five months of this year.
A big portion of the trade deficit is with China, which many lawmakers blame for heavy losses in U.S. manufacturing jobs over the past decade.
The bill by Democratic Representative Peter DeFazio would set up a bipartisan commission to study the causes of the trade gap, with a particular focus on foreign currency and trade practices.
It would require the panel, within 16 months of enactment, to recommend to the White House and Congress specific strategies for reducing the gap with China and other countries such as Japan, Mexico and members of the 27-nation European Union that run significant surpluses with the United States.
Third Way, a moderate Washington think-tank, put out a report on Wednesday saying widespread trade barriers and anti-competitive practices by trade partners "present a major and evolving threat to U.S. exports."
The solution was not to engage in matching protectionism but to recognize that trade deals boost exports and jobs, to "pursue new trade agreements with urgency" and to beef up enforcement of existing trade pacts, the report said.
(Additional reporting by Susan Cornwell and Paul Eckert; Editing by Xavier Briand and John O'Callaghan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The bill will establish a bipartisan commission to study the causes of the trade gap. Oh, did you expect congress to do something?
Jul 28, 20106:08pm EDT--
It¡¯ll never happen. 20 years ago, yes.
It¡¯ll never happen. 20 years ago, yes.
Too many pols were greased to allow the stripping of our manufacturing ,you cant resurrect the dead.
Jul 29, 20107:04am EDT--
