House sets China currency hearing for September
2010-07-22 16:56:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jul 22 2010
Thu, Jul 22 2010
Wed, Jul 21 2010
Wed, Jul 21 2010
Tue, Jul 20 2010
Thu  EDT
They spoke at an event to lay out House Democrats' plans to pass several pieces of legislation aimed at helping create more U.S. manufacturing jobs.
Import-sensitive U.S. industries like steel and textiles in particular want Congress to pass a bill that would require the Commerce Department to treat China's "undervalued" currency as a subsidy under U.S. trade law.
That would allow companies to request countervailing duties to offset the amount of China's currency undervaluation.
China recently loosened its currency from a peg to the dollar, but it has risen only slightly in value since.
"There's been less than a 1 percent change and that's very unsatisfactory," Levin said. "That's the purpose of the hearing, to determine the progress to date, and if there isn't, what the next step is."
Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd also has said he wants to hold a hearing on China's currency policy, but has not yet set a date.
In contrast, the House which is expected to leave at the end of July for its summer recess.
Senator Charles Schumer and several of his colleagues have been pushing for a vote in the Senate on China currency legislation, but so far nothing has been set.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Jan Paschal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Has Barry forced China to remedy it¡¯s human right¡¯s violations,to stop sending tainted merchandise to the States and to back off with Taiwan?
Has Barry forced China to remedy it¡¯s human right¡¯s violations,to stop sending tainted merchandise to the States and to back off with Taiwan?
Jul 22, 20105:23pm EDT--
