Lawmakers demand tough action on China piracy
2010-07-21 13:36:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jul 21 2010
Wed, Jul 21 2010
Tue, Jul 20 2010
Tue, Jul 20 2010
Tue, Jul 20 2010
A customs officer displays a counterfeit branded mobile phone at a rubbish dump site in Kunming, Yunnan province April 26, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
Wed  EDT
"I think we ought to consider this economic terrorism," Representative William Delahunt said, reflecting the frustration of many Democrats and Republicans at a House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee hearing.
Lawmakers repeatedly pressed President Barack Obama's chief intellectual property enforcement official, Victoria Espinel, to tell them what greater pressure the United States could bring on China to stop intellectual property theft.
"If we don't respond forcefully and hard against China until they clean up their act, it's going to send a message to the rest of the world that we're just spinning our wheels," said Delahunt, a Democrat.
The International Intellectual Property Alliance, which represents U.S. copyright industry groups, has estimated lost sales in China at more than $3.5 billion in 2009 due to piracy of American music, movies and software.
U.S. manufacturers also complain that China's counterfeiters rip off their goods and sell them in markets around the world, including the United States.
"China is by far the worst violator of intellectual property rights globally, and its government is complicit in ensuring that it keeps its number one position," said Republican Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen.
Last month, the chief executives of Microsoft and 11 other U.S. software companies met with Obama administration officials and lawmakers to urge increased pressure on China for failing to crack down on piracy.
But it may be necessary for Congress to pass legislation to put "more teeth" in U.S. enforcement tools, she said in response to persistent questioning from Republican Representative Dana Rohrabacher.
China's failure to protect U.S. intellectual property is even more troubling when combined with Chinese government industrial policies "aimed at putting us at a competitive disadvantage," Espinel said.
China also accounts for 80 percent of fake goods seized by U.S. customs authorities, she said.
But given the extensive U.S.-China trade relationship, both Congress and the Obama administration must be careful not to take steps that would have a "significant detrimental effect on other parts of our economy," Espinel said.
Democratic Representative Brad Sherman said the U.S. government should use cyber-combat techniques to take down Internet sites in China, Russia and other countries that sell pirated U.S. music and movies.
"That is something we're actively investigating," Espinel responded. But while it is technically possible, it does not take long for the sites to pop up in new locations, she said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Eric Beech)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jul 21, 20101:57pm EDT--
Really? Economic Terrorism? Delahunt is comparing pirating copies of Microsoft Windows to 9/11, Madrid subway attack, and bombing in India?
Really? Economic Terrorism? Delahunt is comparing pirating copies of Microsoft Windows to 9/11, Madrid subway attack, and bombing in India?
Also, Murfster, you are a disgrace to our boys in Afghanistan and Iraq. I hope a Chinese banker will one day take all your money.
Jul 21, 20103:17pm EDT--
William Delahunt is an idiot. Why are governments getting involved with international business. If I was China I would just come out and say, we¡¯re gona¡¯ copy your crap and there¡¯s nothing you can do about it. Because it might help him realize the futility of even trying to regulate the largest and poorest single population on the planet. Companies like these need to stop thinking of piracy in china as lost revenue, and realize they need to just work around the culture. I mean the Chinese will never buy your stuff! You somehow magically make them buy it and they¡¯ll just start buying something else instead. You might as well be walling off an ant. But you know? In a way, I hope they do crack down on the Chinese, power to them¡­they make good Windows proprietary software, maybe push them hard enough and they¡¯ll start coding for Linux instead.
Jul 21, 20103:49pm EDT--
