China will open wider to foreign business: minister
2010-07-25 21:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Worries that China is throwing up obstacles to foreign business are misplaced, Commerce Minister Chen Deming said in an article published on Monday.
"In fact, China will open wider in the future," Chen wrote in an opinion piece in the Financial Times.
European and U.S. business groups have complained in particular about the unpredictability of Chinese regulation, favoritism toward local rivals in areas such as government procurement and poor protection of intellectual property rights.
Chen welcomed the advanced technology and business know-how that a wave of foreign direct investment has brought to China, noting that since April foreign firms seeking accreditation for "innovation products" have benefited from the same rules of origin as domestic companies.
"Coming out of crisis, China must now work to upgrade its own industries in areas such as high-end manufacturing and environmental goods and services. To do this, China wants to make better use of the knowledge and expertise of multinationals," Chen said.
German carmaker Daimler AG's (
"The world economy is at a crucial stage of restructuring. As China works with others to push the global recovery, tremendous opportunities will open up for foreign companies. China remains open for business, and the rest of the world can benefit," he said.
(Reporting by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
World-Wide Fraud Investigation China is concerned with pyramid/Ponzi schemes that, like Madoff¡¯s scheme have the potential of destroying the economy. China has banned Canadian & American pyramid selling, however there exists huge companies involved in ¡°product masked pyramid schemes, having the same mathematical inherent element, dooming these schemes to certain demise. Many of these frauds are registered on the stock exchanges. This has become a serious problem. As these myriad schemes run out of victims to keep them going and look to Asia as their last hope, Asians who get caught up in these schemes will be the last in, and become the massive losers, their money going to further bolster world-wide organized crime and money-laundering racketeering. According to world policing authority white-collar crime has now surpassed the massive illegal drug ¡°industry.¡± These illegal schemes, which even employ professional singers singing their theme song, ¡°The Power Of Two¡± are proliferating at a maddening rate under the wilfully ¡°blind eyes¡± of North American regulators and law enforcement agencies, as with Madoff¡¯s scam and accepted as well by politicians and authorities as ¡°business as usual.¡± With the billions and billions of dollars being scammed from victims worldwide the perpetrators of these schemes have the power to not only institute multi-million dollar malicious civil lawsuits against ¡°whistleblowers,¡± but also the power to manipulate corrupted law enforcement into trumping up false charges, and prosecutors into conducting malicious prosecutions even to the extent that in my country, Canada, at least one mother was arrested on trumped up charges for trying to recover the money her 18 year-old daughter and daughter¡¯s friend were scanned out of by a lawyer perpetrating a pyramid fraud along with police officers and a college teacher who is also a provincial prosecutor. Chinese authorities deal harshly with the perpetrators of these schemes and try to protect their school children from these frauds. A man who massacred schoolchildren in China was a victim of pyramid fraud. In contrast Canadian authorities routinely harass, threatened and jail the victims and complainants while protecting the perpetrators of these financial frauds. RCMP officers and police on down, government personnel (even at the CRA ¨C Income Tax Department) are the top perpetrators of these pyramid schemes. Check out the latest evidence obtained under the Canadian Freedom of Information Act.
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/tax-agency-workers-surf-web-too-much-report/article1621101/ Check out the truth and a video of the false arrest of a ¡°whistleblower¡± by RCMP aired on Canada¡¯s National Media; CBC Marketplace, resulting in the charges subsequently withdrawn. If these schemes that have fooled banks, stock analysts, accountants etc, ¡°fly under the radar¡± into China, as China embraces more trade from North America, it could wreak havoc not only in China and the rest of Asia, but in the entire world economy¡­. That¡¯s the truth¡­. That¡¯s the reality. www.crimebustersnow.com dave-CBNow
Jul 26, 201011:56am EDT--
