China shows military strength ahead of U.S. drill
2010-07-21 03:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China has shown off its growing military strength with naval exercises off its eastern coast, shortly before Washington and Seoul are expected to carry out their own drills which Beijing has criticized.
State television broadcast images on Tuesday it said showed the East Sea Fleet on recent maneuvers, including helicopters and a submarine launching a long-range missile underwater.
Xinhua said four rescue helicopters and four rescue ships were deployed in the two-day drill in the Yellow Sea, where the United States and South Korea are planning maneuvers aimed at sending a message of deterrence to North Korea.
Beijing has condemned those drills, which many in China feel are also aimed at their country.
Zhu Chenghu, a strategic studies professor at the National Defense University, told the China News Service that the U.S.-South Korean drills were clearly aimed at sending Beijing a message as much as they were directed at North Korea.
"They will take place in the Yellow Sea, which is the entry point to China's house, and they obviously want to show off their military strength," he said.
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates dismissed concerns on Tuesday, saying the drills were routine.
Neither Xinhua nor state television mentioned the U.S.-South Korean exercises. But the official China Daily quoted experts downplaying the Chinese drill, which started on Saturday.
"The nature of the drill is very different from that of the US-ROK joint military action," Beijing-based military analyst Peng Guangqian was quoted saying.
China's exercises rehearsed how to defend against long-distance attacks, as well as exploring ways to integrate troops and civilians to tackle emergencies, Xinhua said.
"We resolutely oppose any activities in the Yellow Sea that may threaten China's security," Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesman Qin Gang told a routine news conference last Thursday.
China's growing military clout and rising defense spending have raised concern in Asia, especially in Japan.
Taiwan, the self-ruled island China claims as its own, warned this week that its huge neighbor was still aiming missiles at it, despite warming business and trade ties.
(Additional reporting by Huang Yan, editing by Andrew Marshall)
