China on track to aim 2,000 missiles at Taiwan: report
2010-07-19 09:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China will have 2,000 missiles aimed at its rival Taiwan by the end of the year, several hundred more than the current number, despite fast-warming trade ties between the two sides, an island defense study said.
Beijing's preparations setting Taiwan further back in the military power balance against its political adversary could destroy 90 percent of the island's infrastructure, the report published in the defense ministry's naval studies periodical said.
The increase from today's estimate of 1,000 to 1,400 missiles could raise tensions after two years of upbeat dialogue between the rivals that has cleared the way for direct civilian flights and a free trade-style deal in June.
"Even though we've signed the trade deal, there won't be any progress on military issues," Hsu Yung-ming, political science professor at Soochow University.
A new threat to detente between tech-reliant Taiwan and economic powerhouse China, already the island's top export destination, would likely chill financial markets as investors hope to see relations gain momentum.
The 2,000 short-range and mid-range missiles aimed at the island just 160 km (99 miles) away at its nearest point would follow from Beijing's broader plans to modernize its military, said Taiwan Deputy Defence Minister Andrew Yang.
"In the process of improving air missile capabilities, that could be the number by the end of the year," Yang told Reuters. "We always show our concern, because we see China still has this intention. They are not reducing missiles."
Taiwan officials have said that China, though keen to unify peacefully with the island by offering economic incentives, must remove missiles aimed at the island before the two sides can discuss a peace accord after six decades of hostilities.
(Reporting by Ralph Jennings; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is really a very sad state of affairs for all the Chinese on the planet; no matter how prosperous they get. Whatever happened to the traditional family ideology. Hypocrites!
Jul 19, 20104:44am EDT--
Very sad, and ominous. Would the USA respond to Chinese military action? ¡­How?
Very sad, and ominous. Would the USA respond to Chinese military action? ¡­How?
I confess that unlike most Americans, I¡¯m not a fan of war. It never (never ever) works as advertised.
We¡¯ve not had a year¡¯s peace since the War to End All War, and the ¡°freedom¡± and ¡°liberty¡± we used to cherish are now gone in all but rhetoric and public mood.
This will all end very badly, I¡¯m afraid.
Jul 19, 20107:25am EDT--
well, world war 2 ended, and now we have the European Union. Moreover, the US, Japan and the EU (which contains Germany) are very close allies. it¡¯s of course sad that you need 50 million people to die for that to happen¡­ I too wish no more of that, and that hopefully China, Russia and the Western powers can also become true friends the way US, EU and Japan now are. Maybe at least Russia can soon join NATO ?¡­
Jul 19, 20107:53am EDT--
