Analysis: China won't kickstart Google but shares attractive
2010-07-11 00:12:00.0
(Reuters) - Google Inc's success in keeping a toe in the China market may not put to rest Wall Street's concerns over the search giant's ability to maintain its rocket-like growth momentum of recent years.
) shares, considered by many to be overvalued for most of last year, are now starting to look attractive after having shed a fifth of their value this year, analysts say.
"We think Google is a very good long-term investment, but not because of China. China is probably the area where they clearly struggle the most," said Ryan Jacob of the Jacob Internet Fund, which holds positions in both Google and its biggest rival in China, Baidu Inc (
"Away from China, Google is a very strong global business with extremely high returns and a very enviable market position. And the valuation is very undemanding at these levels."
Google shares have fallen 26 percent so far this year, underperforming the Nasdaq composite index's
4 percent drop. Thomson Reuters' StarMine estimates that Google's current share price implies a 10-year earnings per share compound annual growth rate of only 10.3 percent. Google's 5-year historical average EPS growth rate has been 69.4 percent.
Aside from its censorship dispute with the Chinese government, which has jeopardized its future in the world's biggest Internet market as measured by users, Google also faces challenges growing revenue in three key focus areas: mobile, display advertising and video site YouTube, analysts say.
Google needs new sources of income since it will be hard to significantly grow search when it already holds a more than 60 percent share of the U.S. search market. There are also fears about a reversal in the global economic recovery, given high U.S. unemployment and the European debt crisis.
The company's problems in China are deflecting its focus from the European continent, which deserves much more attention, said Oppenheimer analyst Jason Helfstein.
"The reality is what is happening in Europe has a much bigger impact on Google's fundamentals," he said, citing concerns that advertising spending by European businesses could be dampened by the sovereign debt crisis.
Google does not break out revenue from Europe, though it says international revenue accounts for 53 percent of its total revenue in the first quarter, and singled out the United Kingdom as accounting for 13 percent of the total.
Google said on Friday that China has renewed its webpage license in the country, soothing some concerns that the Internet company might get kicked out for refusing to censor Chinese Web search results.
But while Beijing permitted Google to continue doing business in China, that does not mean the pay-off will be immediate -- if it even comes at all.
Google's revenue in China is estimated by analysts at around $300 million to $600 million, a fraction of its $24 billion annual revenue. It has a roughly 30 percent share of China's billion-dollar search market, far smaller than Baidu.
Atlantic Equities' Hamilton Faber described the China license renewal as a "minor positive" for Google, its shares rising 2.4 percent to close at $467.49 on Friday.
"I still think their long-term position in China is very fragile," he said, adding that Google faces an uphill battle to grow its search advertising revenue in the country.
Advertisers "don't really want to be on the wrong side of the government," said Jacob. "Now that Google has had problems with them in the past, it probably does make them less attractive and a little more risky to advertise with."
Perhaps Google is better off concentrating on other areas like television and mobile, said Colin Gillis, director of research at BGC Partners, who called Google's efforts in China "a drag on management's focus."
Citi analyst Mark Mahaney is bullish about Google's non-search investments, and maintains a "buy" rating on the stock with a $630 price target or 20 times estimated 2011 EPS. He believes mobile, display ads and YouTube will account for a combined half a billion in revenue by the end of this year.
"I think the market has reached a point of skepticism just prior to when these business are finally becoming material. That is why I like the stock," Mahaney said.
Thrivent Financial fund manager Mike Binger, which holds a position in Google, thinks it's time to strike while the Street still has negative sentiments.
"I still see this company growing sales and earnings 15 percent plus, which is pretty rare these days," Binger said. "And it's not $600 plus (per share) anymore, it's $400 plus. To me that's a good deal."
(Reporting by Jennifer Saba and Alexei Oreskovic; Editing by Tiffany Wu and Richard Chang)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China, India, Indonesia, Brazil and Turkey¡¯s economies are the most powerful engines to drive the global economy to stability said Sahit Muja the President & CEO of Albanian Minerals in New York.
Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°China, India, Indonesia and Brazil were able to keep growing throughout 2008 and 2009.
China¡¯s economic growth is estimated to record 10 ¨C 11% percent annually on an average between 2010-2015¡å
¡°The Indian economy is poised to grow by double digits annually from 2011-2015.
Brazil¡¯s central bank this week upped its growth forecast for 2010 to 7.3 percent. Indonesia¡¯ economy is expected to grow 6.5 % this year.
Gross domestic product in Turkey increased an annual 11.7 percent, compared with 6 percent in the previous three months. Turkey have second fastest growing economy in the world in 2010¡å. Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°China¡¯s 1.32 billion population is a huge market for international and domestic demand for food, energy, oil, natural gas and metals. China have a strong driving demand for housing to meet the needs of 100 million people. Real estate demand in China will continue to grow because of migration of rural population to urban this will continue to drive housing demand, rather than a growing population as in countries like India, Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey and large parts of the Middle East. India¡¯s population in 2010 is around 1.15 billion people. Currently, India is second largest country in the world after China in terms of population. Population of India at the time of Independence was only 350 million. Indonesia¡¯s population is 235 million and growing. Brazil¡¯s population is 193 million and Turkey¡¯s population is 73 million one of fastest growing in the world¡±. Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°Booming economy in China, India, Brazil, Indonesia and Turkey will help economies in The US, EU, Canada, Australia, Africa, Russia, Middle East and Latin America. From 2010 to 2015 more than 500 million new families will need new housing in the world. The 250 million new homes needed in China, India, Indonesia and Brazil. Growing economy and population will drive the demand for new roads, railways, airports, hospitals, schools. banks, infrastructure, water projects, energy projects, courts and legal system, new factories, houses, buildings, oil and natural gas refineries, power plants, wind energy turbines, solar power, cars, trucks, airplanes, ships , machinery and much more¡±. Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°Growing demand for everything will create opportunity for new jobs in all sectors of economy. Agriculture sector in US and Latin America will grow as demand for food will rise. Financial, telecommunication and new technology¡¯s sectors will continue to grow and improve driven by strong demand and competition.
The emerging global economy needs more energy, oil, natural gas, metals. cement, rubber, iron, glas, steel, copper, silver,nickel, gold, aluminum, chrome ore, wood, agricultural products, urea, phosphate and other materials¡±. Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey, Albania and Kosovo will be on my top list to have Albanian Minerals & Bytyci SHPK are joint ventures and sister companies to trade and invest in the world¡¯s powerful emerging economies.
I have been working with partners in China, India, Brazil, Turkey, Indonesia and Albania the to move and capture the tremendous opportunity in the metal markets.
It will be perfect for any investor to invest in major industries in China, India, Indonesia, Brazil, Turkey in real estate, energy sector, food industry, tourism, IT, automobiles, cement, chemicals, consumer electronics, food processing, machinery, mining, petroleum, pharmaceuticals, steel, transportation equipment, and textiles. Textiles, jewelry, engineering goods and software , insurance sector, banking, stock markets. energy projects¡±. Mr Sahit Muja said ¡°Many attractions to invest in China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, Turkey, Albania and Kosovo have been well-chronicled, but they can¡¯t be emphasized enough. The US have a huge advantage in the global marketplace. The US Government and hard working American people need to move fast to capture the tremendous opportunity in global emerging markets. Now the game rules have change in world¡¯s markets. Is not true anymore, the big fish eat the small fish. Now in new world the fast fish will emerge as a winner in the top league of the world¡¯s emerging economies¡±.
Jul 11, 20106:02pm EDT--
