U.S. blames China for breakdown of trade talks
2013-07-17 18:24:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jul 12 2013
Thu, Jul 11 2013
Tue, Jul 9 2013
Mon, Jul 8 2013
Thu, Jun 27 2013
U.S. President Barack Obama announces Michael Froman (L) as his nominee for U.S. Trade Representative while in the Rose Garden at the White House in Washington May 2, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Larry Downing
Wed  EDT
"The United States is extremely disappointed that it became necessary today to suspend negotiations to expand the Information Technology Agreement (ITA)," U.S. Trade Representative Michael Froman said in a statement.
"Unfortunately, a diverse group of members participating in the negotiations determined that China's current position makes progress impossible at this stage," Froman said.
China is one of 20 World Trade Organization members, along with the United States and the 28-nation European Union, that have been negotiating for months to expand the 1996 Information Technology Agreement to eliminate tariffs on additional goods.
Negotiators had hoped to finish the deal this week, working from a draft list of 256 technology products targeted for tariff elimination. But apparently under pressure to protect domestic industries and preserve tariff revenues, China identified 148 "sensitive" products that it either wanted to exclude from tariff cuts or reserve for long tariff phase-outs.
"We are hopeful that China will carefully consider the concerns it heard this week from many of its negotiating partners, and revise its position in a way that will allow the prompt resumption of the negotiations," Froman said.
The United States is the world's largest producer of information and communications technology products and holds a 26 percent share of the global market, according to a 2012 report by the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation.
U.S. industry has pushed for an expanded ITA pact covering an additional $800 billion in trade, which the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation has estimated would boost U.S. exports by about $2.8 billion annually.
Canada's ambassador to the WTO, Jonathan Fried, informed negotiators of the decision to suspend the talks in a letter distributed in Geneva, where the talks were being held.
As a practical matter, the earliest that the talks could reconvene is September, trade experts said.
The Consumer Electronics Association, which represents about 2,000 U.S. companies, urged countries to strive now for a deal no later than December, when all 159 members of the WTO will be in Bali for a ministerial meeting.
'STILL TIME TO GET IT DONE THIS YEAR'
The original Information Technology Agreement pact eliminated tariffs on computers, semiconductors, software, fax machines, telephones and other information technology goods among member countries.
But some important products such as semiconductor manufacturing equipment and certain types of memory chips were left off the list, as well many types of audio-visual equipment such as speakers, DVD players and video cameras.
U.S. industry has also been pushing to include products such as video-game consoles, GPS systems, flat-panel displays and a new class of semiconductor chips called multi-component semiconductors, or MCOs.
John Neuffer, senior vice president at the Information Technology Industry Council, said the decision to suspend the talks was the right call because China's position made it difficult to reach a final agreement.
"We would have been sitting here next year looking at that same list or something a little bit smaller," Neuffer said.
"We were hoping it would be this week, but we still have time to get it done this year," Neuffer said.
The suspension "gives the Chinese some more time to reflect, to get to a more reasonable place," he added.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Jackie Frank and Peter Cooney)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The latest on the list of the Obaama administration¡¯s foreign policy failures ¡­
Jul 17, 20132:06pm EDT--
Let¡¯s see, China is a fast rising consumption nation which has a rapidly expanding middle class armed with ever more disposable income with each passing year. With that newly found spending power, they are going to want ¡°stuff¡± and all sorts of consumer electronics would be near the top of that list. Yeah, I could see why China wouldn¡¯t want tariff for these products to be completely eliminated as that sector of their consumption economy would be dominated by foreign corporations. It would be economic suicide for them and no, China is not obligated to sacrifice themselves for the financial welfare of Americans, Japanese or Europeans. If anything it is the citizens of the developed nations that are in serious need of some lessons in poverty and financial pain. Frankly, developed nations only want to negotiate ¡°reasonable¡± deals that will basically amount to a new form of economic slavery. It¡¯s wat happens when you make a country completely dependent on your products with little hope of breaking free of that bondage in the near future. Cries of IP, trademark and copyright violations? Those are just all tools for the developed world and their multinational corporations to keep the developing part underneath their steel-toed boots.
Jul 17, 20137:32pm EDT--
Jul 17, 201311:31pm EDT--
