Analysis: Japan and S.Korea step up game in fight for resources
2010-07-09 03:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese and South Korean firms, backed increasingly by the state, are stepping up their game in the dash for global resources in which they face fierce competition from China.
For resource-poor Japan and South Korea, China with its tremendous purchasing power is a formidable opponent -- in June
Still, analysts say the tide may be turning for Japan and South Korea because of increased state funding, more state and private sector partnerships and in Japan's case, a change in the law to encourage firms to seek resources abroad.
Korea National Oil Corp (KNOC), armed with a $6.5 billion war chest, is mulling a cash offer for Britain's Dana Petroleum DNX.L as part of a move aimed at doubling national oil reserves, while state-backed Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) recently signed an agreement of cooperation with Vietnam's state oil group.
"Three winning factors in global bidding for resources are money, relationship with the government there, and technologies," says Korea Investment & Securities analyst Ki-yong Park.
"State-run (South Korean) companies, SK Energy (
SK Energy, South Korea's top crude oil refiner, is likely to buy some stakes in mines of Brazilian iron ore firm Ferrous Resources this year, an industry source said, hoping to develop crude oil, LNG and iron ore in South America.
POSCO, with the help of state-run Korea Resources Corp (KORES), is expected to eye coal mines in Australia.
In Japan, resource firms are hoping a recent legal revision will promote a state-guarantee on explorations.
From July, Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corp (JOGMEC) can lend to private-sector firms for investment in metal mines including rare metals, and expand the kind of operations for which it can guarantee state-backed loans.
"Our involvement will help create a sense of confidence to the government of the country where Japanese firms are advancing," state-backed JOGMEC President Hirobumi Kawano said.
Analysts say Japan and South Korea need not compete head-to-head with China, where the pace of economic growth and future demand for resources far exceeds theirs, but should instead be more strategic in securing raw materials.
"Since Japan's domestic demand is on a long-term downtrend unlike an uptrend in China, it should focus on resources such as rare metals which are vital for future demand," said Yukino Yamada, a senior strategist at Daiwa Institute of Research.
In South Korea, resource firms are increasingly teaming up with the public sector to bid for overseas resources.
"To be qualified in global bidding, the size of a bidder matters," said an official at KNOC, which lost out last year to China's largest oil refiner Sinopec when it acquired Swiss oil explorer Addax Petroleum Corp for $7.24 billion.
Public firms' share of overseas mineral investment swelled to 63 percent last year, from an average of 21 percent between 1978 and 2009, as private firms spend less during the global recession.
"Private firms want to make overseas investments with us to hedge against risks, as developing resources has high risks," said KORES President Kim Shin-jong.
Analysts said that Japan's legal revision allows more flexible public assistance for firms going abroad, but a much smaller state involvement than Seoul limits firms' risk taking capacity and prompts them to look harder at opportunities in existing stakes in mines.
JOGMEC took an equity in Sumitomo Metal Mining Co's (
), JX Nippon Mining & Metals and Mitsubishi Materials did recently to raise a stake in Chile's Escondida copper mine.
"It is important for Japanese mining companies to advance into upstream activities, which offer them hedges against both the price upswing and downswing," a JBIC official said.
Japanese public aid has long focused on energy projects, and a mounting pressure to secure industrial metals has not resulted in a shift in state lending.
"We don't prioritize our lending by the types of resources or regions," a JBIC official said.
Over the past 10 years, JBIC lent 4.5 trillion yen ($51.28 billion) to resources-related projects by Japanese firms globally, ranging from gas, oil, LNG to aluminum and copper.
The different procurement paths are a reflection of each country's market size, and corporate and industrial landscape.
Japan, the world's second-largest and Asia's biggest economy, has GDP per capita at $38,455 in 2008, double South Korea's which is Asia's fourth-largest economy, according to the World Bank.
"South Korea's domestic market is much smaller than Japan's, so it's easier for Korea firms to pursue overseas strategy," said Naohiro Niimura, a partner at Tokyo-based research and consulting firm Market Risk Advisory Co.
