GE, Eaton among suppliers for China jet
2010-07-12 14:43:00.0
GE, Eaton among suppliers for China jet | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
GE, Eaton among suppliers for China jet
Thu, Jul 8 2010
Sun, Jul 4 2010
Sun, Jul 4 2010
Wed, Jun 30 2010
Thu, Jun 24 2010
Mon  EDT
) has formed a joint venture in China to develop airplane fuel and hydraulic systems, one of several U.S. aerospace companies tapped to supply components for what is expected to be China's first large commercial aircraft.
The venture will be majority owned by Shanghai Aircraft Manufacturing Co, Ltd, a subsidiary of the state-owned Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China (COMAC), with Eaton owning 49 percent.
The Shanghai-based partners will supply the COMAC C919 single-aisle aircraft, Eaton said. Based on expected production of 2,500 jets, the program is expected to be worth $1.8 billion, Eaton said on Monday.
) said on Monday that a joint venture between the largest U.S. conglomerate and China's AVIC Systems was selected to provide computer systems for controlling the aircraft, displaying information to pilots and tracking its maintenance needs.
"China is the world's fastest-growing aviation market and we need to ensure GE and the United States are part of this growth," said John Rice, a GE vice chairman who oversees the division of the Fairfield, Connecticut-based company that produces aircraft engines and components.
) said it was named to supply brakes and tires for the forthcoming airliner, which is expected to go into service in 2016 with the ability to carry 150 people. Rockwell Collins Inc (
Unlike Eaton, those companies did not provide a value for their contracts.
