China confirms renews Google's China license
2010-07-11 04:19:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology said it had renewed the Chinese operating license of Internet giant Google Inc, confirming an announcement made by the company on Friday.
Guxiang, a company that operates Google's websites in China, was included in a list of more than 200 companies that had their licenses renewed, which was posted on the ministry's website (www.miit.gov.cn).
The document said that the company received approval after "making improvements," but gave no further details.
The official Xinhua news agency reported that Guxiang, in its license renewal application, had committed to "abide by Chinese law," and ensure the company did not provide content that was illegal under China's telecommunications regulations.
Those rules ban any organization or individual from using the Internet to spread content that aims to "subvert state power, undermine national security ... or that incites ethnic hatred and secession, transmits pornography or violence," Xinhua said.
Guxiang also accepted that government regulators will have the right to supervise all the content provided by the firm, Xinhua added, citing an unnamed official from the ministry.
China's decision to allow Google to continue operating in China apparently resolves a months-long censorship dispute that had threatened the U.S. company's future in the world's top Internet market by users.
The move also removes another thorn in U.S.-China relations and reflects Beijing's desire to be seen as friendly to major foreign firms in spite of ideological differences, analysts said.
Google unexpectedly warned in January it might quit the country over censorship concerns and after suffering a hacker attack it said came from within China, but eventually started rerouting users to its unfiltered Hong Kong site.
However late last month the company said it would stop automatic redirection in order to appease Beijing, which was unhappy about the system. Visitors are now invited to click through to the Hong Kong page.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I did have a comment listed but it vanished into the realms of late night babies pretending to be the ¡°Chinese censors but call themselves English Monarchists
Jul 11, 20105:41am EDT--
jont: I suggest you take a history class 101 on Asia. Hong Kong has not been a British colony for decades, if that¡¯s what you are implying. In fact, the current ¡°British monarchical¡± line was German, renamed Windsor only to drum up morale during WWII, to avoid a cumbersome German name. I recommend you read up about the Opium War, where the British fought to ensure their opium trade, which was forbidden officially, could be forced into China¡ª that¡¯s how they got Hong Kong as a colony¡ª that will correct those Hollywood misconception about the opium addict if you learn your ¡°history¡± from money crunching movie script writers rather than historians.
Jul 11, 20106:52pm EDT--
What Google should do, both for business, and for the higher goal of human rights cause, is to invest in Hong Kong, and find a way to send the message to the Beijing government that Google supports the dogfight by Hong Kong people for direct election¡ª something they are largely fighting on their own, with little outside high profile entrepreuner support. This is the best avenue for Google to prove to the naysayers that their posturing about moving out, was just a smart political move, in anticipation for being sued by the American users for failing to prevent the breach of security. Some were saying back then, Google highly criticized China just in case they¡¯d get sued. Even if somebody win the suit, it deflects the blame to a third party foreign entity( which is a smart jury pleasing tactic). At the least, they won some goodwill for those who had been criticizing Google for following the censorship religiously without even a subtle demurring voice. Yeah! google! prove your sincerity about human rights issue. Support the democracy movement in Hong Kong for one person one vote direct election as a pioneering democratic mini-system in China. Give back some of the free profits from Yahoo¡¯s gift of free IP rights for the common good!
Jul 11, 20108:07pm EDT--
