Factbox: Japan, S.Korea join hunt for global resources
2010-07-09 03:57:00.0
Factbox: Japan, S.Korea join hunt for global resources | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Factbox: Japan, S.Korea join hunt for global resources
Thu, Jul 8 2010
Fri, Jul 9 2010
Mon, Jul 5 2010
Mon, Jul 5 2010
Fri, Jul 2 2010
Fri  EDT
Japanese and South Korean firms, backed up their governments, are stepping up efforts to secure resource deals overseas.
* Korea National Oil Corp (KNOC) is talking over a cash offer for Britain's Dana Petroleum DNX.L, as it looks to use a $6.5 billion war chest to help double the country's oil reserves.
), the world's No.4 steelmaker, is looking at A$6.6 billion worth of investments in Australian Premium Iron Ore, a joint venture project in the Pilbara region of Western Australia.
* KORES and South Korea's small steelmaker Dongbu Steel (
) in May agreed with South Africa's Kermas to develop iron ore and titanium there.
* Vietnam's state oil and gas group Petrovietnam signed a memorandum of understanding on June 22 with the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), Nippon Export and Investment Insurance and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp for cooperation in areas such as long-term finance arrangements.
* State-backed Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corp (JOGMEC) signed a deal with American Lithium Minerals Inc AMLM.OB on June 11 to jointly explore a lithium mine in Nevada in the United States.
* JOGMEC on June 24 selected Japan's second-largest copper smelter Sumitomo Metal Mining Co Ltd (
) to transfer its exploration rights for copper, gold and metal molybdenum in Brazil's Carajas region.
* JBIC signed a loan agreement in late May totaling $160 million with Similco Finance Ltd, a Canadian firm in which third-largest copper smelter Mitsubishi Materials Corp (
) has an equity stake, to finance the restart of the Similco copper mine.
* JOGMEC took an equity stake in Sumitomo Metal Mining Co's nickel mining development project in the Solomon Islands in March.
), JX Holdings unit JX Nippon Mining & Metals Corp and Mitsubishi Materials in April teamed up to raise their combined ownership stake in Chile's Escondida copper mine.
(Reporting by Chikako Mogi in TOKYO and Cho Mee-young in SEOUL; editing by Dhara Ranasinghe)
