ICBC to follow AgBank in dash for cash
2010-07-07 09:50:00.0
(Reuters) - ICBC, the world's most valuable lender, aims to tap investors for up to $6.6 billion, sources said, a day after Agricultural Bank of China priced what is set to be the world's largest IPO.
AgBank, the last of China's big banking institutions to go public, is exercising an option to expand the Shanghai portion of its IPO by 15 percent, the bank said on Wednesday, and if they do the same for the Hong Kong portion, the offer would swell to a record $22 billion.
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), which holds the current record for its 2006 IPO of $21.9 billion, plans to raise more funds by offering rights to holders of its Hong Kong-listed H-shares, as well as its Shanghai-listed A-shares, sources with direct knowledge of the deal said on Wednesday.
That's a change from ICBC's earlier plan, which, according to sources, had a few months ago mandated banks to arrange a $7-$10 billion Hong Kong stock offering.
One source said the rights offers still needed approval from the ICBC board, its shareholders and the regulator, so the timing of the offering could be by the end of 2010.
Big state-owned Chinese banks including Bank of China are seeking to replenish funds depleted by last year's government-directed lending spree and to meet higher capital levels demanded by regulators.
The massive fundraisings, though well flagged, have weighed on China's stock markets, contributing to their being among the worst performers in the world this year.
But with AgBank's IPO pricing providing no nasty surprises and the government set to stump up the bulk of the new funds by subscribing to the other banks' planned rights issues, the stock market may be relieved, and the remaining banks' fundraising plans may be smooth, analysts said.
"The government was pushing for banks to lend to keep GDP growing in 2009, so it seems fair to me that it now has to recapitalize the banks with all this fundraising," said Ivan Li, an analyst at Kim Eng Securities in Hong Kong.
"In the medium term, the government may choose to allow the market to play a bigger picture, but until that happens, it's going to be the government paying the bill."
AGBANK PRICING, RATIOS IN LINE
AgBank, founded by Mao Zedong in 1951, has a sprawling network of branches in China's rural areas but also a presence in its major cities. Only three years ago, it was technically insolvent, with non-performing loans of around 24 percent.
AgBank is nearing completion of a dual listing in Hong Kong and Shanghai that priced late on Tuesday at the top of its range for the Shanghai portion and at the middle for its Hong Kong portion, according to sources.
AgBank officially confirmed its Shanghai pricing on Wednesday at 2.68 yuan ($0.40) per share, while the Hong Kong pricing will be announced before the stock's July 16 debut there. AgBank's Shanghai shares will start trading a day earlier.
The pricing was largely in line with expectations, giving AgBank a price-to-book ratio of 1.68. That compares with ratios of about 2 for ICBC and China Construction Bank, China's top two lenders, and a sector mean of about 1.6 for Hong Kong-listed banks.
AgBank's Shanghai offering was more than 10 times oversubscribed by investors after accounting for the overallotment, the bank said on Wednesday.
"The IPO price is market based, and quite reasonable, given the bank's growth prospects," said He Sheng, head of research at Western Securities Cohe, of the AgBank IPO. "Relatively good demand shows that anything can sell well if priced properly."
ICBC's Shanghai and Hong Kong-listed shares ended down 0.5 percent and 1.4 percent, respectively, on Wednesday, both underperforming the broader market.
The ICBC and AgBank fund-raising follow close on the heels of similar plans announced by Bank of China, China's No.4 lender, late last week.
(Additional reporting by Clare Jim, Fiona Lau and Alison Leung in Hong Kong, Samuel Shen and Jason Subler in Shanghai and Michael Wei and Xie Heng in Beijing; Editing by Jonathan Hopfner, Muralikumar Anantharaman and Will Waterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
With all the secret methods and refusing to release the true loan numbers that they borrow out to failed state pet projects how could any responsible investor want these???
Jul 07, 201010:06am EDT--
