China's economy slows moderately
2010-07-15 02:31:00.0
(Reuters) - China's economy slowed in the second quarter as the government steered monetary and fiscal policy back to normal after a record credit surge last year to counter the global crisis.
Annual gross domestic product growth moderated to 10.3 percent from 11.9 percent in the first quarter, the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) said on Thursday. The reading was slightly below market forecasts of 10.5 percent growth.
Other data suggested that curbs on lending to home buyers and local authorities, along with an ebbing of government stimulus spending and an end to inventory rebuilding, were biting with greater force as the quarter drew to a close.
Economists expect no dramatic policy response to Thursday's data. The government has engineered the slowdown -- markets feared overheating earlier this year -- and Premier Wen Jiabao has said the economy is going in the expected direction.
"The GDP and other activity data are basically in line with expectations, and consistent with our view that China's recovery is slowing from the fast pace set in the first quarter but remains relatively solid so far," said Brian Jackson, strategist at Royal bank of Canada in Hong Kong.
Factory growth slowed to 13.7 percent in the year to June, below forecasts for 15.3 percent and May's 16.5 percent growth.
"The good news is the economy is holding up. The bad news is investment is coming down, hence demand for commodities will fall," said Dong Tao, chief non-Japan Asia economist for Credit Suisse in Hong Kong.
Offshore yuan forwards showed little reaction to the figures, which have circulated widely in China's markets since Tuesday. The Shanghai stock market edged up 0.5 percent and stocks in Asia-Pacific outside Japan pared early losses and were broadly steady in a sign of relief that the data brought no major negative surprises.
GO SLOW, PAPER URGES
But the slower growth makes it increasingly likely that the pace of monetary tightening will slow, as Shanghai money markets have been speculating this week.
The government should refrain from any further policy tightening as the economy may slow more sharply than expected in the second half of the year, the official China Securities Journal said on Thursday.
"In the second half of the year, external demand will gradually weaken and the dividend from the trade surplus will fall. This requires an increase in overall social investment and a halt to tightening of both fiscal policy and monetary policy," an editorial said.
China last year became the leading trade partner of Brazil, India and South Africa. German exports to China of machinery are booming.
Unlike many of its Asian peers, most recently Thailand on Wednesday, China has not raised interest rates this year.
And half-year figures are expected to show that China, in contrast to deeply indebted Western governments, ran a fairly big budget surplus, according to market sources.
But Thursday's figures reinforce the view that the first quarter marked the cyclical peak for China, which is set to overtake Japan this year as the world's second-largest economy after the United States.
Consumer price inflation fell to 2.9 percent in the year to June from 3.1 percent in May, below forecasts of a 3.3 percent rise. Consumption was resilient, even though annual retail sales growth eased to 18.3 percent in June from 18.7 percent in May.
Export growth has also remained robust, but the exit from last year's super-loose monetary policy and tightening measures for the housing market are now having an impact on infrastructure and real-estate spending.
Year-to-date investment in fixed-assets such as flats and factories slowed, growing 25.5 percent against a year ago period after a 25.9 percent rise in May.
The swing factor, many economists say, is how abruptly private residential construction slows in response to the campaign against property speculation and whether the government can compensate for it by ramping spending on public housing.
A Reuters poll of economists released on Wednesday pointed to full-year growth of 10 percent in 2010, slowing to 9.0 percent in 2011.
(Writing by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Tomasz Janowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
In all my years of observing China, it is amazing to me how western media swallows what the CCP says hook, line and sinker. Nearly every bit of economic information they release is propaganda in order to shore up their grip on power and maintain stability. Only very rarely does the truth break from their lips. If only the western media and western leaders understood that China¡¯s leaders lie to stay in power, then we wouldn¡¯t be reacting the way we do. Of course, when they see the west react when they¡¯re lying, it only encourages them to lie even more. We should take their pronouncements as pure propaganda unless there is a real way to verify what they¡¯re saying is true. It should always be reported as follows, ¡°China, which is controlled by the Chinese Communist Party, stated that they expect 9% growth this year, however, this cannot be independently verified.¡± You see, the reason why China releases so much erroneous information is because the naive western media takes them at their word ¨C it¡¯s time for you people to be wiser about China since you really don¡¯t know who you are dealing with.
Jul 14, 20108:34pm EDT--
marisa, Calm down. Nobody really takes China¡¯s GDP numbers seriously. The chinese people don¡¯t even take them seriously except for the typical, ignorant party member kind. I am pretty sure even the media knows these numbers are not fully credible, but the news is news. You can take it how you want to.
Jul 15, 20101:20am EDT--
