China won't dump U.S. Treasuries or pile into gold
2010-07-07 08:06:00.0
China won't dump U.S. Treasuries or pile into gold | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China won't dump U.S. Treasuries or pile into gold
Wed, Jul 7 2010
National flags of U.S. and China wave in front of an international hotel in Beijing in this February 4, 2010 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Jason Lee
Wed  EDT
In the third in a series of statements explaining its work to the Chinese public, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange sought to allay concerns in the outside world that arise whenever Beijing shifts its holdings of U.S. government debt.
"Any increase or decrease in our holdings of U.S. Treasuries is a normal investment operation," SAFE, the arm of the central bank that manages China's official currency reserves, said.
It said it constantly adjusts its portfolio to maximimize returns, and any changes to its U.S. Treasury portfolio should be seen in that light and not interpreted politically.
In a series of questions and answers posted on its website, www.safe.gov.cn, SAFE asked rhetorically whether China would use its $2.45 trillion stockpile of reserves, the world's largest, as a "nuclear weapon."
"The U.S. Treasury market is the world's largest government bond market, and U.S. Treasury bonds deliver fair good security, liquidity and market depth with low transaction costs.
"The U.S. Treasury market is a very important market for China," the agency said.
China held $900.2 billion in U.S. Treasuries at the end of April, according to U.S. Treasury data released on June 15.
Bankers say China's total holdings of dollar-denominated assets are much greater, accounting for perhaps two-thirds of its reserves.
But it said economic conditions elsewhere were also a factor in determining the dollar's trend. The euro zone, for instance, was struggling with high government debt levels.
"We must recognize that any depreciation of the dollar is relative to other countries, and other countries or regions also have this or that problem," SAFE said.
One of the prime concerns of Chinese Internet commentators is that a long-term decline in the dollar or euro will erode the value of SAFE's portfolio.
To that end, SAFE called on the United States and other major countries to take "responsible measures" to maintain the value of their currencies. This meant withdrawing monetary stimulus in a reasonable manner and relying less on deficit spending.
"It cannot become a main channel for investing our foreign exchange reserves," the agency said, noting the size of the gold market was limited and prices were volatile.
Buying more gold would also not help much in diversifying China's reserves.
China has increased its gold holdings by more than 400 tonnes in the past few years to 1,054 tonnes. Even if it doubled that amount gold's share of SAFE's portfolio would increase by only one or two percentage points.
"SAFE will never be a speculator. It mainly seeks to protect the safety of China's FX reserves and ensure a stable investment return," it said.
Answering its own question on whether it has bought into stocks, private equity funds or any other higher-risk instruments, SAFE said its never excludes any investment.
"It depends on whether a product meets SAFE's demand for safety, liquidity and a stable yield for its FX reserves, and whether it can help SAFE diversify risks," the agency said.
(Additional reporting by Langi Chiang; Editing by Kim Coghill)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Frankly, I wish China would go ahead and dump them (U.S. treasuries). The rest of the world would quickly and happily snap them up. Even if they didn¡¯t absorb all $900 billion, the Federal Reserve could easily buy up the rest. (The Fed holds more treasuries than China already.) The U.S. could then feel free to impose tariffs on Chinese imports without the hollow threat of this ¡°nuclear¡± option.
Jul 07, 20106:11am EDT--
Phew! That¡¯s a relief. Not that China has all the leverage in the world over us right now, right?
Jul 07, 20106:54am EDT--
STORYBURNeasy, even before this announcement, just what could China do both suddenly and on a truly massive scale? Cash in all their US bonds? Boy, THAT would be smart. Throw the US economy into disarray that makes our present problems look like an informal rehearsal (and thereby screw up their signle most important market for their exports ¡ª us), cause the dollar to go into free drive AND send the yuan soaring ¡ª while leaving China with boatloads of dollars. While foreign investors flee for the nearest frontier screaming. Yeah, China could do that ¡ª sort of like one Siamese twin can wound or kill the other: fat lot of good it does for either ¡°twin¡±
Jul 07, 20108:26am EDT--
