Xi promises peaceful, prosperous China helping neighbors
2013-04-07 09:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China's President Xi Jinping pledged on Sunday that change and peaceful development will power his country's economic rise and sustain growth within its borders and beyond.
Stressing that peace was pivotal for the future of the world's second biggest economy, Xi appealed to business and political leaders to use diplomacy and dialogue to resolve disputes and allow wealth to spread and solve problems.
"For Asia, development is still the top question, development is still crucial for solving many problems and conflicts," Xi told a forum in Boao on the southern Chinese island province of Hainan.
"Without peace, there is no need to talk about development," to added, speaking to an audience of executives and foreign leaders including Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard, Myanmar President Thein Sein and IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde.
Painting a picture of a richer China in 2020, when the government expects average rural and urban incomes will be double 2010 levels, Xi said his country would increasingly export its wealth to its neighbors.
China will import $10 trillion worth of goods a year five years from now, he said, and outbound investment will rise by a big margin. Domestic consumption, particularly retail consumption, will also continue to expand.
China imported $1.8 trillion worth of goods and services last year, up a meager 4.3 percent from a year ago as its economy slumped into its worst downturn in 13 years.
But Xi was upbeat about the future, saying growth would follow when his government changes China's economic structure and financial system. He did not give details.
"China's economy will continue to maintain a healthy growth rate," Xi said. "We will persist with reforms and doggedly pursue the path of changing our economic ways."
In contrast, an ailing global economy faces a difficult recovery fraught with risks, he said.
Xi's message of China's peaceful and inclusive rise was echoed earlier when nearly a dozen senior executives from Chinese state-owned firms met peers from top Australian banks and companies.
Andrew Forrest, an Australian iron ore magnate and founder of Fortescue Metals Group, who chaired the closed-door meeting, told reporters that Chinese state firm executives wanted Australians to know that China was not "expansionist" or "aggressive".
"They do not understand how people could look at China through anything but friendly eyes," Forrest said.
Security concerns in other countries have hampered or overshadowed the overseas expansion of several large Chinese companies, including telecoms equipment firm Huawei Technologies Co Ltd and state-owned oil company CNOOC Ltd..
(Reporting by Koh Gui Qing; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°¡­Chinese state firm executives wanted Australians to know that China was not ¡°expansionist¡± or ¡°aggressive¡±. Although it is expanding through the use of force aggressively. ¡°They do not understand how people could look at China through anything but friendly eyes,¡± Forrest said. Its understandable, as the first statement is a lie¡­ It¡¯s hard to view liars ¡®through friendly eyes¡¯. You may censor your own populace, but the rest of us are allowed to see and understand what you are up to. Until China starts to act honestly and stop doing the opposite of what it is saying, it will find it difficult to find real friends (Other than the usual ¡®friends¡¯ only interested in making money). Of course, that¡¯s not possible, as aggressive expansion is a top priority.
Apr 07, 20132:49am EDT--
Xi promises peaceful, prosperous China helping neighbors, only after we have invaded every piece of it, and not just land, waters too.. so we are coming after you, just like we forwarded hand of friendship with counteries we have occupied, the one we have eyes on, had wars with some democracies to teach them lesson to give refuge the buddist monks..
Xi promises peaceful, prosperous China helping neighbors, only after we have invaded every piece of it, and not just land, waters too.. so we are coming after you, just like we forwarded hand of friendship with counteries we have occupied, the one we have eyes on, had wars with some democracies to teach them lesson to give refuge the buddist monks..
Apr 07, 20133:04am EDT--
It amazes me to see who is friend of china¡­ NKorea, Pakistan, Lybia, Zimbabwe, Sudan.. hmm that sounds like a great list of countries whom china believes to be ever friendly¡­
It amazes me to see who is friend of china¡­ NKorea, Pakistan, Lybia, Zimbabwe, Sudan.. hmm that sounds like a great list of countries whom china believes to be ever friendly¡­
And then how it treat counteries like ¨C Germany, Japan, the US, UK, Aus & India¡­ that makes me wonder China is its own leage with little help of Russia¡­
Now the histroy says and if chinese are wise, if USSR went head on with the Americans ¨C results we all know, I am sure china has something to learn from history instead of laying eyes on every inch of soil it sees¡­
Apr 07, 20133:08am EDT--
