Bank of China plans rights issue for $8.8 billion
2010-07-02 08:21:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Jul 2 2010
Fri, Jul 2 2010
Fri, Jul 2 2010
Fri, Jul 2 2010
Thu, Jul 1 2010
Fri  EDT
), China's No.4 lender, plans to raise up to 60 billion yuan ($8.8 billion) through a rights offer, the company said in a statement on Friday.
Bank of China (BOC), the country's biggest foreign currency bank, proposed for shareholders to get up to 1.1 rights per 10 shares held, it said in a statement.
"All the proceeds to be raised from the rights issue ... shall be applied toward strengthening the capital base of the bank and to improve the capital adequacy ratio of the bank," it said.
China Central Huijin Investment Ltd is the state-owned parent of BOC, but the statement did not mention whether Huijin would subscribe to the rights offer.
BOC's Hong Kong listed shares last traded at HK$3.97 on Wednesday and the bank's Shanghai shares traded at 3.4 yuan before trading was suspended on Friday.
The bank, which raised about $5.9 billion via convertible bonds in Shanghai last month, joined domestic rivals in a rush to replenish funds depleted by last year's lending spree and to meet tighter capital adequacy ratios demanded by regulators.
Agriculture Bank of China ABC.UL, China's third-largest lender, is raising $20 billion plus via a dual listing in Hong Kong and Shanghai.
Chinese media reported in May that the state council, or cabinet, has approved a combined 287 billion yuan ($42 billion) fund-raising quota for the country's four biggest lenders.
), China's No.5 lender, has completed a $2.52 billion rights issue in Shanghai.
(Reporting by Alison Leung; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
