Factbox: Key risks to watch in Kyrgyzstan turmoil
2010-07-01 06:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Following last week's uprising in Kyrgyzstan, the main questions are whether violence continues and how the United States, Russia and China react to turmoil in a country where all have interests.
The United States leases the Manas airbase to support NATO troops in Afghanistan. Russia also leases a base, while China has a long border with Kyrgyzstan and will be concerned for the growing number of Chinese residents and businesses there.
Domestic strains appear to be the main reason for the uprising, but the new self-proclaimed government has signaled that the event was Russian-backed. A Russian official has said Moscow alone should have a base in Kyrgyzstan.
VIOLENCE OR STABILISATION?
After around 80 people were killed in the uprising that forced President Kurmanbek Bakiyev to flee to his southern stronghold, an uneasy calm has returned to the capital Bishkek. [ID:nLDE63807V].
The new leadership, led by former opposition leader Roza Otunbayeva, looks to be in control of the security forces, some of whom fired on opposition demonstrators on Wednesday.
The self-proclaimed government says Bakiyev's supporters are stoking violence in the capital and are not preparing to surrender, but says it will not allow a civil war.
-- Does the self-proclaimed government move against Bakiyev? Does he have sufficient support to attack in Bishkek or control areas in the south where he has his power base and will hold rallies this week? Do outside powers continue to recognize him as the president, or quietly abandon him?
-- What happens with the security forces? So far, they look to have switched loyalty to the new leadership. Is this the case across the country, particularly in the south? What happens to commanders involved in shooting opposition demonstrators?
-- Does looting continue and is it put down? Does it develop an ethnic overtone and target Chinese businesses in the capital, as some previous violence has? If so, how would China react?
The United States and Russia are at loggerheads, although neither publicly acknowledges this.
Washington's priority will be keeping its Manas base open while a Russian official with Medvedev's delegation said on Thursday Moscow wanted it closed.
A senior White House adviser on Russia told reporters in Prague: "This is not some anti-American coup. That we know for sure, and this is not a sponsored-by-the-Russians coup."
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has denied Russia played a part in the turmoil, but a Kyrgyz opposition leader, Omurbek Takebayev, said: "Russia played its role in ousting Bakiyev."
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke to the head of the self-proclaimed government on Saturday, but so far Russia is the only country to recognize it officially.
