Obama: Pressing China on currency to make trade fair
2010-06-30 19:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jun 30 2010
Wed, Jun 30 2010
Wed, Jun 30 2010
Wed, Jun 30 2010
Sun, Jun 27 2010
U.S. President Barack Obama holds a town hall meeting about the economy at the Racine Memorial Hall in Wisconsin, June 30, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Larry Downing
RACINE, Wisconsin
Wed  EDT
RACINE, Wisconsin
"We've got to make sure that countries we're trading with are being fair. I believe in free trade," Obama said at a campaign-style meeting in Racine, Wisconsin.
"For example, if China has a currency that's undervalued, that makes our exports more expensive. It makes their imports cheaper. So we've been putting pressure on them to say, you know what, let's make sure that we're not favoring one side or the other in this trade deal," he said.
China has announced plans to allow its currency to be more flexible, and Obama said at a weekend Group of 20 meeting in Toronto he believed the yuan would rise significantly.
The United States argues the yuan is under-valued by up to 40 percent against the dollar, claiming this makes its exports unfairly competitive and effectively poaches American jobs.
Trade is a delicate topic for Obama, whose Democratic Party draws support from organized labor, which complains that trade deals with Mexico and Canada have hurt U.S. workers.
Racine, perched on Lake Michigan and with unemployment above 14 percent, typifies middle-American communities where employers have been hit by cheap imports and the loss of jobs overseas -- a fact Obama acknowledged.
"It is absolutely true that a lot of our manufacturing left to go to China and other low-wage countries," Obama said.
Jobs, and a general wariness toward free trade agreements with foreign countries, will be a crucial factor in U.S. mid-term congressional elections on November 2, when anger over still-high U.S. unemployment could erode the power of Obama's Democrats.
The Obama administration must also deliver a semi-annual currency report to the U.S. Congress that could name China a currency manipulator, although the odds of it embarrassing China this way have shrunk since Beijing made the yuan move.
The report, which is the task of U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, was delayed from a mid-April release until after the G20, and could now come at any time.
(Writing by Matt Spetalnick and Alister Bull, editing by Cynthia Osterman)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Um this isn¡¯t rocket science here. Increase tariffs on their stuff and then adjust as the value their currency to our liking. I know I only have a degree that covered the basics of Econ but really. How hard is this. Everyone should be signing this.
Um this isn¡¯t rocket science here. Increase tariffs on their stuff and then adjust as the value their currency to our liking. I know I only have a degree that covered the basics of Econ but really. How hard is this. Everyone should be signing this.
http://www.change.org/petitions/view/the_99ers_need_ a_tier_v_added_ to_unemployment _benefits I am not one of the unemployed however see the need for Unemployment extensions¡­ The fact that Congress cannot find other cuts is unacceptable; they always go after what is needed the most and save their pet projects and Wall Street friends. Congress needs to be held accountable for the their failure to create a jobs bill and a jobs market. Extending Unemployment is not the answer however it what is needed now.
The Answer is to create jobs, which will take Congress placing higher taxes on any company that out sources jobs over seas, higher taxes on any funds leaving the US and higher tariffs on imports. Until then we have to pay out unemployment for the failure of our leaders. Support unemployment here, it is one of Change.org highest all time petitions. http://www.change.org/petitions/view/the_99ers_need_ a_tier_v_added_ to_unemployment _benefits
Jun 30, 20104:17pm EDT--
I have a question. When did our country start to support communisim? Is that not what we are doing by sending our jobs and money to a communist country?
Jun 30, 20104:35pm EDT--
Jun 30, 201010:51pm EDT--
