Analysis: China makes haste slowly globalizing the yuan
2010-07-05 10:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Each journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. Yet for the trek of turning the yuan into a global currency, China is only just lacing up its boots.
According to this skeptical line of thinking, it will take Beijing a generation to make the yuan a fully convertible currency that can rub shoulders with the dollar and the euro.
But a more tantalizing interpretation of events is that China is proceeding quite nicely in expanding the use of the yuan beyond its borders, underlining its determination to eventually wield more influence in global financial affairs.
What has got optimists excited is the extension on June 17 of a pilot program permitting imports and exports to be settled in yuan, also known as the renminbi, rather than in dollars or other foreign currencies.
The scheme was widened to firms in 20 Chinese provinces, not just five southern cities, and to counterparties in all countries, not just in Hong Kong, Macau and Southeast Asia.
That remains a drop in the ocean. But if China stands by the promise it made on June 19 to make the yuan more flexible, the attraction for domestic companies of avoiding foreign exchange risks by invoicing in their home currency can only grow.
As for exporters to China, the consensus that the yuan is headed higher is a big incentive to hold renminbi.
"We expect more than half of China's total trade flows, primarily bilateral trade with emerging markets, to be settled in renminbi in the next three to five years," Qu Hongbin, chief China economist at HSBC in Hong Kong, concluded in a report.
It gets more intriguing. Companies outside China will be wary of holding yuan unless they have somewhere to invest it. Putting the money on deposit in Hong Kong, the main conduit for yuan settlement, yields a pittance.
On cue, plans are afoot to broaden the range of renminbi investments available in the territory.
Hopewell Highway Infrastructure Ltd, a toll-road company, last week announced the first non-financial renminbi corporate bond issue in Hong Kong.
Yuan-denominated insurance policies are expected soon, and the authorities are drawing up plans to let brokerages take yuan deposits and invest them in the mainland capital markets.
The scheme, dubbed "mini-QFII," is a junior version of the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) program, under which selected overseas funds have been permitted to convert about $30 billion of foreign currency into yuan and invest it in China.
As always with financial liberalization in China, the pace will be sensible, not stunning. Expect strict quotas on the scheme.
And not to be forgotten, China said last week it would make it easier for domestic firms to move money overseas for purposes unrelated to trade or investment.
"With a more flexible exchange rate regime we expect to see further liberalization of the capital account, and less need for China to accumulate foreign exchange reserves over the medium term," said Jianguang Shen, an economist for Mizuho in Hong Kong.
Resentful of the "exorbitant privilege" the United States enjoys in issuing the leading reserve currency, China would prefer to build up claims on the rest of the world in yuan -- raising its profile in the process -- rather than in a dollar it distrusts.
Central bank governor Zhou Xiaochuan sketched out a long-term plan in March 2009 to supplant the dollar with a super-sovereign currency akin to the International Monetary Fund's Special Drawing Right.
The yuan, he implied, would be one of its constituents. The SDR, the IMF's unit of account, now comprises the dollar, euro, yen and sterling.
Many commentators called Zhou's vision naive. But with emerging markets going from strength to strength while rich countries drown in debt, the political winds are behind him.
The IMF is committed to shifting at least 5 percent of its voting powers to its emerging market members, and the fund's managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, would like to add other currencies to the SDR basket -- starting with the yuan.
"I think it will be difficult to include the renminbi before the renminbi really has a market price and is in one way or the other a floating currency. But the sooner, the better," he said on June 29.
"The full liberalization of the capital account has wider ramifications than the internationalization of the renminbi and will therefore have to be handled carefully," according to Joseph Yam, former chief of Hong Kong's Monetary Authority.
But if cross-border trade in yuan booms and market forces are gradually allowed to set the yuan's value, China will presumably grow more comfortable with the idea of convertibility. Bringing the yuan into the SDR would be more feasible.
"These are baby steps, not big steps," said Stephen Roach, non-executive chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia, about Beijing's initiatives.
"But they are all steps in the direction of making the renminbi into a more international currency that is commensurate with China's global role, opening up the capital account and moving toward convertibility," Roach said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I makes more sense for China to make the yuan a global currency than for Chinese officials to whine about the dollar. If it were easy to establish a global reserve currency, then China would already have done it as an adjunct to its export activities. If it is not easy to establish a global reserve currency, then China has essentially been trying to cheat its trading partners by trying to obtain for itself the benefits of having a global reserve without making the investment necessary to establish its own such currency. The article mentions four currencies as having global significance: the dollar, sterling, the euro, and the yen. Of those, sterling enjoys an unbroken continuity of development since the middle ages or renaissance and is by far the oldest. The dollar developed during and after the American Revolutionary War, based on the pre-Revolution practice of taking Spanish milled dollars (pesos minted in the vice royalty of Mexico, typically valued at one British crown or 1/4 of a pound sterling, though that relationship was broken long ago) in exchange, because currency denominated in sterling was in short supply. The yen is a post-World War II development, while the euro is a post-millenium development. If it were easy to establish a global reserve currency, there would be more of them. My guess is that if China is successful in establishing the yuan as a global currency, it will lose interest in complaining about the dollar. It may even be that China¡¯s success in establishing the yuan as a global currency can be gauged by the degree to which China continues to complain about the dollar or advocates the creation of some transnational construct to replace the dollar as a global currency reserve. (Query whether a political construct such as China as advocated as a global currency reserve could ever attain the confidence of markets needed to fulfill the role of a reserve currency.)
Jul 05, 20102:38pm EDT--
Jul 05, 20106:36pm EDT--
If anyone in the world thinks China is going to move at turbo speeds to make themselves vulnerable to the actions of west, is not only unaware of history, but incapable of clear thought processes¡­.
If anyone in the world thinks China is going to move at turbo speeds to make themselves vulnerable to the actions of west, is not only unaware of history, but incapable of clear thought processes¡­.
I frankly hoped that they learn the lesson of the Plaza Accord of 1985, and what havoc it brought upon the Japanese economy, and will not be anxious for that to happen to them. I agree with the Morgan Stanley Asia Chairman¡­ Washington needs to rethink a flawed strategy of attempting to fix America¡¯s multilateral international imbalance through a bi-lateral currency adjustment. It is bad politics driving bad economics¡­.
Get Schooled in Economics¡­ It¡¯s Educational.
Jul 05, 201010:14pm EDT--
