China denounces new unilateral U.S. sanctions on Iran
2010-07-06 09:56:00.0
(Reuters) - China denounced the United States on Tuesday for imposing its own sanctions on Iran, saying Washington should not unilaterally take such steps outside of U.N. resolutions.
Last week, President Barack Obama signed into law far-reaching new sanctions on Iran that aim to squeeze the Islamic Republic's fuel imports and deepen its international isolation.
"China has already noted that the United States and other parties have unilaterally put in place further sanctions against Iran," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang told a news briefing in Beijing.
"Not long ago, the U.N. Security Council approved resolution 1929," Qin said, referring to sanctions placed on Iran last month. "China believes that the Security Council resolution should fully, seriously and correctly be enforced and cannot be wilfully elaborated on to expand Security Council sanctions measures."
The U.S. House of Representatives and the Senate approved the new sanctions bill that penalizes companies supplying Iran with gasoline as well as international banks involved with Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
Qin repeated that China believed talks were the best way to resolve the dispute over Iran's nuclear activities.
Iran is a major supplier of crude to China, the world's second-biggest consumer of oil after the United States, providing over 10 percent of imports last year.
Dominated by energy shipments, bilateral trade has grown from around $10 billion in 2005 to more than $20 billion last year.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard and Huang Yan; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
if china would not have pulled all the teeth out of un sanctions then we would not have to go unilateral, china is not a friend to the us and we need to wake up to this fact, refuse to buy chinese goods, though this is easier said then done it is possible
Jul 06, 20107:51am EDT--
while China hasn¡¯t commited to any war for 30 years, US invaded a dozen of countries and caused millions of abnormal deaths in the same period. Whose dreading the peace?
Jul 06, 20109:51am EDT--
Becareful, the Reuter delete comments too if you are against the US.
Jul 06, 201010:06am EDT--
