China military denies exercise aimed at U.S
2010-06-28 23:23:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Jun 29 2010
Mon, Jun 28 2010
Sat, Jun 26 2010
Sat, Jun 26 2010
Tue, Jun 22 2010
Mon  EDT
Analysts and a military officer said the live ammunition exercise starting on Wednesday that will close off parts of the East China Sea off China's coast over six days were routine and the timing was coincidental.
"The PLA artillery exercise in the East China Sea and the joint U.S.-South Korea exercise in the Yellow Sea are a complete coincidence," Li Daguang, a professor at China's National Defense University told the Wen Wei Po, a Hong Kong newspaper under mainland control.
"The outside world shouldn't read anything into this."
Li, a People's Liberation Army (PLA) officer, said the firing exercise was a routine one and "not aimed at the U.S.-South Korea joint exercise."
But the China Daily, the country's official English-language newspaper, said some analysts saw the announcement of the exercise as a "response to a joint exercise between the United States and Republic of Korea navies in the Yellow Sea."
The Yellow Sea lies to the north of the East China Sea, and the areas of the two exercises would not overlap.
China's Foreign Ministry said last week it was concerned about reports a U.S. aircraft carrier may join the anti-submarine exercise with South Korea following a standoff with North Korea over the sinking of a warship from the South.
"Though the Chinese government did not say anything about the drill, anybody with common sense on military strategy will bet that they are related," one expert on China-U.S. relations, Shi Yinhong of Renmin University in Beijing, told the China Daily.
The joint exercise that had been expected this month will most likely take place in July, although a date has yet to be set, the Pentagon said on Monday.
Washington has not officially said whether an aircraft carrier could participate, as some news reports have suggested, citing Pentagon sources.
Beijing has been angered by U.S. navy ships engaging in surveillance in waters close to China's southern coast.
Earlier this year, Beijing curtailed contacts with the Pentagon over continued U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, the self-ruled island that China claims as its own territory.
Defense Secretary Robert Gates said this month China's decision to break off military-to-military contacts could undercut regional stability.
Gates said the PLA was the main obstruction in the way of improved relations, and suggested its position was at odds with that of the country's political leadership.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
of course it is!! prett obvious
Jun 29, 201010:19am EDT--
In the last 6 months of my employment in China, I have steadily recieved increased pressure from my employer excersising its soverign audacity on my own individual contract with them and my goodwill towards honoring that contract. Even in this domestic and friendly mileu of cooperation, they instead chose to take advantageous postures and actions against my person though they are not being directly provoked by me to do so¡­It has been very perverse to me¡­and near combative.
In the last 6 months of my employment in China, I have steadily recieved increased pressure from my employer excersising its soverign audacity on my own individual contract with them and my goodwill towards honoring that contract. Even in this domestic and friendly mileu of cooperation, they instead chose to take advantageous postures and actions against my person though they are not being directly provoked by me to do so¡­It has been very perverse to me¡­and near combative.
Thus my observations of China tend to be inclined to believe that they like to provoke violent response..and force th hands of others so they can play the innocent victim¡­perhaps because they were not a people who sustained their culture by migration¡­.I can¡¯t say for sure..I just see people being a-holes to me, without an excuse¡­The country itself is also rich in that atmosphere that induces fermentation¡­(i.e ¡°beer-courage¡±) By that, I mean it is constantly sweaty and moist¡­.In general it seems they are confident that as long as they can screw and get drunk there will be always be a China. And because they have unique physical attributes that are perhaps concurrent to that fermentation¡­they exploit them as their aesthetic¡­They seem to be profiting from the fetish of their race..That is to say, unless forced to, they don¡¯t see the need of an African President¡­no matter how long he lives in the country¡­or is a nice guy¡­or whatever¡­Unless they are near extinction and a African saves that last Chinese girl and boy from going the way of the dodo. They can keep on making Chinese looking babies if they stay deicated to that..and that is a basic ¡°Grandma¡± survival strategy..¡±profiling¡± is also an advantage¡­But like I said if the African is their Saviour, then he is a Protector of China and ONLY then could he be a RULER¡­But since that is not so Currentlt the idea of, say, a Chinese President of, say, Japan makes a whoole lot of sense¡­(They seem to dwell on Japan in the World Cup even)¡­And with all the changes going on in Japans leadership in the last 5 years¡­You have to wonder¡­It seems like to me the Chinese are also using Japanese and Korean ¡°libertytown¡± ethics and strategies to profit from and undermine the unique attributes of others¡­I mean its bizarre to be in a China that relishes in it¡¯s ability to appropriate Western cultural mediums as their own, yet insists openly and publicily in a most confrontational manner, (¡±lao wai¡±), that the Westerners who have exported that medium to them are somehow not a part of their newfound glory¡­. A big problem that I have had to navigate and also percieve is that when it comes to chinese girls they, and their guardians basically support a tributary attitude¡­(i.e. You want the tangible asset of a female body¡­.You have to obey us and give up something we want..They always quick to offer intangible appeasements in most conflicts)¡­That empty promise has been very effective from the times of US¡¯s attitudes towards Madame Kai-shek it seems..It was really her that provided the guns that armed the Communists¡­The Chinese female body has become a weapon to gain access, to gather information and to plot strategies. With that in mind, they will continue to ask more and more¡­if you REALLY, REALLY want that female body of what they consider a divine gift of THEIR unique beauty¡­Very much the same as the Japanese prostitutes when the US occupied their island. And in a western culture that promotes pornography you contiinually are upping the ante on that evaluation at your own expense¡­That is also seems why the Chinese are gaining momentunm on thewake of an African-centric dominance of American media and culture¡­They see how effective it is to play a race card¡­The only difference being the African in America is compromised to an extent, by being American¡­whereas the Chinese are not¡­unless you can undermine the distinctions of being a ¡°Chinese¡± person¡­.which are, in truth, ambiguous at best.
Jun 30, 20109:00am EDT--
