FTSE hits 10-month low on double-dip recession fears
2010-07-01 00:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares hit a 10-month closing low on Thursday as downbeat data from the U.S., China and Britain sparked double-dip recession fears, triggering a broad sell-off, with banks and miners the hardest hit.
fell 111.12 points, or 2.3 percent, to 4,805.75 -- its lowest close since September 3, 2009.
Markets were spooked after a key survey of U.S. manufacturing activity fell to its lowest in six months, while contracts for pending sales of previously owned homes plunged a record 30 percent in May, far more than expected.
The U.S. figures followed data from China showing manufacturing growth slowed in June. In Britain, a rebound in manufacturing slowed from a 15-year high in June as export order growth all but ran out of steam.
And growth of the global manufacturing sector eased again in June, a survey showed. At 55.0, the JPMorgan Global Manufacturing PMI was down further from the near record high reached in April.
"Today's data has heightened lingering fears of a double dip recession. There is real worry among investors about the stability of the global recovery and support for future earnings," said Jimmy Yates, head of equities at CMC Markets.
) were among the worst off, down 5.4 percent and 5.0 percent respectively.
The blue-chip index lost more than 13 percent in the second-quarter, the worst fall since the third-quarter of 2002 when the dot.com boom collapsed, but index compilers FTSE Group said BP (
BP - A BRIGHTER FUTURE?
) was one of the only two risers on the FTSE 100, gaining 2.8 percent with traders citing talk that the oil giant had capped the leaking well in the Gulf of Mexico.
In a note, RBS said the latest data from BP suggests that the first relief well may be completed in the first half of July, ahead of BP's guidance which implies early August.
Other oil majors retreated, with Royal Dutch Shell (
), down 4.5 percent as traders cited market talk the company could lower its guidance. Shell declined to comment on the talk.
Among midcaps, Wellstream WSML.L was the top faller, down 12.5 percent after the British oil services firm warned an expected second-half recovery would be slower after the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico caused uncertainty.
), which fell 3.8 percent.
Banks, generally seen as riskier assets, were out of favor as investors rushed to exit more cyclically geared positions.
) was the top loser among the blue chips, down 5.6 percent. Analysts cut earnings estimates for Barclays after the bank said late on Wednesday that investment banking conditions have weakened in the last two months.
