AgBank soothes investor fears as market plunges
2010-06-29 09:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Agricultural Bank of China ABC.UL, in the final stages of a more than $20 billion IPO, moved to ease investor concerns on Tuesday, outlining key financial steps amid a 4 percent plunge in Shanghai stocks.
The market slide was due in part from investors selling ahead of the IPO's formal launch but also came after the bank disclosed a lower-than-expected price range for the Shanghai portion of the offering.
China's third largest bank, with $1.4 trillion in assets, addressed cost to income ratios, future profits and its loan book at a previously planned press conference here on Tuesday.
If it raises more than $21.9 billion, the IPO would be the world's largest ever.
The Beijing-based lender said it would see its cost-to-income ratio fall by 5 to 8 percentage points after its public offering, the bank said, as it tries to ease investor concern about its high cost base.
"If we cut our cost-to-income ratio by 1 percentage point, we expect it to help our net profit grow by 2 billion yuan ($295 million)," Vice-Chairman Zhang Yun told reporters ahead of its listing in Shanghai and Hong Kong next month.
AgBank's cost to income ratio in 2009 was 43.4 percent, compared with 33 percent at Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (
The government run company, founded by Mao Zedong in 1951, has 24,000 branches, 441,000 employees and 320 million customers.
AgBank is typically seen as a riskier investment compared with some of its rivals because of its higher ratio of bad loans and huge network of branches in rural areas, which increases operating expenses.
The lender, which extends into China's vast rural population but also has branches in most major cities, is the last of China's Big Four banks to list, after struggling for years with a massive non-performing loan portfolio.
About 15 percent, or 533 billion yuan, of AgBank's total loans went to local governments at the end of 2009, Zhang said, a figure the bank claimed was lower than its peers.
"The risk of loan exposure to local government investment vehicles is controllable, given that it only accounts for 15 percent of the loans," he said.
The non-performing loans (NPL) ratio for its overall local government loan portfolio was 0.61 percent, Zhang said. By comparison, rival ICBC said in May its NPL ratio for local government lending was 0.02 percent.
Some analysts have raised concern that some banks may have overstretched themselves lending to local governments in 2009, when China went on a massive lending spree to help boost its economy amid the global economic downturn.
Expenses, including aggregate commissions and fees, were estimated at HK$1.3 billion, AgBank said in its prospectus.
AgBank will sell shares in Hong Kong within a range of HK$2.88 to HK$3.48 ($0.37-$0.39) each, raising up to $11.4 billion to help it strengthen its capital and support ongoing growth.
Pressure on AgBank's offering is growing ahead of its planned July 15 and 16 listing. The only way the lender will be able to achieve the IPO record appears to be if it exercises an over-allotment of shares.
That pressure intensified on Tuesday as China's stock market
(Additional reporting by Clare Jim; Writing by Kelvin Soh; Editing by Chris Lewis and Jon Loades-Carter)
