AgBank Shanghai IPO gets lower price ceiling than HK
2010-06-28 11:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Agricultural Bank of China (AgBank) may set a lower price for its Shanghai initial public offering than for its Hong Kong offering, source said, after setting a price range for the mainland portion with a lower ceiling to reflect weaker demand among Chinese investors.
The combined offering is set to raise up to $20.2 billion, slightly smaller than Industrial and Commercial Bank's (
) record $21.9 billion offering in 2006, unless a greenshoe option is exercised to expand the IPO by 15 percent.
AgBank ABC.UL will sell shares in Shanghai at 2.52-2.68 yuan ($0.37-$0.39) apiece, the lender said in a statement, confirming a Reuters story.
The A-share price range compares with a range of HK$2.88 to HK$3.48 ($0.37-$0.45) set last week for the Hong Kong leg of the IPO, which could raise up to $11.4 billion.
"The A-share price range is set much lower than for H shares, as the lender is considering the recent weakness of the domestic stock market," said a banker involved in the deal, who declined to be named.
The final IPO prices in the two markets, to be determined on July 7, could also turn out to be different, one of the sources said, confounding many analysts' initial expectations that the Hong Kong and Shanghai IPO prices would be the same.
With more than 350 million customers, exceeding the population of the United States, AgBank is the last of China's Big Four banks to go public.
The bank, headed by 53-year-old war hero Xiang Junbo, is looking to replenish its capital and drive growth.
The Hong Kong price range represents a price-to-book value of 1.55-1.79 times for China's third-largest bank with assets of $1.4 trillion.
Analysts said a divergence in the IPO prices in Hong Kong and Shanghai would reflect the reality that overseas investors are more interested in Chinese banking stocks, looking to their long-term potential, whereas local investors are not as attracted to the bread-and-butter bank.
"Global investors are longer-term in nature, thus preferring companies like AgBank that serve as a proxy of China's economic growth," said Yu Wei, analyst at Guoyuan Securities Co. "Chinese investors are more speculative, and dislike companies with too much certainty."
Highlighting the difference in investor tastes, most dual-listed Chinese banks currently trade at a premium in Hong Kong over their Shanghai-listed peers.
Investor interest in AgBank's Shanghai IPO appeared modest by traditional measures for mainland IPOs, with 214 institutions submitting bids for 59.5 billion shares in premarketing, or 2.6 times the shares available to them, according to Monday's statement.
The Hong Kong leg of AgBank's IPO has already been over-subscribed by institutional investors at low to mid-range prices, sources involved in the deal told Reuters last week.
Eleven cornerstone investors, including United Overseas Bank (
) and sovereign wealth funds in Qatar and Kuwait, have agreed to buy $5.45 billion worth of AgBank H shares, or nearly half of the Hong Kong offering, sources have said.
(Additional reporting by Fiona Lau; Editing by David Cowell)
