China AgBank narrows range for Shanghai IPO: sources
2010-06-28 06:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Agricultural Bank of China (AgBank) is likely to set a lower price for its Shanghai initial public offering than it set for the Hong Kong portion of the IPO, according to sources, reflecting weaker demand among Chinese investors.
AgBank ABC.UL will sell shares in Shanghai at 2.52 yuan to 2.68 yuan ($0.37-$0.39) apiece, two sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters. The narrower price range for the Shanghai offering meant the bank will potentially raise up to 59.5 billion yuan in the mainland portion of its IPO.
The price range for yuan-denominated A shares, due to be formally announced late on Monday, compares with a range of HK$2.88-HK$3.48 ($0.37-$0.45) set last week for the Hong Kong leg of the IPO.
"The A-share price range is set much lower than for H-shares, as the lender is considering the recent weakness of the domestic stock market," said a banker involved in the deal, who declined to be named.
The final IPO prices in the two markets, to be determined on July 7, could also turn out to be different, a source said. Many analysts had initially thought the Hong Kong and Shanghai IPO prices would turn out to be the same.
With more than 350 million customers, the population of the United States, AgBank is the last of China's Big Four banks to go public. The bank, headed by 53-year-old war hero Xiang Junbo, is looking to replenish its capital and drive growth.
AgBank last week set the price range for its 25.4 billion Hong Kong-listed H shares, signaling it could raise as much as $11.4 billion.
The Hong Kong price range represents a price-to-book value of 1.55 to 1.79 times for China's third-largest bank with assets of $1.4 trillion.
The A share price range gives a clearer indication of the size of AgBank's IPO.
The lender would raise up to about $20.2 billion in Shanghai and Hong Kong, leaving its IPO slightly smaller than Industrial and Commercial Bank's (
) record $21.9 billion offering in 2006, unless a greenshoe option is exercised to increase the IPO size by 15 percent.
Analysts said a divergence in the IPO prices in Hong Kong and Shanghai would reflect the reality that overseas investors are more interested in Chinese banking stocks, looking to their long-term potential, whereas local investors are not as interested in the bread-and-butter bank.
"Global investors are longer-term in nature, thus preferring companies like AgBank that serve as a proxy of China's economic growth," said Yu Wei, analyst at Guoyuan Securities Co. "Chinese investors are more speculative, and dislike companies with too much certainty."
AgBank will start trading in Shanghai on July 15, and in Hong Kong a day later.
But investor interest in AgBank's Shanghai IPO is reportedly high, with the official Securities Times reporting on June 25 that the Shanghai offering was 16 times oversubscribed upon the completion of domestic pre-marketing.
The Hong Kong leg of AgBank's IPO has already been over-subscribed by institutional investors at low to mid-range prices, sources involved in the deal told Reuters last week.
Eleven cornerstone investors, including sovereign wealth funds in Qatar and Kuwait and United Overseas Bank (
), have agreed to buy $5.45 billion worth of AgBank shares, or nearly half of the Hong Kong offering, sources said.
(Writing and additional reporting by Samuel Shen; Editing by Jason Subler and Muralikumar Anantharaman)
