Global financial regulations also fit China: central banker
2010-06-25 23:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Most principles embodied in a new set of financial regulatory rules proposed by the United States and Europe also fit China, and embracing them early would help it strengthen financial stability, the country's deputy central bank governor said on Saturday.
Embracing such principles would help also narrow the regulatory differences between China and western countries, Yi Gang told a financial and banking conference held in Lujiazui, the nerve center of the financial industry in Shanghai.
Separately, Yi also called for negotiations, not trade wars, to resolve disputes, including disputes over the value of China's yuan currency.
"China should actively participate in designing global economic management and supervision rules," Yi said.
Group of 20 leaders meeting this weekend in Toronto want progress on a reform known as Basel III, that requires banks to set aside far more capital and hold a minimum level of liquid assets from the end of 2012.
International banks are lobbying hard to water down the draft rules, saying they would have to raise so much new capital that economic recovery and lending would be jeopardized.
"If we implement these principles, standards, framework and many of those important rules early, it would be highly significant to helping China narrow the gap with advanced countries, promote financial reforms and strengthen our financial stability," Yi said.
On Friday, the eve of the G20, U.S. lawmakers hammered out a historic overhaul of financial regulations in a domestic victory for President Barack Obama.
(Reporting by Samuel Shen, editing by Lucy Hornby and Miral Fahmy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Perhaps we/humanity have unleashed the pandora¡¯s box that will be our undoing/dying. All so we can continue our hedonist Energy WASTE. 100¡¯s of million of lights burning unnecessarily during the day and night, OVERDRIVING, OVERheating, OVERcooling, are the norm. America¡¯s cultural WASTE is horrendous and few seem to really care.
Perhaps we/humanity have unleashed the pandora¡¯s box that will be our undoing/dying. All so we can continue our hedonist Energy WASTE. 100¡¯s of million of lights burning unnecessarily during the day and night, OVERDRIVING, OVERheating, OVERcooling, are the norm. America¡¯s cultural WASTE is horrendous and few seem to really care.
FREE Alternative Energy is Available NOW: CONSERVATION ! ! ! Stop the/your Energy WASTE
Jun 27, 201010:29am EDT--
Jun 27, 201010:41am EDT--
