G20 drops China-sensitive plaudits on yuan reform
2010-06-27 19:35:00.0
(Reuters) - World leaders ditched plans to welcome Beijing's shift toward greater exchange rate flexibility at a G20 summit in Toronto on Sunday, highlighting China's sensitivity over the issue.
But President Barack Obama, who has been pressing for a yuan revaluation to help ease trade disparities, welcomed Beijing's move and said he believed over time the currency would appreciate significantly.
Negotiators had hoped a statement to be signed by the leaders in Canada would include a line welcoming last week's announcement that Beijing was ending a de facto peg that had locked the yuan to the U.S. dollar for nearly two years.
"The majority of the members of the G20 welcomed the plans of the government of China on introducing a floating yuan rate," Andrei Bokarev, a Russian finance ministry official, told reporters.
But a phrase saying as much was included in an early draft communique but dropped from the final version "at the request of the Chinese side," he said.
Two officials said the line that had been present on Saturday had been erased less than 24 hours later. "China did not want to be explicitly mentioned, even as a good case," one of the officials said.
Instead, he said China recognized it had a critical role to play in helping to rebalance the global economy but necessary changes could not happen overnight.
It has become a major point of contention between Washington and Beijing. U.S. Congress members are pressuring Obama to get tougher with China, saying the mismatch in trade is making bad U.S. jobless rates even worse.
Obama said he believed China's pledge of greater currency flexibility is serious. "We didn't expect a 20 percent revaluation in a week. That would be disruptive to the Chinese economy. It would be disruptive to the world economy," he said.
"We do expect that as more and more market forces come to bear, that given the enormous surpluses that China has accumulated, that the RMB is going to go up, and it is going to go up significantly," he said. The yuan is also called the RMB or renminbi.
"If you only rely on exchange rate reform, it is very difficult to address trade imbalances or trade frictions," Yu Jianhua, a director-general in the commerce ministry, said.
In a separate but related development, China's ambassador to the World Trade Organization in Geneva told Reuters on Sunday that excessive demands from the United States explained why the Doha round of talks on global trade liberalization, launched in 2001, were going nowhere.
"The U.S. is the sole member who insists that we're still far away from the conclusion of the round," Sun Zhenzyu said.
(Reporting by G20 team; Writing by Brian Love; Editing by David Storey)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
That¡¯s right monkeys, just pretend its not there and then build your little sand castles in the sky. I wonder how anyone in the world can think that these people are serious adults? I guess the truth is that there are very very few serious adults, as I look around at my peers in my mid-fifties I realize that the baby boomers have never gotten out of adolescence and I guess never will. Are all generations this childish and stupid? Reading history it appears so, time after time people lazily allow thieves to take everything over and ruin it, pitifully sad no?
Jun 27, 20109:22am EDT--
How can we call these people our ¡°leaders?¡± What a pathetic example of how the world does not have the will or deisre to stand up to dictatorships anymore. It is also another sad example of China¡¯s irresponsible leadership. If China really came to the G20 to help fix global imbalances, then the first thing it would have done is recognized the fact that China¡¯s currency manipulation is one of the main causes of all the unbalances. It¡¯s time for new global leadership!!! leaders are needed that do not kowtow to every wish and demand of China. Why does the world worry so much about ¡°offending¡± the Chinese, or causing them to lose face? Does the world not realize that China causes the world to lose face as well? A HUGE double standard exists ¨C one that says it is culturally insensitive to offend the Chinese, but not culturally insensitive for the Chinese to offend other nations. The world is going down the drain fast!
Jun 27, 201010:16am EDT--
You China-bashers are a pitiful lot. Can¡¯t deal with the fact that our Congress has run our country into the ground? Apparently, the Chinese have learned from the economic failures of socialism, while the US Congress has learned nothing. Schadenfreude
Jun 27, 201010:54am EDT--
