China Mobile CEO says mulling Africa M&A
2010-06-26 07:21:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Jun 24 2010
Thu, Jun 24 2010
Tue, Jun 22 2010
Tue, Jun 22 2010
Tue, Jun 22 2010
Sat  EDT
), the world's largest mobile-phone carrier, is looking for acquisitions in Africa but does not have any targets at the moment, its chief executive told Reuters on Saturday.
The company would be willing to take either a minority or majority stake in a local African operator, Wang Jianzhou said on the sidelines of the Fortune Global Forum in Cape Town.
"We pay much attention to the African operators, but we don't have a target company currently ... It is not easy to get an agreement for M&A (mergers and acquisitions). We can have a majority, we'd also like to be the minority," he said.
Fast-growing Africa is increasingly a focus for wireless operators in developed markets, due to its quickly rising middle class and relatively low mobile-phone penetration.
), Africa's largest mobile-phone operator, is facing a threat from India's Bharti Airtel (
), which recently bought the African operations of Kuwait's Zain (
Bharti said this month it plans to spend a total of $350 million in the next three years to improve its networks in Uganda, Zambia and Malawi.
Wang declined to say if China Mobile had considered acquiring the sub-Saharan assets of Egypt's Orascom Telecom (
), which may have been part of MTN's recent failed acquisition talks with Orascom.
While China is the world's biggest mobile market, with around 700 million subscribers, operators there face stiff competition and have been forced to chase less lucrative subscribers in smaller cities to maintain growth.
China Mobile added an average of 5.5 million users per month in the first quarter, lower than the average of 6.6 million a year earlier. Wang told Reuters he expects that pace to continue for the rest of the year.
"I think there will be no big changes from now to the end of this year, because the rural areas still have huge potential. The pace will continue." (Editing by Ron Askew)
