Exclusive: China rebuffs U.S. trade criticism
2010-06-27 04:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China has dismissed U.S. comments that Beijing is blocking a new trade agreement, saying that it was the United States that was stalling progress in the World Trade Organization's long-running Doha round.
The angry comments, by China's ambassador to the WTO, indicate how difficult it now is to bridge the gaps in the Doha talks, launched in late 2001, because of differences between the United States and big emerging economies, foremost China.
"Everybody knows what the real reason for the deadlock of the Doha round is and where the main political obstacles come from," Sun Zhenyu told Reuters on Sunday.
"The U.S. is the sole member who insists that we're still far away from the conclusion of the round. Their new excessive request on an elevated level of ambition is in fact equivalent to a restart of the round and a flagrant deviation from the original negotiation mandates."
Frustration on both sides has now boiled over into a public war of words, making a deal even harder, a fact recognized by leaders of the G8 countries, who include the United States but not China, when at their summit in Canada on Saturday they dropped a commitment to complete Doha this year and simply renewed a pledge to conclude an agreement.
Sun was responding to comments by his American counterpart, Michael Punke, the U.S. ambassador to the WTO.
It says that China, now the world's biggest exporter, has clearly gained enormously from joining the WTO in 2001, when it made big cuts in tariffs and opened its markets.
But Punke said China had not responded to U.S. requests for detailed one-on-one negotiations, although there were signs of hope that Brazil and India would take part in talks.
He said the United States recognized that serious negotiations involved give and take, indicating that Washington was ready to pay for new concessions from its partners.
"The blame put on China, Brazil and India is nothing but a red herring to distract people's attention from the real problem," he said.
If the United States really wanted to make progress in the talks, it could address a number of contentious issues, he said.
It could cut its trade-distorting agricultural subsidies, especially cotton, from $15 billion, cut "tariff peaks" on sensitive goods that keep out developing country imports, comply with WTO rulings condemning its controversial method of calculating anti-dumping duties, known as zeroing, and let in more temporary workers for services from health to construction.
Sun said China was negotiating actively in the Doha talks and under current proposals would cut its agricultural and industrial tariffs by about 30 percent, as well as opening several new service sectors to foreign competition.
China had repeatedly called at the G20 for a Doha deal to help the world recovery, but a deal had to benefit developing countries, not the interest of one rich WTO member, he said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
If barack does not approve of the public use of HIS middle name, perhaps he should change it to TAX ¨C barack tax obama. HE cannot find enough goods, services, companies, industries or people to tax. Since he has NO practical business experience he does not seem to grasp the idea that additional taxes anywhere end up hitting the individual tax payer. Business taxes are an expense passed directly to the consumer.
Jun 27, 20105:48am EDT--
China hasn¡¯t opened it¡¯s markets to foreign companies. When China joined the WTO in 2001, on of the stipulations was that markets should be open to foreign firms. Well, foreign countries have opened their markets to China (as is evidenced in the fact that everything is Made In China). But China continues to stall on it¡¯s obligations to open Chinese markets to foreign companies. China gets away with far too much!!! China either needs to live up to their WTO obligations, or the WTO needs to kick China out and close all foreign markets to Chinese goods. If China refuses to play by the rules, then China needs to be forced to play by the rules. Tarriffs on all Chinese goods!!!
Jun 27, 201010:22am EDT--
China up; America down: that¡¯s the path, and it¡¯s America¡¯s doing, not China¡¯s, considering the starting point for each nation. Human rights abuses don¡¯t matter to Americans when the goods are cheaper. However, a conflict is coming.
Jun 27, 201012:39pm EDT--
