Europe shares fall, ending 9-day rally
2010-06-22 13:14:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares fell on Tuesday, snapping a nine-day winning run, as markets re-evaluated China's move to give its currency more flexibility and oil group BP (
of leading European shares fell 0.4 percent to close at 1,050.79 points, after rising 7.7 percent in the previous nine sessions.
"It's probably profit-taking," said Philippe Gijsels, head of research at BNP Paribas Fortis Global Markets in Brussels. "The China move is good but we shouldn't exaggerate. It's not going to solve all the problems."
The index is up 0.5 percent in 2010, having suffered in April and May on worries about debt levels in Europe.
BP fell 4.4 percent to its lowest close since 1997 as its beleaguered boss Tony Hayward retreated from daily management of the U.S. oil spill crisis and dodged making a conference speech, where his stand-in was heckled by environmentalists.
), down 1.6 percent. In a review of the energy sector, Goldman Sachs reiterated its "sell" rating on Total, cut its target price and downgraded BG (
), downgraded by Fitch Ratings, was among French banks to fall. BNP Paribas, Credit Agricole (
Fitch also said the risk of the euro zone economy falling into a double-dip recession had increased over the past three months, mainly due to weakened confidence in the private sector about the economic outlook.
"With all the fiscal consolidation going on and all the countries doing it at the same time we don't know what the impact will be," said Gijsels.
He said news from central banks would be important in coming weeks. But, like most strategists, he expects the U.S. Federal Reserve to keep interest rates near zero, in a decision to be announced after European markets close on Wednesday.
Britain's' FTSE 100
closed 1 percent lower, after finance minister George Osborne set out his plans to cut the country's deficit in an emergency budget, following the Conservative-Liberal coalition taking power in May.
The main rate of value added tax will rise to 20 percent from 17.5 percent, but not until January.
Across Europe, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
was flat; the S&P 500
Sales of previously owned U.S. homes fell unexpectedly in May as delays in processing mortgage applications hampered the closing of contracts benefiting from a popular homebuyer tax credit, an industry group said.
China's currency reforms initially sparked a global rally in riskier assets on Monday, on hopes that a stronger yuan would boost its already formidable purchasing power for imported goods and raw materials, boosting the global economic recovery.
Among individual movers, Whitbread (
) rose 3.6 percent, after it posted a first-quarter sales rise of 7.6 percent, boosted by a strong performance at its Premier Inn hotel chain.
