Obama: Positive signs on yuan but too early to judge
2010-06-24 17:33:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama said on Thursday China had made progress by announcing greater currency flexibility, but it was "too early to tell" if the
yuan's rise would be enough to help rebalance world growth.
Obama, speaking at a joint news conference with visiting Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, said initial signs were positive, and the gradual change witnessed so far in the currency's value against the dollar were no surprise.
"We did not expect a complete 20 percent appreciation overnight, for example, simply because that would be extremely disruptive to world currency markets and to the Chinese economy," Obama said, making plain he welcomed the decision.
"I think China made progress by making its announcement that it is going to be returning to its phased-in, market-based approach" to the currency, Obama said.
In a move intended to defuse likely criticism at the upcoming Group of 20 summit for its currency policy, China on Saturday announced it would allow more flexibility of the yuan, which had been tightly pegged against the dollar for the last two years.
U.S. lawmakers claim China is stealing precious American jobs by keeping the yuan artificially low against the dollar, which makes Chinese exports to the United States cheaper and U.S. exports to China more expensive in dollar terms.
As a result, Congress is weighing legislation to encourage Beijing to let the yuan rise. House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee Chairman Sander Levin said this should remain an option if the currency did not move fast enough.
Obama is under pressure in an election year to fight for American workers. But he needs Chinese cooperation in other areas important to U.S. interests, like pressuring Iran and North Korea for their nuclear programs, and has opted for quiet diplomacy with China on the highly delicate issue of the yuan.
Both leaders are heading to the Group of Eight and Group of 20 rich and developing nations, which meet in Canada June 25-27 to review the outlook for global growth.
The yuan ended higher against the dollar on Thursday at 6.7997, up from Wednesday's close of 6.8124. But dealers said there was no sign that the People's Bank of China was encouraging a sharp rise in its currency.
Obama, who must weigh whether he characterizes China as a currency manipulator in a report to Congress, said only time would tell. But he hinted a year was a reasonable benchmark.
"The initial signs were positive. But it is too early to tell whether the appreciation, that will track the market, is sufficient to allow for the rebalancing that we think is appropriate," Obama said.
"If that trajectory indicates that over the course of a year, the (yuan) has appreciated a certain amount, that it is more in line with economic fundamentals, then hopefully not only will that be good for the U.S. economy, that will also be good for the Chinese economy," he said.
The peg has contributed to a massive surplus in the Chinese trade account with the United States, which economists fear is an unsustainable imbalance that could renew global financial instability if it undermined dollar confidence.
The regular congressional report was delayed from its April publication date until after the G20. Obama said he would leave the decision on whether to cite China for currency manipulation to U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, but reiterated his argument the yuan was being kept too low.
"We have said consistently that we believe that the (yuan) is undervalued, that that provides China with an unfair trade advantage, and that we expect change," he said.
But it is not clear where that bill might fit in a crowded legislative agenda or whether it would face a veto by Obama, who so far has focused on diplomacy to advance the U.S. goal of getting China to cut its huge trade surplus.
(Additional reporting by Matt Spetalnick, Jeff Mason and Paul Eckert in Washington, Editing by Frances Kerry and Cynthia Osterman)
