China says concerned about South Korea-U.S. drill
2010-06-22 07:53:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Jun 17 2010
Wed, Jun 16 2010
Mon, Jun 14 2010
Sat, Jun 5 2010
Sat, Jun 5 2010
People look around a model of the South Korean Navy's Chamsuri class patrol boat No. 357, which was sunk during the second Yeonpyeong sea battle between the two Koreas in 2002, at the Korean War Memorial Museum in Seoul June 20, 2010, five days ahead of the 60th anniversary of the Korean War on June 25. Credit: Reuters/Jo Yong-Hak
Tue  EDT
The South Korean corvette the Cheonan was sunk off the peninsula's west coast in March, killing 46 sailors. South Korea has blamed the North for sinking the Cheonan with a torpedo fired from a submarine, a charge the North denies.
Some news reports, including one in the Washington Post newspaper, have said Pentagon officials are considering sending an aircraft carrier to take part in the exercise in the Yellow Sea off South Korea's western coast.
Seoul says an international inquiry showed there was no doubt North Korea sank the Cheonan but Beijing, North Korea's only real ally and benefactor, has reacted much more cautiously.
"We're extremely concerned about these reports and will closely follow developments," he told a news conference.
He said China was worried the show of naval force could unsettle the region. "Under current circumstances, all the parties concerned should exercise calm and restraint and do nothing to escalate tensions and harm the interests of countries in this region," Qin said.
North Korea said the planned exercises were part of a "dangerous scheme to disturb the peace," the state news agency KCNA quoted a major daily as saying on Tuesday.
"The situation of the Korean Peninsula is now at the crucial phase in which an all-out war may break out any moment. Therefore, the reckless joint military exercises projected under such a situation cannot be construed otherwise than a scenario to ignite another Korean war."
China has resisted calls from Seoul, Washington and Tokyo to join in condemning Pyongyang over the Cheonan sinking, instead saying it needed to assess the competing claims.
Beijing has also been irked by U.S. navy ships engaging in surveillance in waters close to China's southern coast.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing and John Ruwitch in Seoul; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is concerned about the joint exercise, but is afraid to admit that it was a n. korean torpedo that sank the ship.
Jun 22, 20109:12am EDT--
despite the acquiescence, asia already considers the US the primary instigator of tensions in the region. Most suspect the US sunk the ship and is accusing DPRK to justify military bases. US is playing into this characterization. US agressions in asia is over. only option is to leave with dignity.
Jun 22, 20109:15am EDT--
First off Mockivillian, you need to stop smoking that stuff. US aggression? Wake up. China has already seen an analyzed the evidence, that is why they are so completely silent on the results. Duh! Where the heck do you think those NK weapons come from? So NK can really do whatever they want to their neighbor, sink a ship, fire on a ship, lob shells, whatever and its ok? No repurcussions? Quit seeing a consipiracy everywhere you look or at least where the US is concerned. You need to get a life.
Jun 22, 20109:39am EDT--
