Factbox: Winners and losers from a firmer yuan
2010-06-23 19:37:00.0
(Reuters) - China's signal it will let its yuan currency appreciate is good news for global manufacturers and resource companies that supply the world's third-biggest economy with the equipment and commodities it needs to fuel growth.
On the other hand, it could dampen the outlook for China's own exporters and commodity producers. A relatively mild yuan appreciation against the dollar of about 5 percent would cause losses at these companies, according to a Reuters poll conducted at China's top trade fair in April.
In Canada, base metal producers Inmet Mining, First Quantum Minerals Ltd and Teck Resources all rose on Monday on hopes China's move would increase its resource imports.
The world's largest maker of earth-moving equipment, Caterpillar Inc, could be a major winner. The U.S. machinery giant sells billions of dollars worth of machinery and products to China each year. Its group president said on Saturday that Beijing's move would help lift U.S. exports.
Foreign automakers that sell cars in the world's largest vehicle market, such as BMW AG, Volkswagen AG, General Motors Co, PSA Peugeot Citroen, the Renault-Nissan alliance and Fiat SpA, should also gain.
BMW would benefit the most if the yuan continues to rise against the euro -- an outcome that is far from certain -- as its auto manufacturing joint venture with Brilliance China imports about half its parts, mainly from Germany.
BMW shares were up 2.7 percent, Volkswagen rose 1 percent, Renault rose 3.6 percent, Nissan rose 2.8 percent, Fiat fell 0.2 percent and Brilliance rose 4.8 percent.
CONSUMERS, TECHS - WIN
A spokeswoman for GE, which makes many of the products it sells in China in that country, said the U.S. conglomerate does not expect "any material impact" to its earnings from the change.
PC maker Lenovo Group Ltd, which earned 47 percent of its sales in China in 2009, reports earnings in U.S. dollars. Lenovo shares were up more than 5 percent on Monday.
Yum Brands Inc, which owns the KFC and Pizza Hut fast-food chains and generates more than one-third of its profits from its 3,500 locations in China, regards the move as good news, said spokesman Jonathan Blum.
"China represents our No. 1 growth opportunity and we expect this to be a very positive development over the long-term," Blum said.
No. 1 chipmaker Intel Corp expects limited effect from the change, a spokesman said.
"All of Intel's transactions worldwide are conducted in dollars so the effect of currency fluctuations is not a direct one on the company," said spokesman Tom Beermann. "There would be secondary effects if currency valuations caused demand for our products (or products that use our chips) to increase or decline overseas."
Shares of Baidu Inc, China's top search engine, were up 2 percent on the Nasdaq. GE was up 1 percent, Procter & Gamble was down 1 percent, Lenovo rose 5.2 percent and Yum rose 0.4 percent.
