Miners boost FTSE as China allows flexible yuan
2010-06-21 00:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares rose on Monday, boosted by China's move to allow a flexible yuan which lifted investors' risk appetite and bolstered the demand outlook for commodities, underpinning gains in miners and banks.
ended 48.27 points higher, or 0.9 percent, at 5,299.11, after it closed 0.1 percent lower on Friday to end a seven-day winning run.
The index is up over 2.1 percent in June after sharp falls in April and May, as fears over Europe's debt problems have receded.
China's central bank said late on Saturday it was ready to make the yuan more flexible, citing a global economic recovery and more balanced external trade.
"It's being treated as good news across the market as Asia and in particular China is still driving global growth in 2010," said Jimmy Yates, head of equities at CMC Markets.
Metal prices firmed and crude rose to around $79 per barrel as China's move melted some uncertainty on demand from the resource-consuming giant.
Miners had the biggest impact on the index, with BHP Billiton (
) gaining 4.7 and 5.0 percent, respectively, while Vedanta Resources (
) was the star performer, up 6.0 percent.
Banks, which tend to move in tandem with investor's appetite for risk, were firmly higher, with sector heavyweight HSBC (
were higher on the back of China's decision, helping sustain UK momentum, and ahead of the latest two-day Federal Reserve rate-setting meeting later on Monday.
) was the biggest drag on London's blue-chip index, down 2.2 percent on worries over the mounting costs faced by the energy major from the massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
Other energy stocks, however, were buoyed by China's move with Royal Dutch Shell RSDa.L and BG Group (
Defensive stocks, which tend to underperform when markets rise, were weaker as investors rotated into more cyclical areas.
The FTSE 100 retreated from a session high of 5,331.46 as UK investors remained cautious ahead of Tuesday's first budget from Britain's coalition government, with finance minister George Osborne set to deliver what is likely to be the toughest budget in at least 30 years.
"In recent weeks our clients have been long on the FTSE and sterling and could use any sharp rally after the budget as an opportunity to take profits," said Simon Brown, chief executive at ProSpreads.
) fell 2.5 percent, with traders citing pessimism over a possible hike in sales tax from the budget, and a report in the Financial Times that it is unlikely to name a new chairman before July's general meeting.
