Instant View: China sets yuan higher, market rebound brief
2010-06-21 22:36:00.0
(Reuters) - China's central bank set the yuan's daily mid-point at 6.7980 against the dollar on Tuesday, the highest level since the yuan's revaluation in July 2005, signaling it could allow the currency to rise further.
Stock markets and commodities trimmed early losses after the fixing, while the euro gained against the dollar, but the rebound proved brief.
Global markets had surged early on Monday after China pledged to make the yuan more flexible, which could boost its already considerable purchasing power for imported goods and raw materials. But U.S. stock markets later surrendered their gains on doubts about how much Beijing would allow the yuan to appreciate and how fast. .N
The People's Bank of China disappointed many market watchers on Monday by fixing the yuan at a steady 6.8275 to the dollar, but later stepped aside and allowed it to surge nearly 0.5 percent in the spot market.
The yuan was quoted at 6.7968 in spot markets after the mid-point setting, slightly firmer than Monday's close of 6.7976, before slipping to 6.8129 by mid-morning.
- Most analysts believe any appreciation in the yuan will be slow and modest. On Sunday, the central bank said that exchange rate reform would be gradual, ruling out both major appreciation and a one-off revaluation and suggesting the new currency regime will look a lot like the old one.
- China's announcement at the weekend that it was resuming yuan reform seemed calculated to disarm critics of its currency regime before a Group of 20 summit this weekend in Canada. But a top U.S. lawmaker, Senator Charles Schumer, said China must provide more details about its new currency policy or U.S. lawmakers will press ahead with plans to raise trade barriers.
TOSHIHIKO SAKAI, CHIEF MANAGER OF FX TRADING AT MITSUBISHI UFJ TRUST BANK, TOKYO
"The currency impact from the yuan move is hard to predict because it will depend on how the equity market perceives resulting China-U.S. relations over the yuan. If pressure from U.S. lawmakers about the yuan intensifies and trade relations deteriorate between the two countries, it could impact equity markets negatively, and that may not help risky currencies much."
OLIVIER DESBARRES, FOREIGN EXCHANGE STRATEGIST, CREDIT SUISSE, SINGAPORE:
"This was a surprise to some extent. We didn't think the PBOC would be quite as aggressive. We thought the fix would be somewhere between yesterday's fix and yesterday's spot close. So the fact that they fixed around yesterday's close is more hawkish than we had expected.
"After the weekend announcement, the market had already traded the news but the statement was vague ... To some extent the PBOC is delivering perhaps more than the rhetoric had suggested it would. So I guess they have wrong footed the market for the second time in as many days."
CRAIG CHAN, SENIOR FX STRATEGIST AT NOMURA, SINGAPORE:
"Today's fixing lower was kind of bizarre given that overall risk appetite was kind of shaky overnight.
"Assuming we don't get a big blowout in risk and euro collapses, dollar/China fixing will continue to come down in coming sessions though definitely not at the same pace. It is not going to be a one-way trajectory but the downtrend is definitely intact."
EDWARD MEIR, COMMODITIES AND ENERGY ANALYST, MF GLOBAL, NEW YORK
"I am not surprised they did this. We had been looking for a revaluation for some months. It's an easy way out for Beijing - it helps their inflation numbers and will stem some of the criticism about the value of the yuan.
BRIAN JACKSON, STRATEGIST, ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, HONG KONG:
"China has backed up all the talk with action, and President Hu will arrive in Toronto later this week with tangible evidence that China is serious about increasing the flexibility of its exchange rate.
"We still may see moves in either direction from day to day, but we think the trend in the weeks and months ahead will be for yuan to make limited but meaningful gains against the dollar.
"This will help China deal with its own domestic policy challenges, but will also be good for the global economy.
WAI HO LEONG, ECONOMIST, BARCLAYS CAPITAL, SINGAPORE
"They want to make sure that the impact of the adjustment process is minimized for exporters and importers. They want to introduce an element of certainty for businesses, which is quite important. Also, they want to make sure that the trade balances are at least maintained."
XU BIAO, ECONOMIST, CHINA MERCHANTS BANK, SHENZHEN:
"It's still hard to conclude from just one or two trading days that there is a trend of yuan appreciation.
"It's true that the yuan has hit a new high against the dollar since China's yuan reform, but so what? Is there a real big difference between 6.7980 and 6.8000?
"The future yuan/dollar exchange rate is still uncertain, and it will be up to the dollar's performance. In fact, we expect the dollar to strengthen in the third quarter, and the yuan may weaken against the dollar over the third quarter as a whole."
