Factbox: Diverse group in AgBank's investor list
2010-06-23 09:59:00.0
Factbox: Diverse group in AgBank's investor list | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Factbox: Diverse group in AgBank's investor list
Wed, Jun 23 2010
Wed, Jun 23 2010
Wed, Jun 23 2010
Mon, Jun 21 2010
Mon, Jun 21 2010
Wed  EDT
The AgBank IPO, which hopes to be the world's biggest at more than $23 billion, is s China's third-largest lender with $1.4 trillion in assets.
Getting cornerstone investors on board should help the state-owned lender add confidence to the IPO, and help draw in new investors.
Following is the final list of cornerstone investors, whom sources say have committed to the Hong Kong portion of the IPO.
The emerging market-focused bank, 18 percent-owned by Temasek, signed a strategic agreement with AgBank ahead of the IPO [ID:nTOE65G03H]. StanChart is investing $500 million in AgBank.
Seven, controlled by Australian tycoon Kerry Stokes, said it is awaiting confirmation on the $250 million stake it secures in China's largest bank by retail customers.
The Singapore state investor will invest $200 million in the IPO. Temasek in recent years has moved away from financial industry investments, diversifying into resources and infrastructure.
A leading company in agricultural processing and producing, ADM will invest $100 million in the AgBank IPO.
* Cheung Kong's (
Li Ka-shing, Asia's third wealthiest man according to Forbes, is in charge of real estate group Cheung Kong Holdings (
), among other businesses. Li, with other Hong Kong tycoons, is a frequent participant in Hong Kong's cornerstone investing market for large IPOs.
The Chinese insurer routinely invests in Greater China's large IPOs. It has committed to the H-share offering in Hong Kong and could invest in the Shanghai A-share IPO as well.
Chinese media say PetroChina is expected to be a cornerstone investor in AgBank's Shanghai offering.
China's almost $300-billion sovereign wealth fund is also expected to invest in the A-share (Shanghai) offering.
(Reporting by Denny Thomas, Kennix Chim and Michael Flaherty; Editing by Valerie Lee)
