Australia & China sign deals worth over $8.8 billion
2010-06-20 22:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Australia and China inked commercial deals worth more than $8.8 billion on Monday, largely in mining, in another sign that a new Australian mining tax has failed to dampen inward Chinese investment.
The signings, witnessed by visiting Chinese Vice-President Xi Jinping, included deals for state-owned China Development Bank to provide financing for several major mining projects, including a $1.2 billion loan for an iron ore development.
Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, who is fighting a fierce mining backlash against the 40 percent mine-profits tax, highlighted that seven of the 10 bilateral deals signed on Monday covered the resources and energy industries.
"The Chinese are still active partners with all of our resource companies. There is a lot of good stuff going on out there," Rudd told reporters after the signings.
"It is important to separate the facts of what's going on from some of the fear that is being pushed by some companies who object to paying a bit more tax."
Miners have threatened to axe more than $20 billion in new Australian projects if the tax is introduced in its current form. The world's second biggest iron ore miner, Rio Tinto (
), has said that Australia is now its top sovereign-risk issue worldwide.
The miners' warnings, backed up by a multi-million-dollar industry ad campaign, has unnerved the public ahead of a general election expected to be held late this year, with opinion polls showing almost half voters against the new tax.
But the industry's campaign has begun to be undermined by a continued wave of investment into the sector since the tax was first unveiled on May 2. Even while campaigning against the tax, miners have announced project advancements or deals with foreign investors worth more than $10 billion.
Far from being spooked by the new tax, due to apply from mid-2012, Chinese firms could see it as a chance to strengthen their grip on Australian raw materials, especially iron ore, by providing financing in return for long-term supply agreements.
The China Development Bank agreed on Monday a $1.2 billion loan facility for the $2 billion Karara iron ore project in west Australia, which is being developed by Australia's Gindalbie Metals Ltd (
) and China's Angang Steel Co (
), including its $3.45 billion West Pilbara iron ore project, also in west Australia.
Rudd, who aims to use the mining tax to help fund his re-election platform this year, oversaw the signings along with Xi, regarded as heir apparent to China's President Hu Jintao.
Monday's agreements also included an expanded partnership between Australia's dominant phone company, Telstra Corp (
), and China's ZTE Corp (
), whereby Telstra would become preferred telecoms supplier to ZTE worldwide.
In addition, Australian airline Qantas (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Better dead than red!¡± (They were talking about the working class, not themselves of course.)
Personally I¡¯d rather see banks targeted rather than mining companies, but that will never happen since they¡¯re the ones running the whole show.
Jun 21, 20101:54am EDT--
Jun 21, 20107:04am EDT--
