AIG's $2.2 billion Taiwan unit sale deadline extended
2010-06-21 07:54:00.0
AIG's $2.2 billion Taiwan unit sale deadline extended | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
AIG's $2.2 billion Taiwan unit sale deadline extended
Mon, Jun 21 2010
Mon, Jun 14 2010
Mon, Jun 14 2010
Mon, Jun 14 2010
Fri, Jun 11 2010
Mon  EDT
) have agreed to extend the deadline for completing AIG's planned $2.2 billion sale of its Taiwan unit.
While the extension could help AIG and its buyers address concerns from Taiwanese regulators, the longer the transaction is stretched out the less likely it will succeed.
The delay in selling Nan Shan Life adds to the frustration of AIG, which had to abandon the $35.5 billion sale of its Asian life insurance business to Prudential Plc (
China Strategic and Hong Kong investment firm Primus Financial agreed to buy the unit, Nan Shan Life Insurance Co Ltd, in October 2009. But they have been unable to seal the deal because of concern in Taiwan over their political connections with mainland China and their lack of expertise in the insurance business.
Despite booming business ties, many in Taiwan are suspicious of China's intentions toward the island, while concerns have also been raised over what might happen to Nan Shan's more than 4 million policyholders, nearly one-fifth of Taiwan's population.
The buyers and AIG moved to ease some of those concerns by offering to put $325 million of the purchase price in escrow for four years to beef up the insurer's capital, but they may consider rejigging the deal.
"The extension of the date of the purchase agreement underscores the commitment of both parties to the successful close of the transaction," AIG said in a separate statement.
AIG was saved from a near collapse through a $182.3 billion U.S. taxpayer-funded bail out at the height of financial crisis. As a result, AIG is now nearly 80 percent owned by the U.S. government and the insurer is selling assets to repay billions of dollars owed to taxpayers.
(Reporting by Denny Thomas and Alison Leung; Editing by Chris Lewis)
