China tells G20 to keep its hands off the yuan
2010-06-18 12:07:00.0
(Reuters) - China told the rest of the world on Friday not to meddle with the way it manages the yuan, calling the exchange rate a sovereign matter for it alone to decide.
Beijing is under pressure from Washington in particular to let the yuan rise in value to help reduce the large U.S. trade deficit with China, and markets are expecting the issue to come up at next week's Group of 20 summit in Canada.
"The RMB is China's currency, so I don't think it is an issue that should be discussed internationally," Cui Tiankai, a vice foreign minister who is China's G20 sherpa, the official in charge of preparing for the summit, told a news briefing.
China has kept the yuan, also known as the renminbi (RMB), steady around 6.83 per dollar for almost two years to help its exporters ride out the global financial crisis. Many Western economists believe it is undervalued by as much as 40 percent.
Zhang Tao, head of the central bank's international department, said that as far as he knew the yuan had never been discussed at previous G20 summits.
"The Chinese government will decide on its foreign exchange rate policy according to both domestic and global economic situations," Zhang said.
While the global economic recovery was unfolding more strongly than expected, the world economy was facing multiple uncertainties, Zhang said.
Foremost among these was the euro zone's debt morass, Vice Finance Minister Zhu Guangyao added.
"The global economy is in the process of recovering, but still faces uncertainties, especially the European debt crisis," he said.
The European Union is China's biggest trading partner, and although China's overall exports have recovered to pre-crisis levels Beijing remains concerned that the world economy is not yet on a stable footing.
Debt-averse Germany is pressing for a rapid reduction in budget deficits, while the United States and France fear deep cuts could derail the economic recovery.
Straddling the two camps, Zhu said countries with serious budget deficits should accelerate fiscal consolidation but in a manner that is "growth-friendly".
On the question of how global financial regulation should be reformed, Zhu said a key principle was that countries should chart their own paths based on their own economic conditions.
But, as general goals, he said the Group of 20 wealthy and emerging nations should work to strengthen banks' capital and liquidity requirements.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good for China! It¡¯s only right too. The Euro, sterling pound and USD have all depreciated against the Yuan over thelast 6 months. That already has a similar effect to a Yuan appreciation.
Jun 18, 20102:00am EDT--
Jun 18, 20108:33am EDT--
I call it now, quad alliance WW3. Russians, China, Iran and North Korea vs the world. Get prepaired while there is still time. Train America, be ready. Our enemies are numerous and tougher then the average American. They already deal with hardship, our average citizen is rather ¡°soft¡± compaired to these countries citizens. Aquire a rifle, legally of course, and learn to atleast fire it properly and hit targets reliably at a respectable range. At least prepare for the possibility that our way of life might change at any moment. DO NOT DEPEND ON OUR GOVERNMENT EXCLUSIVELY!
Jun 18, 20109:33am EDT--
