Western retailers: yuan move not all bad
2010-06-21 17:45:00.0
(Reuters) - Western retailers may pay more for goods they import from China as the yuan appreciates, but the thought of millions of Chinese consumers who will be able to shop at their stores is helping to ease the pain.
Executives who spoke at the Reuters Consumer and Retail Summit on Monday took solace in the idea that any appreciation following China's weekend statement that it would let the yuan appreciate against the dollar would likely be gradual.
"I don't think that there is any sense that there is going to be any immediate impact ... The open question is how quickly and how far they'll actually let the currency revalue, anyway," said Matthew Shay, president and CEO of the U.S. National Retail Federation, a retail trade group.
Some retailers see margins hit because their goods manufactured in China will be more expensive in dollars or euros. Retail stocks dropped more than the broad market on Monday in the wake of the yuan announcement. The Standard & Poor's Retail Index .RLX fell almost 2 percent, while the S&P 500
"I can't see any way for the yuan other than up, but I think the pace at which it will happen will be quite carefully modulated by the Chinese government," said Ian Cheshire, chief executive officer of British home-improvement retailer Kingfisher Plc (
At the same time, "there will be opportunities to that in that market, as Chinese consumers have greater purchasing power with their own currency," Shay said.
For example, U.S. furniture maker Ethan Allen Interiors (
) sources some of its products from China, but expects sales to that country to at least mitigate higher costs, if not overcome them, CEO Farooq Kathwari said.
"For us, I would say the net is going to be either neutral or positive," he said.
Beyond the retail industry, the yuan's move is expected to help companies that supply commodities or heavy equipment to China's fast-growing economy, like Caterpillar Inc (
), as well as foreign chains, like fast food operator Yum Brands Inc (
), which sell and source their goods locally.
The Chinese market is expected to become even more attractive as the yuan appreciates, A.T. Kearney said.
), for example, manufactures about 80 percent of its toys in China, mostly for export. But it is also seeing a robust local market for that merchandise these days.
"The Chinese economy is becoming a more consumer-based economy," said Bryan Stockton, president of international business for the toymaker. "It also means the Chinese economy is developing to the point where brands are becoming more important."
Retailers said the move in the yuan could eventually accelerate a trend toward moving manufacturing to Vietnam and other lower-priced countries, but this would take time.
"China will still be very competitive ... Even (with a) 20 percent exchange rate appreciation, in some products the scale of the savings versus UK or European manufacturers is still big," Cheshire said.
It also is not easy to move manufacturing from one country to another, however, so retailers will have to look for ways to mitigate the impact of the rising yuan while still buying products from China.
"We will continue to stay in China," said Ben Gordon, CEO of British mother and baby products maker Mothercare (
) . "We think the Chinese sourcing really is here to stay though the renminbi (yuan) rising is not going to help on cost ... through sourcing offices (in Hong Kong and Shanghai) we'll keep that down."
(Additional reporting by Dhanya Skariachan and Phil Wahba in New York, Mark Potter and James Davey in London; editing by Michele Gershberg, Gerald E. McCormick and Matthew Lewis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The US might have got their way with the appreciation of the Yuan but the prices of products in all countries are increasing as a result of the higher prices of chinese products that they import. For an American, an increase in the prices of products does not mean much or anything, but for the poor African and Asian families whose incomes are less than $100 per month, an increase of a few cents on any product that they buy makes a large difference. It might even be a difference between life and death. So, why have the Americans brought such calamity to them? If the US wanted to increase the price of the Chinese products for the Americans, the US should have devalued its own currency. But to ask the Chinese to revalue the Yuan is to put undue and unnecessary pressure on the poor Africans and Asians and South americans.
Jun 22, 201012:24pm EDT--
Jeanmichel, Total nonesense. How exactly do you devalue your currency against a country that is pegging its currency to yours like China is doing to the American dollar? On the contrary this will benefit Africans more than deprive them. With a higher Yuan suddenly local African manufacturers and traders will become more competitive and more African jobs will be created bringing more money into Africa. Cheap Chinese imports have put a number of Africans out of work as the low-tech African production could not keep up with Chinese mass production and dumping. Everyone but Chinese exporters want a higher Yuan do some research.
Jun 22, 20108:10pm EDT--
