AgBank picks banks to lead $23 billion IPO: sources
2010-06-20 14:03:00.0
(Reuters) - The Agricultural Bank of China has chosen the banks to lead its more than $23 billion initial public offering, sources involved with the process said on Sunday, a move that finally sorts out the key roles for the deal.
AgBank's selection of its top banks came as key investors swooped in on the offering while its underwriters market the dual listing to institutional investors. Qatar has agreed to invest $2.8 billion into AgBank's IPO, according to a report on Sunday.
AgBank, China's third largest lender, has selected its internal securities unit, as well as CICC, Goldman Sachs (
) as joint global coordinators for the offering, granting these banks top status for the IPO's handling among the 11 banks picked to underwrite the Shanghai-Hong Kong deal.
The joint global coordinators take on the most responsibility for an IPO and also stand to earn the biggest fee, which in the case of AgBank could be one of the largest fee pools ever for an IPO. Should the offering exceed $21.9 billion, it would be the largest IPO in history, shedding around $450 million in fees to the banks at an estimated 2 percent charge.
AgBank had taken the rare approach of waiting until well into the process to select it's joint coordinators, a move that some people involved said was beginning to cause frustration.
The appointing of the coordinators is a key step for the deal as it enters a critical phase, with underwriters and executives reaching out to institutional investors in Asia and worldwide to convince them to invest in the company ahead of a planned July 6 pricing date, and July 15 debut.
Reuters reported on Friday that of the seven cornerstone investors so far, two Middle East sovereign wealth funds, Kuwait and Qatar, were among those that agreed to invest in AgBank, with each expected to invest around $1 billion each.
Bloomberg reported on Sunday that Qatar has agreed to invest $2.8 billion, which would make up a significant portion of the roughly 40 percent of the Hong Kong offering that the company is granting to cornerstone investors.
AgBank hopes to raise up to $14.4 billion through its Hong Kong offering, according to a term sheet previously reported by Reuters, an amount that includes an over-allotment of shares to be used after the stock trades. Excluding that, AgBank plans to raise around $12 billion for its H-share offering.
The IPO is a key step for the bank to raise capital and become the last of China's Big Four banks to go public. AgBank, which at 320 million has more customers than the population of the United States, has suffered in the past from a large book of loans that went bed.
The bank has since cleaned up that book, and will use the capital from the IPO to secure its balance sheet.
AgBank and the Qatar Investment Authority were not available for comment. The banks mentioned either declined to comment or were not immediately available. (Reporting by Michael Flaherty and Kennix Chim; Additional reporting by Dinesh Nair in Dubai; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
