Senator questions arms sales to Taiwan
2010-06-16 18:58:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Jun 16 2010
Wed, Jun 16 2010
Wed, Jun 9 2010
Tue, Jun 8 2010
Sun, Jun 6 2010
Wed  EDT
"There is no current offer from China," her spokesman said after the Senate hearing.
Feinstein, a Democrat, said the redeployment offer had been raised during "my meeting with some of the leadership." She visited China and Taiwan earlier this month. China regards Taiwan as a renegade province subject to unification with the mainland, if necessary by force.
Feinstein did not spell out any details about the offer, telling Gates, "Perhaps some of this I should discuss with you privately."
Wang Baodong, a Chinese Embassy spokesman in Washington, said China's deployment of "defensive forces within its own borders was for safeguarding its territorial integrity and defending its national security."
"As to the redeployment, it depends on how the situations are evolving," he said by e-mail without elaborating. He was responding to a question about Feinstein's comments.
Feinstein called U.S. arms sales to Taiwan "a substantial irritant" in relations between Washington and Beijing, and predicted they would remain so in the future.
"I think there is an opportunity to consider where we go if this across-the-strait situation is stable," Gates said.
'EXTRAORDINARY DEPLOYMENT'
After the Obama administration notified Congress in January of plans to sell Taiwan up to $6.4 billion in arms, China broke off military-to-military contacts with the United States. Earlier this month, China turned down a proposed fence-mending visit by Gates.
Feinstein responded: "In my meeting with some of the leadership, it was mentioned that China had offered to redeploy back. Now I understand the word 'redeploy' isn't 'remove.' And I understand the nature of what's there and the number of troops."
"The bottom line is the decision on Taiwan arms sales is fundamentally a political decision," Gates said.
Gates said the United States was "very concerned" about China's growing anti-ship cruise and ballistic missile capabilities.
(Reporting by Adam Entous and Jim Wolf; Editing by Peter Cooney)
