Q&A: What's behind China's recent labor unrest?
2010-06-15 08:11:00.0
(Reuters) - A string of strikes at foreign-owned factories in southern China, especially Honda vehicle plants and parts suppliers, has highlighted the rising demands of young Chinese workers from the countryside.
A series of suicides at Foxconn, an electronics maker with a huge plant in southern China, has intensified attention on discontent in China's labor force.
HOW SERIOUS IS IT?
The unrest has been localized and is likely to remain so, but its implications are broad.
The reported strikes since May have disrupted a few factories but barely dented production at Honda, the main company hit. But the disputes reflect the demands of younger migrant workers who expect better wages and conditions than their parents accepted, and who feel underpaid in the face of rising prices and living standards.
The number of Chinese between the ages of 15 and 24 has held at around 200 million to 225 million for the past 20 years. That number is likely to fall by a third in the next 12 years, according to Arthur Kroeber of Dragonomics, an economic consultancy in Beijing.
WHAT ARE THE WORKERS DEMANDING?
Mostly they want pay rises, but they have also been sensitive to any hints that managers are threatening their cohesion.
Workers at the Honda-associated plants have complained of long hours, including forced overtime, for pay that often totals 1,000-2,000 yuan ($146-$292) per month. They have demanded pay rises of several hundred yuan a month.
Some of the recent disputes have brought sizeable pay increases, including a 66 percent raise for workers at Foxconn, and 20 percent or more for workers in the first Honda strike at a vehicle assembly plant. Vehicle parts makers have offered workers smaller rises.
In many of China's private factories, state-run trades unions are either non-existent or shells controlled by management. Some striking workers have said they want to form their own independent unions, but that demand has not taken hold widely.
COULD THE UNREST SPREAD?
It could, especially in factories around Shenzhen and Dongguan in southern China where migrant worker discontent about conditions runs deepest.
But even there, the vast majority of factories continue production as usual. The most common response of workers to unsatisfactory conditions remains quitting, not striking.
The example of Honda, however, could bolster demands at other manufacturers for wage rises and better conditions. State media have barely mentioned the unrest, but word travels quickly among workers connected by the Internet.
Beyond China's far southern manufacturing zone, worker protests have been common for years, but the latest unrest appears very unlikely to escalate into nationwide stoppages.
Chinese workers in state-owned factories and mills have their own complaints about wages, conditions and dismissals, especially when those plants have been privatized, prompting claims of corruption and profiteering. Some of them may feel emboldened.
In many big state-owned companies, the booming economy has boosted profits and wages. Their workers are not spoiling for confrontation.
WHAT WILL THE GOVERNMENT DO?
Expect a piecemeal response, not a thunderclap of policy changes.
The Chinese government faces contending pressures over how to deal with the workers' demands, and that means the official response is likely to be low-key and vary from place to place.
But much of the country's exports have long relied on cheap labor. Local officials in particular will be reluctant to risk losing investment by allowing a rapid rise in industrial wages.
Chinese leaders have so far avoided direct comment on the strikes, perhaps because they are reluctant to fan word of the unrest that could embolden other unhappy workers.
In recent years, the Chinese government has shifted from treating all worker unrest as a threat to its control. It has opened up channels for employees to lodge complaints and pulled back from using police against strikers.
If worker demands spread and become more political by embracing calls for independent unions, the government response is likely to harden to include more arrests and detentions of strike organizers.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Local officials in particular will be reluctant to risk losing investment by allowing a rapid rise in industrial wages.¡±
¡°Local officials in particular will be reluctant to risk losing investment by allowing a rapid rise in industrial wages.¡±
The investment above refers to the bribe invested in local officials. It will be a major struggle for workers to establish their own labor unions because the Communist government just does not like organizations independent from its control and democratically organized. The concept of independent labor unions will challenge how the government is organized and how officials are elected. They will eventually challenge the justification for the special political status of the Communist Party. However, the history will prove that the power of the Communist Party in China will erode eventually due to its own corruption and the march of external events.
Jun 15, 201012:31pm EDT--
Kudos jlpeng, totally agree. Also, China will eventually be forced to abandon their fixed exchange rates- the population is unsustainable with rising wages, so the protectionist strategy will have to be dropped or poverty will increase and the poor will starve/suffer even more than currently. It¡¯s inevitable I think, especially when the new generation asking for wage increases ages and makes up a majority of the workforce.
Jun 15, 20102:22pm EDT--
Funny..China¡¯s wages are going up and the US is going down. I wonder where wages will converge? Say a monthly salary in the US of 500 USD? I just wish, we in the US, had the guts to protest our job loses. Sadly, the goons in the US government, the lackey of the corporations, would just send out the riot squad to bludgeon us to death. I can¡¯t see how China treats workers any worse than here.
Jun 15, 20102:42pm EDT--
