Senator questions arms sales to Taiwan
2010-06-16 16:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Jun 15 2010
Tue, Jun 15 2010
Wed, Jun 9 2010
Tue, Jun 8 2010
Tue, Jun 8 2010
Wed  EDT
"There is no current offer from China," her spokesman said after the Senate hearing.
Feinstein, a Democrat, said the redeployment offer had been raised during "my meeting with some of the leadership." She visited China and Taiwan earlier this month.
Feinstein did not spell out any details about the offer, telling Gates, "Perhaps some of this I should discuss with you privately."
Feinstein called U.S. arms sales to Taiwan "a substantial irritant" in relations between Washington and Beijing, and predicted they would remain so in the future.
After the Obama administration notified Congress in January of plans to sell Taiwan up to $6.4 billion in arms, China broke off military-to-military contacts with the United States. Earlier this month, China took the extraordinary step of turning down a proposed fence-mending visit by Gates.
The defense secretary defended the arms sales, saying they were mandated by an act of Congress and had been backed by successive U.S. administrations for more than 30 years.
Feinstein responded: "In my meeting with some of the leadership, it was mentioned that China had offered to redeploy back. Now I understand the word 'redeploy' isn't 'remove.' And I understand the nature of what's there and the number of troops."
"The bottom line is the decision on Taiwan arms sales is fundamentally a political decision," Gates said.
"This is not a decision that's up to the Department of Defense. It is a decision that is up to the political leadership of the United States in terms of what would be required in order to change our approach with respect to the execution of that law or change that law if it's necessary."
Gates said the United States was "very concerned" about China's growing anti-ship cruise and ballistic missile capabilities.
(Reporting by Adam Entous and Jim Wolf; Editing by Peter Cooney)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China has already shown on multiple occasions that it cannot be trusted¡­¡­why would we expect anything different this time?!?!
Jun 16, 20103:00pm EDT--
