Chinese exports leap, put yuan back under microscope
2010-06-10 19:16:00.0
(Reuters) - China's exports jumped in May, reassuring investors about the economy's strength but putting pressure on U.S. President Barack Obama to placate critics who say Beijing is keeping the yuan unfairly undervalued.
Imports also grew robustly, testifying to the underlying momentum of the world's third-largest economy despite government steps to cool the red-hot property market.
Some economists said the export surge would be short-lived given debt problems in Europe, the country's biggest overseas market, but several said it would revive a debate about the timing of a long-awaited resumption in the appreciation of the Chinese currency.
"It will support those who argue for a change in the policy, to the extent that it reduces near-term uncertainty about exports," said Wensheng Peng, an economist at Barclays Capital in Hong Kong.
But Peng said the debate in Beijing was more about introducing greater flexibility to the currency than pushing up its value. As such, any climb would be moderate and gradual.
"Reform will be more about increasing two-way variations in the exchange rate," he said.
Offshore yuan forward markets seemed to agree. At mid-morning, they were pricing in a rise of just 0.5 percent against the dollar in the next year.
China's total exports rose 48.5 percent in May from a year earlier and imports were up 48.3 percent, the General Administration of Customs said on Thursday, giving China a trade surplus of $19.5 billion, up from just $1.7 billion in April
The median forecast of 32 economists polled by Reuters was for exports to rise 32 percent and imports to climb 45 percent, with a projected trade surplus of $8.8 billion.
For the time being, at least, Chinese exports to Europe registered no impact whatsoever from the continent's debt crisis. On the contrary, exports to the European Union soared to a 49.7 percent year-on-year increase from a 28.5 percent path in April.
"The export figures were much stronger than the market had expected and can ease fears about an economic double-dip," said Xie Xuecheng, senior economist with Southwest Securities in Beijing.
"However, we should not be overly optimistic about the export sector in the coming months because the crisis in Europe has not ended and cost pressures on exporters remain high," he added.
Wages are surging in the export heartlands of southern China, dramatized by a wave of strikes to press for higher pay and an offer by contract electronics manufacturer Foxconn to almost double the wages of some workers after a string of suicides.
Figures also showed strong upward pressure on property prices, which rose 12.4 percent in the year to May, just shy of a record 12.8 percent increase in the year to April.
Despite double-digit economic growth, Beijing's crackdown on property speculation and worries about a wave of capital raising by banks have left Shanghai's stock market one of the world's worst performers this year, down more than 20 percent.
Some economists suspected that overseas buyers of Chinese goods might have brought forward their purchases to beat an expected resumption of the yuan's rise, something that had been feverishly anticipated in April and early May.
Exports rose 9.9 percent from April. After calendar adjustments for the number of working days, the increase was 10.9 percent, Customs said. By contrast, imports fell month on month.
Looking through the distortions in the data, Ting Lu, an economist with Bank of America Merrill Lynch, said in a report that year-on-year export growth could soon be slumping.
Because Europe's debt crisis has sent the euro tumbling, speculation has recently cooled that the yuan will resume its rise after having been frozen since July 2008 to help exporters weather the global credit crunch.
"Years of meetings and discussions with Chinese officials in an effort to persuade China to float its currency have repeatedly failed to produce lasting and meaningful results," the New York Democrat said.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner delayed an April 15 report on whether China was manipulating its currency to give Beijing more time to act on its own. He has argued it is in China's own interest to reform.
Geithner, who was in Beijing two weeks ago for high-level talks, is expected to face a grilling when he goes before the Senate Finance Committee on Thursday.
"With U.S. unemployment still close to 10 percent and Chinese exports now growing at a rate of almost 50 percent, it is likely that the rhetoric on this issue coming out of Washington will soon get more heated," said Brian Jackson, a strategist with Royal Bank of Canada in Hong Kong.
(Additional reporting by Michael Wei; Writing by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills & Kim Coghill)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Geithner should be thanking the Chinese, because without the link the US dollar would become worth less. Perhaps that is the point, the USA is having trouble further devaluating the dollar. Of course this devaluation would equal inflation, yet also greatly hurt Americans who use the dollar as products would cost more. So Geithner should be thanking the Chinese in helping the middle and lower class of Americans in keeping some value in the dollar and thus helping millions of Americans who barely make enough money to survive (provided said Americans have a job of course).
Jun 10, 20101:08pm EDT--
Apparently, the Chinese have learned from the economic failures of socialism, бн.. while our Congress has learned nothing.
Jun 10, 20101:40pm EDT--
During the Industrial era, The West (US, UK, Europe and all developed countries)manufactured and consumed alot. They reached a point where there is no aggressive consumption. Rest of the world was importing lot of goods and technologies. The demand started to pickup. So the west came up with the concept of Globalisation (Assuming rest of the world will import products from the west, they can rule the world). West had powers and controlling through sancations on the developing countries. What ever they decide became as law for them, But if the others do the same, it is unlawful. Due to technological advancement the concept of cheap manufacturing came up. All the west want to make huge profit. So they decided outsource the entire manufacturing hub to China and other countries. Till the recession, West kept quite( particularly US) Because, they were getting money in their pocket. Also, the US companies boast as if they are patriotic to their country( But they are financial virus). In order to get huge profit, they betrayed their own people and moved the industries outside US. Now when they started to loose the market, They compain other countries (China;s practise is wrong, Irans Nuclear is not fair). The so called patriatism is gone by the US companies on their own country, It is nature, thats why they do anything for money and simply always wait for a chance to blame on somebody. The future will be ruled by developing countries. The so called developed countrues will go into the era called degradation. Whow knows, may be in future all the White house and London Palace also mortgaged to developing countries to get money.
Jun 10, 20102:09pm EDT--
