U.S., China face off over currency ahead of G20
2010-06-18 16:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States pressed China on Friday to move toward a market-based exchange rate, but Beijing said not to meddle with its management of the yuan, setting the stage for a clash at next week's G20 summit.
Now that the global economy is on the mend, divisions are beginning to show.
U.S. President Barack Obama released a letter to his Group of 20 colleagues that zeroed in on prickly policy differences over China's currency stance and debt-wary Europe's rush to rein in bulging budget deficits.
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, who will host the meeting, urged G20 countries to halve their fiscal deficits by 2013 and stabilize debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016, according to an official, who also said China's currency would be discussed.
But China largely took the issue off the table, saying its currency, also known as the renminbi, was its own business.
"The RMB is China's currency, so I don't think it is an issue that should be discussed internationally," Cui Tiankai, a vice foreign minister who is China's G20 sherpa, the official in charge of preparing for the summit, told a news briefing.
Obama, under pressure from some U.S. lawmakers who accuse his administration of soft-pedaling on China, said free-floating currencies were "essential" to global economic activity, a thinly veiled reference to the yuan.
"The signals that flexible exchange rates send are necessary to support a strong and balanced global economy," Obama wrote.
"China's statement is ... absolutely outrageous," said Morris Goldstein, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington "Where should we be discussing it. At the World Cup?"
Obama's administration has stopped short of accusing China of manipulating its currency to give it a trade advantage, something that some members of the U.S. Congress have urged.
The Treasury Department delayed its regular currency report to Congress, which was due in April, angering some legislators who think the administration is dragging its feet.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The USA has zero room to scold another country. Especially their massive manipulation by the Federal Reserve as they are monetizing debt plus illegally buying Fred/Fann (junk) paper at near 100% face value. The below proves it is time to end the Federal Reserve. ¡°Given the very high level of reserve balances currently in the banking system, the Federal Reserve has ample time to consider the best long-run framework for policy implementation. The Federal Reserve believes it is possible that, ultimately, its operating framework will allow the elimination of minimum reserve requirements, which impose costs and distortions on the banking system¡± ¡ª Federal Reserve February 10, 2010 www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20100210a.htm#fn9 PS: If you do not understand the above, basically banks will just be allowed to print money endlessly without any control. Call is a complete and utter devaluation to worthless of the US dollar, which by the way only has 4% (yes, ONLY 4 percent!) of its value/buying power since its inception. So losing the last 4% should be easy with zero reserves.
Jun 18, 20106:14pm EDT--
