Analysis: Old scars emerge as U.S. and Europe part economic ways
2010-06-15 16:45:00.0
(Reuters) - When a lawmaker asked Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner last week what China could do to lift the global economy, the first words out of his mouth were about Europe instead.
After nearly two years of lockstep economic policy moves, the regions are going their separate ways, with debt-wary Germany pressing for a swift clamp-down on public spending while the United States preaches patience.
As Group of 20 world leaders prepare for next week's summit in Toronto, disagreements are becoming more frequent and decades-old policy biases are resurfacing.
For many American officials, Germany's rush to retract is reminiscent of 1937 when the United States abruptly shifted into austerity mode, thinking the Great Depression was over. For Germany, the old scar is hyperinflation.
"I think I should start by noting... that it's very important what Europe does and what Japan does too," Geithner said in response to Kerry's question at a congressional hearing on U.S.-China relations on Thursday.
Like China, Germany and Japan typically export more than they import, so it makes sense for Geithner to mention all three when he talks about rebalancing world growth.
Until Europe's debt troubles intensified last month, however, he rarely did.
In September, when Geithner spearheaded a U.S. push to rebalance the global economy, China was the primary discussion point and there was no specific mention of Europe.
Over that period, Geithner traveled to Berlin to warn that an overly aggressive retrenchment could stall the recovery; he wrote a sternly worded letter to G20 finance ministers expressing concern over weak demand in Europe and Japan; and he gave a statement reminding G20 countries of the "importance of economic policies that are in our broad collective interest."
WHAT TIME IS IT?
Despite Geithner's admonitions, it was concern about public finances that dominated the G20's statement at the conclusion of the finance ministers meeting in Korea in early June.
Mindful of the Great Depression, U.S. policymakers insist economic recovery is a prerequisite for repairing public finances. European leaders fearful of runaway inflation argue fiscal restraint is required for restoring the confidence that is necessary for growth.
Geithner appears to be the primary U.S. messenger on this issue, but the transatlantic rift is also evident in clashing remarks from central bankers and heads of state.
"This very moment is not the time to radically reduce our spending or raise our taxes because the economy is still in recovery mode and needs that support," Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said last week.
Bernanke, a scholar of the Great Depression, often blames a 1937 fiscal and monetary tightening spree for prolonging the slump, and has cautioned against removing supports too soon.
At the same time Bernanke was speaking in Washington last week, the European Central Bank's Axel Weber was telling an audience in Berlin that high public debt could force the ECB to raise interest rates to anchor inflation expectations.
Earlier this month, German Chancellor Angela Merkel acknowledged her country was under international pressure to keep up spending to boost demand, yet she agreed to 80 billion euros in budget cuts and taxes by 2014.
Obama clearly has policy backing from Bernanke, Geithner and others, but public support is less certain.
Anger over high government debt is one of the driving forces behind the Tea Party movement, which has upended several political campaigns, and even some members of Obama's own Democratic party have balked at approving the additional spending he wants.
As for Europe, its budgetary rules limit deficits, so Germany's tightening is no doubt aimed at bringing it back into compliance, not just keeping inflation at bay.
Whatever the motive, it is likely to constrain growth. Joseph Lupton, a JPMorgan economist, said his firm downgraded Europe's growth prospects because of the fiscal pullback.
"It's not at all clear that Europe is going to be strong enough to absorb that," he said.
A weaker Europe means a weaker global economy, and the G20 has little chance of smoothing over U.S. and European differences, said Sherry Cooper, chief economist at BMO Capital Markets in Toronto.
"The G20 can no more coordinate policy than the EU can dictate member deficits," she said. "As we have so painfully seen, there is no decoupling in the global economy. What happens in one country can affect all the others through global financial markets."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jun 15, 20106:04pm EDT--
Geithner, it seems, would rather part ways with the rest of the world than own up to the scope of imbalance and institutional corruption in the domestic US economy.
Jun 15, 20106:07pm EDT--
Pure Silliness. The USA is perhaps the ONLY country that CAN decouple from the ¡°global economy¡±. We have all the minerals, land, agriculture, oil that we need in-country. The only thing we don¡¯t have is a population willing to work for $113/month as in China. All of you free market fools can go to hell.
Jun 15, 20106:25pm EDT--
