Obama prods China on currency rates in G20 letter
2010-06-18 11:13:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama raised the prospect of a clash with China at a summit next week by calling for market-determined exchange rates, shortly after Beijing told the world not to criticize its currency policy.
Obama, in a letter dated June 16, urged G20 partners to redouble efforts on financial reform. In a reference to austerity measures in Europe, the U.S. president also said public finance problems should be addressed "in the medium term" -- a warning that clamping down on budgets should not be done at the expense of economic recovery.
Obama's letter, released on Friday, zeros in on prickly policy differences between the United States and two of its largest trading partners.
It has also diverged from Europe's biggest economy, Germany, by preaching patience in clamping down on public spending even as Berlin and other European capitals struggle to address public debt that has thrown the eurozone into crisis.
"The signals that flexible exchange rates send are necessary to support a strong and balanced global economy," Obama wrote in the letter, referencing China without naming the country outright.
The Obama administration has stopped short of accusing China of manipulating its currency to give it a trade advantage, something that some members of the U.S. Congress have urged.
The Treasury Department delayed its regular currency report to Congress, which was due in April, angering some lawmakers who think the administration is dragging its feet.
China told the rest of the world on Friday not to meddle with the way it manages the yuan, calling the exchange rate a sovereign matter for it alone to decide and all but ruling it out of bounds at next week's G20 summit.
In the letter, Obama urged G20 leaders to accelerate financial reform and stand ready to respond quickly if necessary to avert an economic slowdown.
"We must act together to strengthen the recovery," Obama said. "We need to commit to restore sustainable public finances in the medium term. And we should complete the work of financial repair and reform."
He said the United States wanted G20 negotiators to agree to more stringent capital and liquidity requirements for financial institutions, stronger oversight of derivatives markets, and a framework for winding down large global firms and getting the financial sector to pay for the burdens it creates.
Obama said the group's highest priority during its June 26-27 meeting should be to safeguard and strengthen global economic recovery.
"Should confidence in the strength of our recoveries diminish, we should be prepared to respond again as quickly and as forcefully as needed to avert a slowdown in economic activity," he said.
(Additional reporting by Emily Kaiser, Editing by Kristin Roberts and Will Dunham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It is important that the G20 meeting in Toronto should adopt the policy suggested by Chancellor Merkel, President Sarkozy and President Obama that banks should create what is essentially an ¡°insurance¡± fund to deal with the inevitable future disasters that will occur. The New York banks brought the world economy to the brink of a meltdown. This cannot be allowed to happen again. It is most regrettable that the present conservative government of Canada for purely ideological reasons has campaigned and is campaigning against this sensible initiative. That it has succeeded in getting support in trying to block this move from Brazil and India is irrelevant. In the end, these two developing countries in spite of their economic achievements are minor league players in the interconnected world banking arena. It is to be hoped that President Obama, the German Chancellor and the French President will prevail in Toronto.
Jun 18, 20108:43am EDT--
It doesn¡¯t make sense for China to manipulate its currency, and then threaten to derail the G20 if anybody dares to call them out on it. But I guess that¡¯s what we can begin to expect from a rising China. They don¡¯t accept criticism from their own citizens,¡­.and now it appears like they won¡¯t accept criticism from anybody else either (despite the damaging effects of China¡¯s own actions). China needs to stop threatening international bodies of governance, and start contributing to the peace and stability these bodies of governance provide. Is threatening international bodies of governance the actions of a ¡°responsible power?¡±
Jun 18, 20109:46am EDT--
@ calexanderbrown, The whole bank tax is outrageous for any country who has a sound and properly run central banking system controlled by it¡¯s own government. If private interests did not own the American bank then this problem would never have probably occurred. Expecting other countries to bail out another because their banking practices are one of the worst with literally minimal reserves of cash on hand is pathetic. Instead of demanding handouts and taxpayers dollars to save their system. The entire American banking system needs to overhauled and keep more in it¡¯s reserves instead of lending it out. Quite simply; try copying the Canadian system, And fix your own problems, a tax system would simply make your banking system maintain it¡¯s reckless ways. As a Canadian I¡¯m proud the government won¡¯t budge on this issue.
Jun 18, 201010:40am EDT--
