Wall Street slides as BP plunge hurts sentiment
2010-06-09 16:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Stocks fell on Wednesday in another late-day roller-coaster ride, dragged lower by BP and other energy shares as the U.S. probe of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico deepened.
"You hear this unease over solvency and/or a dividend suspension at BP, and I think it's hurting the tone of the market," said Nick Kalivas, senior equity index analyst at MF Global in Chicago.
BP officials have said they have enough cash to handle the crisis, but the cost of protecting BP's debt against default hit record highs, suggesting increased worry about the British oil giant's ability to handle its obligations.
With Wednesday's decline, BP has given up more than half its market value since the explosion that triggered the spill in late April. On April 20, the day of the offshore oil rig explosion, BP's New York-traded shares closed at $60.48. On Wednesday, the shares ended at $29.20.
Banking shares also fell late, in sympathy with energy shares. MF Global's Kalivas cited concerns that some banks with exposure to the region may be at risk of losses. The KBW bank index .BKX lost 0.8 percent, with Birmingham, Alabama-based Regions Financial (
dropped 40.73 points, or 0.41 percent, to 9,899.25. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
fell 6.31 points, or 0.59 percent, to 1,055.69. The Nasdaq Composite Index
lost 11.72 points, or 0.54 percent, to 2,158.85.
Sentiment was positive earlier in the session after sources told Reuters that China's May exports data came in above expectations, reassuring investors concerned that Europe's debt problems could dampen demand for foreign goods and slow the global recovery.
Advancing stocks barely outnumbered declining ones on the NYSE by a ratio of about 16 to 15, while on the Nasdaq, about 7 stocks fell for every 6 that rose.
The S&P found technical resistance at its session high around the 1,078 level, which roughly coincides with its 14-day simple moving average.
The index's moving average convergence divergence, or MACD, a widely followed momentum indicator, fell slightly short of generating a 'buy' signal and also provided resistance.
About 10.53 billion shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and Nasdaq, above last year's estimated daily average of 9.65 billion.
On the upside, airline shares rose after UBS raised its price target on various top names, including AMR Corp's AMR.N American Airlines, Delta Air Lines Inc (
In deal news, Allscripts-Misys Healthcare Solutions Inc (
) agreed to buy Eclipsys Corp ECLP.O in a $1.3 billion deal. Eclipsys shares rose 2.8 percent to $19.02, while Allscripts tumbled 9.7 percent to $16.64.
(Reporting by Rodrigo Campos; Additional reporting by Leah Schnurr; Editing by Jan Paschal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Oh, yeah! Chinese exports grow and this will lift OUR economy? How much did their import of American goods and services grow. It seems to me, U.S export growth of goods and services to China would be a more telling metric of the health of the American economy. Of course, if we are limit the scope of measurement of our economy to EPS of global corporations, then yeah, it¡¯s good news in the short term.
Jun 09, 201012:05pm EDT--
Can anyone tell me, if we eliminated social security payments, pension payments, government transfer payment for military expenditures, government transfer payments to the health care and pharmaceutical industry, food stamps and other entitlement programs, what would be left of our economy? What would happen to the bottom line of the companies that depend on this source revenue? This is the mess our supposedly long-term economic and trading policies have wrought over the last several decades. All of these government expenditures are what props up our economy and to pretend otherwise is disingenuous or stupid. Our economy will either blow up with a bang, or more than likely just suffer a long slow death. Either way, without drastic change, we are toast.
Jun 09, 201012:19pm EDT--
Jun 09, 20105:03pm EDT--
