U.S. appeals to China to restore military ties
2010-06-05 10:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Jun 4 2010
Sat, Jun 5 2010
Defense Secretary Robert Gates speaks at the Shangri-La Dialogue Asia Security Summit in Singapore June 5, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Vivek Prakash
Sat  EDT
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said China's decision to break off military-to-military contacts between the Pacific powers earlier this year could undercut regional stability.
He urged Beijing to accept the "reality" that Washington is committed to arming Taiwan, like it or not.
"It has been clear to everyone during the more than 30 years since normalization that interruptions in our military relationship with China will not change United States policy toward Taiwan," Gates told a security conference in Singapore.
To underscore its displeasure over the continued sales, China took the extraordinary step of turning down a proposed fence-mending visit by Gates during his trip to Asia.
"There is a real cost to any absence of military-to-military relations," Gates told the conference, where he held talks with top ministers from across Asia with the exception of the Chinese, who sent a lower-level representative.
Gates said "sustained and reliable" contacts between the two militaries were needed to reduce the risk of "miscommunication, misunderstanding and miscalculation" that could lead inadvertently to conflict.
He also called it the "collective responsibility" of Asian states to address North Korean "provocations," increasing pressure on a reluctant China to rebuke its long-time ally.
But Gates and other U.S. officials suggested the United States was looking beyond measures in the U.N. Security Council and could act unilaterally or in concert with its allies to increase Pyongyang's isolation.
Gates has singled out China's People's Liberation Army (PLA) as the main obstruction in the way of improved relations, saying its position was at odds with that of the country's political leadership, which he has said supports closer military ties.
"Only in the military-to-military arena has progress on critical mutual security issues been held hostage over something that is, quite frankly, old news," Gates said.
He said arms sales to Taiwan have spanned decades and were "an important component of maintaining peace and stability in cross-strait relations and throughout the region" because China's own military buildup is largely focused on the self-ruled island.
Gates said this should not be seen as threatening to China because the United States has long made clear it does not support independence for Taiwan, which Beijing regards as a renegade province to be united with the mainland, by force if necessary.
A senior member of the Chinese delegation, Major General Zhu Chenghu of the National Defense University, challenged Gates directly after his speech, saying his country was not to blame for stalling military-to-military ties.
He said U.S. arms sales to Taiwan ran counter to Beijing's "core" interests and sent the message that America saw the Chinese as "enemies."
After his speech, Gates shook hands with the head of the Chinese delegation, General Ma Xiaotian, deputy chief of the PLA's general staff, Pentagon Press Secretary Geoff Morrell said.
Ma played down the extent to which Beijing has scaled back contacts with the U.S. military, saying only high-level visits have been "temporarily suspended."
Some U.S. officials saw the friction with China as particularly worrisome given heightened tensions in the region after the United States and South Korea concluded that North Korea was behind the sinking of the South Korean corvette Cheonan in March, killing 46 sailors.
Seoul has referred the matter to the U.N. Security Council, but it is unclear what action, if any, the body will take.
Beijing, which is North Korea's only major ally and which fought alongside the North in the Korean War, has declined publicly to join international condemnation of Pyongyang, saying it is still assessing the evidence.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China can veto any proposed resolution or statement.
Pentagon strategists have voiced alarm at what they see as China's faster-than-expected military build-up, from powerful anti-ship missiles to an advanced combat jet that may rival the premier U.S. fighter, Lockheed Martin Corp's F-22 Raptor, within eight years.
Admiral Robert Willard, head of the U.S. military's Pacific Command, said there were concerns across the region about the "intent" of China's "profound" military buildup and increased maritime "assertiveness."
(Additional reporting by Nopporn Wong-Anan; Editing by Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is playing hardball as usual over North Korea. It¡¯s a proxy war, and it definitely could change the behavior of the North Koreans if it wanted to. But, it continues to play the game that it has limited influence there, no matter that the North Korea is close to imploding.
Jun 04, 201011:29pm EDT--
It¡¯s time for China to start ACTING like a responsible power, rather than just simply calling itself a responsible power. Frankly speaking, China¡¯s harboring of North Korea and Iran does not seem to me like very ¡°responsible¡± actions by a nation who supposedly promotes ¡°social harmony.¡± I¡¯m sure that South Korea doesn¡¯t feel that China is bringing ¡°harmony¡± to the Korean peninsula. The world needs real leadership!!!
Jun 04, 201011:40pm EDT--
The principle of the U.S.: let us do what we want¡­even if in some cases we harm you¡­you should accept our bullying and be friends¡­..China, despite its influence and role, sometimes accepts..maybe it is politics¡­¡­but nothing else¡­.now we all know it is China¡­
Jun 05, 20102:22am EDT--
