Analysis: China heir-apparent embarks on regional roadshow
2010-06-14 03:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping, likely to succeed Hu Jintao as president in 2013, on Monday joined a long line of China officials to woo Asia as U.S. President Barack Obama canceled his return to a region he has called a priority.
Xi arrived in Dhaka on Monday on a tour that will also take him to Laos, New Zealand and Australia, criss-crossing a region where China's economic growth offers both hope and cause for anxiety.
Beijing wants to press its message that it is not a threat and hopes to serve as a harmless regional adhesive, promoting trade and cooperation, and Xi is sure to hold to that theme.
"Especially since the financial crisis, China's influence has grown, but in the region that influence is accompanied by mutual misgivings," said Qin Yaqing, a professor at the China Foreign Affairs University who has advised his country's leaders.
"These visits by our leaders are intended in part to reassure nearby countries, to ease those misgivings."
In many countries across Asia and beyond, worries about China's economic and military ambitions undercut the pull of its rapid growth and mounting foreign exchange reserves.
"China's rise is the single event doing the most to transform the regional landscape," said Andrew Shearer, a researcher at the Lowy Institute for International Policy, a think tank in Sydney.
"But that economic integration has actually also created something of a backdraft," added Shearer, co-author of a recent study by the Lowy Institute of the region's security outlook.
"Increasingly, what China does in the military space is also troubling countries around the region, undercutting some its commercial diplomacy."
Obama canceled, for the second time in two months, a promised trip to Indonesia and Australia [ID:nN04272788], a decision which is unlikely to damage ties with two firm allies. But longer-term worries about U.S. economic prospects and reluctance to embrace free trade pacts could open more room for Beijing to shape the region, said analysts.
"Genuine American influence has to rest on more than diplomacy, it must also rest on a perception of American economic strength," said David Lampton, director of China Studies at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies of Johns Hopkins University, in Washington D.C.
"Most countries in the region now have China as their leading export market. And while China is building free trade and other economic arrangements broadly in the region, the United States is not," Lampton wrote in an emailed response to questions.
Xi's regional tour lasts until June 24 and comes on the heels of Hu's visit to Central Asia, and Premier Wen Jiabao's hopscotch from South Korea to Japan and then Mongolia and Myanmar.
The portly 57-year-old son of a Communist revolutionary veteran, Xi remains firmly in Hu's shadow and is unlikely to announce any major policy shifts or agreements during his trips abroad. But his status, and China's economic weight, will ensure he gets a respectful reception.
Talks at his first stop, Dhaka, will cover increased military cooperation with Bangladesh. In Australia, Xi is likely to stress economic ties, pushing aside squalls over the jailing in China of Anglo-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto executives on commercial secrets and bribery charges, and the 2009 collapse of Chinese conglomerate Chinalco's bid to increase its stake in Rio Tinto.
China's trade with Asia grew by 45 percent in value in the first four months of 2010, compared with the same period last year, pulling out of the global slump, according to Chinese statistics. China's trade with Australia grew 45.5 percent.
"Even though in objective terms, the United States remains miles ahead of China in all indices of national power, the regional perception is definitely changing" as trade flows shift in China's direction, said Shearer, the Sydney-based researcher.
"Countries in the region are already starting to factor that reality into their behavior, and their planned behavior over the next decade," he said.
But that shift is not all in Beijing's favor.
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said this month the United States was worried about disputes over sovereignty in the South China Sea, where China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines and Malaysia have contending territorial claims.
Beijing's growing naval presence and other signs of expanding military reach are drawing some of China's neighbors closer to Washington.
"Both China and the United States need to work together for regional security and have the will to do so," said Qin, the professor. "But there's a lack of trust that stands in the way, and so they tend to move toward hedging with the other."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Enter the Dragon! The new leader of world¡­
Jun 15, 20101:29am EDT--
