China's Xi tells Africa he seeks relationship of equals
2013-03-25 15:50:00.0
(Reuters) - China's new president told Africans on Monday he wanted a relationship of equals that would help the continent develop, responding to concerns that Beijing is only interested in shipping out its raw materials.
On the first stop on an African tour that will include a BRICS summit of major emerging economies, Xi Jinping told Tanzanian President Jakaya Kikwete that China's involvement in Africa would help the continent grow richer.
"China sincerely hopes to see faster development in African countries and a better life for African people," Xi said in a speech laying out China's policy on Africa, delivered at a conference center in Dar es Salaam built with Chinese money.
Renewing an offer of $20 billion of loans to Africa between 2013 and 2015, Xi pledged to "help African countries turn resource endowment into development strength and achieve independent and sustainable development".
Africans broadly see China as a healthy counterbalance to Western influence but, as ties mature, there are growing calls from policymakers and economists for a more balanced trade deal.
"China will continue to offer, as always, necessary assistance to Africa with no political strings attached," Xi said to applause. "We get on well and treat each others as equals."
Countering concerns that Africa is not benefitting from developing skills or technology from Chinese investment, Xi said China would train 30,000 African professionals, offer 18,000 scholarships to African students and "increase technology transfer and experience".
"The Sino-Tanzania relationship has endured a lot," said Tanzania's Kikwete, whose nation built close ties with China in the early years after independence from the British in 1964. "Now we have become all-weather friends."
The two leaders witnessed the signing of trade and other deals, including plans to co-develop a new port and industrial zone complex, a loan for communications infrastructure and an interest free loan to the government. No details were given on the size of the loans or the industrial projects.
Xi's next stop is South Africa for a BRICS summit on Tuesday and Wednesday where he could endorse plans for a joint foreign exchange reserves pool and an infrastructure bank.
Those proposals respond to frustrations among emerging markets at having to rely on the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, which are seen as reflecting the interests of the United States and other industrialized nations.
Nigeria's central bank governor, Lamido Sanusi, wrote in the Financial Times this month that the trade imbalance between China and Africa was "the essence of colonialism" and cautioned the continent was vulnerable to a new form of imperialism.
"The legacy of (the) West is the feeling that Africa should thank them, and that Africa should recognize that it is not as good as the West," Zhong Jianhua, China's special envoy to Africa, said before Xi's trip. "That is not acceptable."
Lu Shaye, head of the Chinese Foreign Ministry's African affairs department, said it was the West which was only interested in African resources, not China.
"What have Western countries done for Africa in the 50 years since independence? Nothing. All they have done is criticize China and that is unfair," he told a Hong Kong television station, in remarks carried on the ministry's website.
Xi's African tour ends in Republic of Congo, from where China imported 5.4 billion tonnes of oil last year, just 2 percent of its total oil imports, but potentially the source of a lot more.
(Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard in Beijing; Writing by Edmund Blair and Richard Lough; Editing by Robin Pomeroy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Chinese leaders know that they trade more with rich countries than with poor nations. Chinese purchases of raw materials usually have infrastructure projects to elevate their trading partners for future trade growth. The West usually takes the resources and runs because the West worries only about the current quarter¡¯s profits. China gives training and scholarships for Africans to become more successful in business or at whatever they pursue. This will continue African growth for the future and enhance the quality and quantity of China¡¯s purchases and sales in its trade with Africa. China also accepts that there is one world but many systems, so it does not try to force governmental changes on sovereign African countries. The West demands the western tyranny of corrupt democracy that works only for the rich in the West. The West imposes its imperial demands with sanctions that are designed to force Africans to accept regimes that the West is willing to permit the Africans to have. The West thinks that Africans don¡¯t have the right to choose their own govenments or have their own opinions unless they are acceptable to the West. Unfortunately for the West, the costs will be reductions in African trade for the West and increases in African trade with China. Respect is less expensive than imperialism.
Mar 25, 20134:40pm EDT--
For a long time, Beijing has a vision that the world will be multi-polar. Africa combined or separately will be one of the future superpowers. Beijing has been promoting this vision even before the fall of Soviet Union. Back in 60s-70s, Africans helped Beijing reclaim the position in UN. China has no territorial or ideological conflicts with African countries in general. A powerful Africa is of great benefit for China (and in fact all emerging third world powers). On the contrary, powerful neighbors who have been robbed by the Europeans are nightmare for them. Hence he who says China is only interested in resources is either unwise or ignorant.
Mar 25, 20138:10pm EDT--
¡°China imported 5.4 billion tonnes of oil last year, just 2 percent of its total oil imports, but potentially the source of a lot more¡±. This means China imported 270 billion tonnes of oil, that is almost 200 tonnes per person.
Mar 25, 20138:35pm EDT--
