Geithner testimony on U.S.-China relations
2010-06-10 11:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Jun 10 2010
Thu, Jun 10 2010
Thu, Jun 10 2010
Thu, Jun 10 2010
Thu, Jun 10 2010
Thu  EDT
For Geithner's prepared testimony, see:
"The time is long past for any Treasury Department to admit publicly what everyone else already knows, that China is manipulating the value of its currency in order to gain an unfair advantage in international trade."
"They need to grow up and be citizens of this world, as mature citizens and know that in a globalization, it isn't just economics that is globalized, it's politics that are globalized. And we ought to be able to discuss these things without one country being incensed because the other one brings something up. We're all mature people. "
"I, to be honest, do not know, whether we're at the point now when we're going to see meaningful progress in the near term. ... Our objective is to encourage China to move as quickly as possible."
The United States must formulate a comprehensive strategy to better manage our bilateral U.S. economic relationship. Different U.S. agencies are pursuing different, uncoordinated strategies. We can no longer approach our economic relationship in this piecemeal way. ... We must craft a holistic strategy, orchestrated and led by the White House, to develop a strong, mutually beneficial U.S.-China economic relationship.
"We must be willing to take strong unilateral action," Baucus said referring to Geithner's decision to delay an April 15 report on whether China was manipulating its currency. "We must work multilaterally to resolve the currency issue. But we cannot expect our trading partners to take strong action if we are unwilling to do so."
"America can no longer afford to be complacent. We no longer have the luxury of pursuing failed approaches. We must rethink the U.S.-China economic relationship. We must act, not just talk."
FROM GEITHNER'S PREPARED TEXT:
"The Administration will apply forcefully the full remedies available under U.S. law to address unfair trade practices, such as injurious dumping and subsidies."
"Reform of China's exchange rate is critically important to the United States and to the global economy. And it is in China's own interest to allow the exchange rate to reflect market forces."
"A stronger renminbi would benefit China because it would boost the purchasing power of households and encourage firms to shift to production for domestic demand, rather than for export."
"China's exchange rate policy affects all of China's trading partners. Because of concern about the impact on their competitiveness, many emerging markets have been intervening in foreign exchange markets in order to resist upward pressure on their exchange rate."
