Exclusive: Yuan revaluation not key: Australia
2010-06-09 07:24:00.0
(Reuters) - A revaluation of China's yuan currency will not solve imbalances threatening global economic health and past U.S. fiscal policies are more to blame than Beijing, Australia's finance minister said on Wednesday.
"There is a clearly a major global imbalance problem that hasn't gone away. But having said that, the notion that there is a simple solution to those imbalances by Chinese revaluation I think frankly is misguided," Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner told Reuters Insider TV.
"I'd have to say if you were looking for the culprits on why these problems have emerged, you'd have to say that the fiscal and monetary policies of the United States in the earlier part of this decade would be number one on that list," he said.
China is under pressure to unleash the yuan from a virtual peg to the U.S. dollar, possibly adopting a trade-weighted basket of currencies and allowing the yuan, or renminbi, to help resolve trade imbalances.
China is Australia's biggest export market, with two-way trade worth $53 billion in 2008. Resource-hungry Chinese firms have also been involved in a series of tie-ups with Australian mining companies.
Some analysts argue that Europe's sovereign debt crisis could present China with an opportunity to unshackle the currency from the greenback, which has been a long-running source of friction between Washington and Beijing.
China is the biggest holder of U.S. government debt and bought $17.7 billion worth in March, taking its total holdings to $895.2 billion, the latest figures show. Tanner said a major Chinese revaluation would do little to solve the key focus of bilateral relations between China and the United States, and the problem of current account flows.
"It's not easy to see where you would get an automatic rebalancing from that," he said. "Ultimately, this is not something that a country like Australia can dictate, but those imbalances are clearly a global problem."
Tanner said he was confident European debt problems, now threatening to spread to countries like Britain and Hungary outside the euro zone, would not lead to a fragmentation of the currency bloc.
He also downplayed the chances of Europe's problems spreading to Asia and Australia, possibly through a downturn in Chinese demand for Australian resources.
"Some people can put together a doom scenario. I tend to think that all those things are very unlikely," he said.
