China to release AgBank prospectus on Friday: sources
2010-06-03 07:47:00.0
(Reuters) - China's securities regulator plans to release on Friday long-awaited documents for Agricultural Bank of China's ABC.UL roughly $30 billion initial public offering, according to sources, a sign the deal is on track for a listing approval hearing next week.
Sources with direct knowledge of the matter said the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) will release AgBank's preliminary prospectus late on Friday, which would offer key financial information on the company, not seen since the bank's year-end report in 2008.
AgBank is planning to seek Shanghai and Hong Kong listing committee approval on June 10, sources say. The bank is expected to begin premarketing of the deal in the next week, with a tentative A-share and H-share listing date aimed for July 15 and July 16, according to sources.
In an A-share draft prospectus, the issuer will normally state the number of shares it is going to offer in Shanghai, and sometimes will state Hong Kong H-shares as well.
Investors looking to buy into the world's largest ever IPO will be allowed to soak up financial details in the prospectus, with the exception of IPO price and valuation.
AgBank is going public to complete Beijing's mission of listing its top banks, and to raise money at a time when all of China's major financial groups are boosting capital ratios after a lending spree. As the last of the major banks to list, AgBank is seen in the market as the weakest of China's top four.
AgBank, whose 350 million customer base is bigger than the population of the United States, had $7.1 trillion in assets as of 2008, its last public financial filing. Based on that figure, AgBank is the fourth largest Chinese bank by assets.
Middle East investors have also been mentioned as potential investors in the largest public offering since the world's largest bank by market value, China's ICBC 0349.HK, went public in 2006.
(Reporting by Michael Flaherty and Samuel Shen; Editing by Chris Lewis and Jon Loades-Carter)
