From copper to cameras; feeling the heat from China slowdown
2013-07-24 05:20:00.0
(Reuters) - China's manufacturing engine lost further momentum in July and the job market weakened, a survey showed on Wednesday, complicating a transition to consumer-driven growth and boding ill for so many leveraged to the world's second-largest economy.
"China's slowdown is starting to become more dangerous," warned Yasuo Yamamoto, a senior economist at Mizuho Research Institute in Tokyo.
Since taking office in March, China's new leaders have said they are prepared to tolerate tamer growth and push a restructuring of the economy toward domestic consumption, but there have been mixed messages on how much of a slowing they would tolerate. The flow of data suggests their task of changing the shape of the massive economy will only get harder.
Wednesday's flash HSBC/Markit Purchasing Managers' Index showed output, employment and new orders all declining at a faster pace in July. The overall index of business conditions fell to 47.7 from June's final reading of 48.2, a third straight month below the watershed 50 line which divides expansion from contraction, and the weakest level since August 2012.
The employment sub-index slid to 47.3 in July, the weakest since the depths of the global financial crisis in early 2009.
"This print could reignite fears of a Chinese hard landing," said Annette Beacher, head of Asia-Pacific research at TD Securities in Singapore. "We expect economic growth to continue moderating towards 7 percent."
China's economy grew 7.5 percent in April-June from a year earlier, the ninth quarter of slowdown in the past 10 quarters.
On Wednesday, the industry ministry said it was putting a priority on restructuring and reforming traditional industries such as steel, shipbuilding, cement and aluminium, once drivers of growth, but now plagued with overcapacity.
"China cannot change its weak economic growth situation due to still weak external demand and overcapacity problems in the domestic market," said Wang Jian, a senior researcher with the China Society of Macroeconomics, a research body affiliated with the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC).
"China's economic growth rate will probably fall below 7 percent in the fourth quarter this year and may fall under 6 percent in some quarter next year," Wang wrote in the China Securities Journal on Wednesday.
While that's at the extreme end of market forecasts, China has become such a major importer of goods that any weakness in demand is increasingly felt worldwide.
Japan on Wednesday reported annual growth in its exports to China eased to 4.8 percent in June from 8.3 percent in May, and camera maker Canon Inc trimmed its sales targets and annual profit forecast, blaming the China slowdown.
"Chinese consumers tend to be very fond of cameras, especially high-end ones such as SLRs, but an economic slowdown has hit just as sales were recovering from last year," Chief Financial Officer Toshizo Tanaka told an earnings briefing.
In the United States, Apple reported quarterly revenues from Greater China dived 43 percent from the previous quarter, and fell 14 percent from the same time last year - an abrupt turnaround for the Silicon Valley giant which has come to count on endless growth in the world's biggest smartphone market. The country accounted for 13 percent of all Apple's April-June sales, up 10-fold in the past four years but down from nearly 19 percent in the previous quarter.
The same goes for commodity exporters. China consumes around half of the world's iron ore and coal and 30-40 percent of global production of base metals such as copper.
London copper futures briefly fell from 1-month peaks in the wake of Wednesday's China data, while the Australian dollar took a knock as China is the country's single biggest export market.
"It adds to the concern about the outlook for demand, and brings into question just how strong Chinese commodities demand will be," said Alexandra Knight, economist at National Australia Bank.
(Writing by Wayne Cole; Editing by John Mair and Ian Geoghegan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
People just do not seem to understand moderation. Long term stability should be the goal in any economy, not carelessly overheating it to fill the pockets of the few. All the fear mongers out there already propagating gloom and doom, which in turn could in a sense, become a self fulfilling prophecy. How about promoting that the Chinese leadership is thinking 20 years ahead of all the greedy partakers of China¡¯s expansion?? Stability¡­.Look at it this way. China can grow at 15% for five years or 5% for 15 years. Which is the more stable model?? I want to hear that China is still growing in 20-30 years, not that it overheated and crashed in 5!! A steady model is what the Chinese leaders are after and it is wise for them¨Cmaybe not Silicon Valley but that¡¯s just too bad.
Jul 24, 20135:00am EDT--
Globalists who bet the farm on a communist government to promote free markets at the expense of investing in their own domestic markets deserve to eat crow, and take the pain. Invest in your own countries you vultures.
Jul 24, 20137:19am EDT--
this is welcome news to me. the world needs to wean themselves from the glut of cheaply made chinese products that have flooded every corner of the globe. the chinese government has put such a push on manufacturing in order to position its country as the world¡¯s leading exporter and global economy, that it has poisoned its own environment to critical proportions; millions of chinese are subjected to toxic air, contaminated water, and toxin-laden food supply due to heavy metals in over 75% of the country¡¯s farmland soil. i have been boycotting chinese products for over 2 years now (no easy task, mind you!). since the chinese economy has exploded in recent years and created a massive growing middle class, the illegal trade in animal parts to drive the chinese folk medicine, status symbol and ivory lust has increased by horrific proportions. tens of thousands of elephants are being slaughtered as we speak ¡ª their tusks shipped to china and thailand to be carved into chopsticks, trinkets and bookmarks. the rhino is on the verge of extinction, its horn used in chinese folk medicine. and shark fin soup is pushing many species of shark perilously close to extinction (which is destabilizing our oceans) ¡ª a delicacy based on unimaginable cruelty and waste. the money obtained by poachers for their goods in africa is going directly into the pockets of rebel groups throughout the country who have been initiating a campaign of abuses and atrocities upon the civilian population. in addition to economic means to stabilize their country, the chinese government also needs to educate its people as to the effect their appetites for illegally obtained animal parts is having on global wildlife populations ¡ª and the funding of human rights abuses and crimes against humanity of innocent african women and children.
Jul 24, 20138:42am EDT--
