In new sign of trust, public Taiwan firms target China
2010-06-02 08:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan's publicly invested companies, worth about $100 billion to the central budget, have started selling to China in one of the strongest signs of trust between two governments after decades of hostilities.
Some of the dozens of firms owned in full or in part by Taiwan's government have begun selling wares such as beer and bottled water or laying similar plans to pursue bigger money in China, a giant market and global economic powerhouse.
Those moves show that Taiwan, a self-ruled island over which China claims sovereignty, trusts the Communist leadership with a piece of its budget, new momentum for relations that have grown closer through trade talks and allowed financial markets to firm.
"It's a symbol of the mutual trust relationship," said Cheng Cheng-mount, an economist with Citigroup in Taipei.
Government-supported firms have lagged Taiwan's private sector, which broke into China some 15 years before political ties began easing in 2008 under Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou, as publicly held companies cannot legally invest there and often face permit obstacles on one side or both just to sell.
"You need a number of years before the importance will be seen," Cheng said of government-invested firms selling to China.
Taiyen Biotech Co Ltd, which is 38 percent government-owned with revenues of about T$510 million per quarter, since 2009 has gradually introduced bottled water and beauty products in China. Taiyen declined to estimate China revenues but said more products were on the way.
"We hope that in the future China sales will exceed sales in Taiwan since consumers there are more numerous, nearly 65 times more," said company Chairman Hung Hsi-yao.
Taiwan Sugar Corp, which is 99 percent government held, plans to sell pork, rock sugar and health foods to China, while 20 percent government-owned Taiwan Fertilizer Co Ltd is looking for Chinese farms where it can try out its products.
More entries to China are in the pipeline, said Chang Jung-kung, the ruling Nationalist Party's deputy secretary-general and China affairs point person.
"If these products want to be competitive globally in the future, they need to consider the mainland," Chang said.
Due to legal restrictions, Taiwan's two government-owned banks have not chased China though they hope to one day.
But revenue could evaporate if Taiwan's anti-China opposition returns to power as early as 2012, putting trade ties with China on ice, political analysts say.
Beijing has considered a possible chill in ties as it lets publicly held Taiwan firms do business, Chang said.
"If there is some rupture in the Chinese economy, Taiwan is going to suffer for sure," Joseph Wu, an international relations research fellow and Taiwan's former chief China policymaker, told a news conference in May.
(Reporting by Ralph Jennings; Editing by Ken Wills)
