China urges calm in standoff over North Korea
2010-05-29 23:26:00.0
(Reuters) - China came under pressure to censure in North Korea at a regional summit on Sunday but gave no sign it would get tough with the hermit state, instead urging everyone to calm tensions over a ship sinking.
Seoul and Tokyo blame North Korea, whose leader, Kim Jong-il, visited China earlier this month, of torpedoing the Cheonan corvette in March, killing 46 South Korean sailors.
Beijing remains noncommittal, refusing to publicly join international condemnation of Pyongyang, dependent on China to support its destitute economy and frail leader.
"We need to dispel the impact of the Cheonan incident, gradually ease tension and especially avoid a clash," Wen told reporters, standing next to Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama and South Korean President Lee Myung-bak.
At the end of the summit, Wen held to China's position of avoiding blaming North Korea.
"Without peace and stability on the Korean peninsula, development in east Asia is impossible," said Wen.
China and Japan are the world's number two and three economies and, with South Korea, account for close to 20 percent of global economic output.
Wen offered his condolences for the dead sailors, but did not mention North Korea by name.
The leaders of the three big northeast Asian powers met in Seogwipo, a honeymoon resort on the South Korean island of Jeju, for a weekend summit that was meant to boost plans for greater regional cooperation and economic integration.
Instead, the quarrel between North and South Korea has stolen the limelight.
South Korea's Lee made clear he expected China to come round eventually and back a U.N. Security Council response to the sinking.
"China and Japan have very important roles to play in the international community and I fully expect them to have wisdom on this issue," he said, in reference to the sinking of the Cheonan.
As a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council, China has the power to veto any proposed resolution or statement.
The mounting antagonism between the two Koreas is worrying investors who, though they do not expect war, wanted to be sure that the furious rhetoric does not get out of hand.
At the first session on Saturday, Hatoyama repeated calls to China to act on what Tokyo and Washington have said was convincing evidence of the North's wrongdoing.
China counts neighboring North Korea as a friend and a buffer against the other, U.S.-allied neighbors. It says it needs to consider the evidence.
Wen held to that position in a meeting with Lee on Friday, but, in a hint he might change tack, said Beijing would protect nobody found responsible for the sinking.
"With regard to the Cheonan, China seems confident that tensions will eventually diminish," wrote Stephanie Kleine-Ahlbrandt, the North East Asia Project Director for the International Crisis Group, a non-government advisory organization, in an emailed response to questions.
Hatoyama said Japan will back Seoul when it takes the North to the U.N. Security Council. But Pyongyang may not bow even if China goes along with such steps, said Kleine-Ahlbrandt.
"We have seen plenty of cases in which external pressure has not worked on North Korea," she wrote. "It is therefore questionable whether further measures will have the desired effect in this situation."
North Korea has warned of war on the Korean peninsula if Seoul imposes sanctions, calling the South Korean government "military gangsters, seized by fever for a war."
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Seogwipo, Lucy Hornby in Beijing; Editing by Jonathan Thatcher and Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
calling the South Korean government ¡°military gangsters, seized by fever for a war.¡±
calling the South Korean government ¡°military gangsters, seized by fever for a war.¡±
and yet which country is it that feels the need to keep defying international agreements and beligerantly keeps testing their missiles? which country is being run by a dieing wack job who lives for altercations? this really isn¡¯t all that hard to figure out these people teach their children at a very early age that it¡¯s them against the world and that the outside worl wants nothing more than to persecute them and so by the time they are in their early teens they know nothing but hatred and mistrust of the outside world and as a result of that brainwashing one of their submarine commanders got a bit carried away with himself and probably had no intention of hitting and sinking that ship but his warning shot was a little off and hit that ship I¡¯ve already read that it¡¯s almost a given that sub commander has already been executed as well as his crew and I have to agree with that statement and as such it¡¯s easier for psycho kim to act an ass and go to war if need be rather than to apologize to south korea yes I¡¯m sure he would rather die than appear to not be in total control
May 29, 20109:31pm EDT--
