Spanish austerity vote helps reverse euro decline
2010-05-27 17:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Spain turned to austerity while China and the United States offered soothing words about Europe on Thursday, providing a respite in the euro-zone debt crisis that allowed markets to recover.
Spain's governing Socialists won parliamentary approval for a 15 billion euro ($18.4 billion) austerity package by a single vote in an effort to cut its budget deficit and regain market confidence.
But the euro rebounded 1.6 percent versus the dollar and 1.4 percent versus the yen while the continent's main stock index climbed 2.9 percent.
U.S. stocks rose sharply with the S&P 500 closing 3.3 percent higher, its largest gain on a percentage basis since May 10, although volume was below average. The Dow gained 2.9 percent to close above 10,000 points at 10,259. The Nasdaq rose 3.7 percent for the day.
The People's Bank of China said in a statement that a Financial Times report that the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) was concerned about its exposure to euro-zone debt was groundless.
The central bank said Europe would remain one of China's main investment markets and Beijing would support actions to help the European Union resolve its debt crisis.
The United States also offered comforting comments when Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said America and Europe broadly agreed on the need for controls on risk-taking, playing down differences on financial regulation.
"I think we all agree we want more conservative restraints on capital and leverage," Geithner said after talks in Berlin with German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble.
Washington has grown increasingly concerned that the effects of the Greek fiscal blowout could spread beyond Europe, with banks prone to a similar meltdown that roiled world markets during the 2007-2009 financial crisis.
A day earlier in London, Geithner chided Europeans for their response to the crisis, saying, "What markets want to see is action."
The Kuwait Investment Authority also denied a media report that the Gulf oil producer's sovereign wealth fund was reducing its exposure to the euro zone, saying there was no change to its long-term investment strategy in Europe.
The crisis has hardened attitudes among some European Union lawmakers toward the financial industry, with one EU lawmaker proposing bankers forfeit up to 70 billion euros in bonuses over the next decade to pay for an emergency crisis fund.
The plea by Sharon Bowles, head of the European Parliament's influential Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, added to the momentum for a bank levy proposed by the 27-country bloc's executive body, the European Commission.
Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy have all agreed to push through multibillion-euro savings despite fierce opposition from trade unions and sometimes violent street protests.
Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero owed his thin victory on the deficit-cutting plan to the abstention of Catalan nationalist lawmakers, underlining his precarious position.
Spanish trade unions were meeting to consider protest action over the planned public-sector wage cuts, pension freeze and civil service hiring restrictions.
French unions were staging a day of action against government proposals, still to be spelled out in detail, to increase the retirement age.
(Reporting by Sonya Sowsett in Madrid; Simon Rabinovitch and Aileen Wang in Beijing; Glenn Sommerville in Berlin; Editing by Paul Taylor, Tomasz Janowski and Jan Paschal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China seems to enjoy their rising status and appears to be testing the effects they have on the west with their comments. Everything they test is likely carefully monitored so they can gain the upper hand. They are testing the effect they have and someday will likely attempt to be the leading superpower. Then their nice friendliness will end and they will treat the rest of the world as they do their own citizens. People don¡¯t seem to be aware of the demon hiding behind the dragon.
May 27, 20105:06am EDT--
May 27, 20108:06am EDT--
Perhaps now we can start to see the importance of national savings. How long have we had to hear that consumer spending is the driver of our economy? That¡¯s a joke; no sustainable economy is built entirely on spending and now we¡¯re seeing why. And what does our govenment incent when they dramatically raise taxes on savings and investment (see repeal of Bush tax cuts on dividends and capital gains) and continue to provide tax breaks for borrowing (see interest expense deductions, housing credits, cash for clunkers, etc etc etc). Why save anyway if you really believe in nationalized retirement? I¡¯m sure Social Security and Medicare will do you just fine. Start learning your Mandarin people. Economic policy isn¡¯t just about what checks you receive in the mail or whether or not the govenment buys you out of your bad home loan. It is directly linked to our county¡¯s power in the world. China saves and now China¡¯s calling the shots.
May 27, 20109:31am EDT--
