Clinton avoids China disputes, hands out teddy bears
2010-05-22 05:37:00.0
(Reuters) - Secretary of State Hillary Clinton passed out teddy bears to Chinese children as she toured the Shanghai World Expo on Saturday and carefully skirted the United States' many policy disputes with China.
At the start of a four-day visit whose centerpiece will be talks in Beijing about strategic and economic matters, Clinton spent a misty morning at the Expo, an emblem of China's rise on the world stage.
Dressed in a powder blue jacket to match the Expo's plump, cartoonish mascot, Clinton walked through the U.S. and Chinese national "pavilions" shaking hands, posing for pictures and talking up the importance of people-to-people ties.
She avoided any public discussion of the issues that will occupy her in Beijing, including North Korea's suspected sinking of a South Korean warship, Iran's nuclear program, and U.S. calls for China to allow its currency to appreciate.
Speaking after her four-hour tour, Clinton suggested the event may mark a watershed in the history of China's financial hub and richest and most cosmopolitan city.
"It's like a coming out party for countries and cities," Clinton told reporters. "There is a real historical significance to them doing this."
That the chief U.S. diplomat is spending two nights in Shanghai before the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Beijing on Monday and Tuesday illustrates the importance of China's rising economic and political influence to Washington.
Clinton began her day at the U.S. pavilion, which was a bare patch of ground less than a year ago with the United States short of money to build it and at risk of missing an event at the top of China's business and political agenda.
Thanks partly to her intervention, major U.S. companies stepped up to the plate to fund the pavilion, whose attractions include three films highlighting the American way of life.
In one, Americans including basketball stars Kobe Bryant and Magic Johnson offered greetings in Chinese.
A second verged on corporate advertising, with an executive discussing the potential of wind to meet China's burgeoning energy needs with pictures of U.S.-made windmills in the background.
After the film, Clinton handed out teddy bears to children in the audience.
The films made no explicit reference to democracy, human rights, freedom of religion or other political issues where the United States has long criticized China's record.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I wonder if she¡¯s telling them to mind their business and stay out of the North Korean situation or the American debt will be erased?
May 22, 20107:32am EDT--
The Clinton¡¯s are still handing things to China. Her husband¡¯s administration played a big part in handing them our middle class. http://archives.cnn.com/2000/ALLPOLITICS/stories/10/10/clinton.pntr/ I wonder when history is written 50 years from now, if we will still be calling Bush the worst president ever¡­
May 22, 20107:53am EDT--
This trip basically summarizes America¡¯s China Policy for the last 3 decades¡­¡­.do nothing, say nothing, and ¡°hope¡± China acts responsibly. It¡¯s time for America¡¯s leaders to start standing up for America¡¯s interests. Don¡¯t be afraid of ruffling a few Chinese feathers! Because the Chinese actually seem to enjoy ruffling the entire world¡¯s feathers! (ex. look at their destructive role in N Korea, Iran, Sudan).
May 22, 20109:56am EDT--
