China approves Anshan Steel merger with Panzhihua
2010-05-25 08:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Anshan Steel Group has received approval from China's state asset regulator to merge with Panzhihua Steel, paving the way to forge the biggest steelmaker in China.
Shares of the listed units, Angang Steel Co and PZH Steel, were suspended from trading on Monday, fuelling expectations a long-rumored merger of the two groups would soon be announced.
Beijing has been actively pushing for consolidation in its fragmented steel sector, aiming to create three to five majors with greater competitiveness, although several deals have stalled due to opposition from local governments.
China's State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) has approved the Anshan-Panzhihua deal, the listed companies said in a statement, confirming what a source familiar with the situation told Reuters earlier on Tuesday.
The deal calls for establishing a new state-owned firm, Angang New Co, that will wholly own Pangang Group and Anshan Steel Group, the statement said.
Angang Steel Co's statement to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange said it had applied for its shares to resume trading on Wednesday, although no notice had yet been posted on the Shenzhen exchange's website regarding resumption of the two companies' mainland-listed shares.
The source said the key assets of Anshan and Panzhihua would be merged quickly, in contrast to foot-dragging in Anshan's combination with Benxi Iron & Steel Group, which encountered heavy resistance.
Anshan Steel announced plans in 2005 to merge with Benxi Steel to form Anben Iron & Steel Group, but the firms have been very slow to transfer operating assets to the new entity.
Benxi Steel this month agreed to acquire Beitai Steel, which produced 6.9 million tons of crude steel last year, the daily China Business News reported.
Anshan and Panzhihua are both owned by the central government, while Benxi is owned by local authorities.
Many steel mills provide a key source of jobs and tax revenue for local governments, which in turn often fiercely resist giving up control -- and revenue -- via a merger.
China wants to consolidate the steel sector to boost bargaining power in iron ore purchasing and increase cost competitiveness, while shutting outdated, heavily polluting mills as the industry battles chronic overcapacity.
Anshan Steel and Benxi Steel produced a combined 29.3 million tons of crude steel last year, together making them China's fourth largest steel producer.
Panzhihua Steel, based in southwestern China's Sichuan province, produced 8.2 million tons of crude steel last year.
Once the consolidation of Anshan, Panzhihua, Benxi and Beitai is complete, Anben Steel will surpass Hebei Steel and Baosteel Group to become China's largest steel producer, based on current output levels.
