Beijing breaks ice with Hong Kong opposition
2010-05-24 07:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China's leadership reached out to Hong Kong's opposition democrats on Monday in a breakthrough move to resolve a bitter dispute over how to realize full democracy in the city.
Li Gang, a deputy director of Beijing's liaison office, met senior members of Hong Kong's opposition Democratic Party that has been highly critical of the Chinese Communist leadership that in 1989 ordered troops to fire on pro-democracy demonstrators in and around Tiananmen Square.
"We hope that Li Gang ... can take our clear position to the highest levels of the central government and hope they make a response," said Emily Lau, one of the democrats who met Li.
Democratic Party Chairman Albert Ho said such a meeting, formally sanctioned by Beijing, was a first for his party.
With the return of Hong Kong, a former British colony, to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, both sides have sparred over the pace of constitutional development, with the vocal and highly mobilized opposition democrats condemning Beijing's repeated delays over promised democratic reforms.
The talks come as Hong Kong gears up for a key vote on an electoral reform package that will make elections in 2012 marginally more democratic, but far short of the one-man, one-vote polls the democrats have been pushing for that year.
"We very much hope that we can take a fresh step in realizing electoral reforms for 2012 ... that will take us a step closer toward universal suffrage," Li told reporters in rare, wide-ranging comments underscoring Beijing's desire to resolve the thorny and divisive issue that has dominated local politics.
While Beijing has promised universal suffrage in 2017 to elect the city's leader, it hasn't clarified key details including threshold nomination rules that may end up shutting out pro-democracy candidates.
These have traditionally been dominated by pro-establishment and pro-Beijing forces. The democrats say these seats, which make up half the legislature, must be phased out fully under universal suffrage.
"I see no grounds for people to attack us that we have been appeased (by Beijing)," Ho said in response to attacks from radical democratic factions that his party was selling out on its longstanding principles.
While Ho said he hoped to use the talks as a platform to push for "concrete improvements" over future reforms, some experts said the odds of a breakthrough were slim.
"It needs quite some time to build up some understanding," said James Sung, a political scientist. "I think there will be at least three or four rounds of meetings before they finally can make a decision on whether they accept a compromise."
