U.S. could fall behind China in clean energy: Locke
2010-05-22 05:23:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States could fall behind China and other countries in clean energy technology unless Congress passes energy legislation, U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke said on Saturday.
Many U.S. investors were reluctant to plough money into big solar, wind and other clean energy sectors until they knew what technologies U.S. government policy was going to favor, he said.
"There's too much capital sitting on the sidelines for lack of an energy policy," Locke said during a stop at U.S. and Chinese joint venture project to build batteries for electric vehicles.
"The longer we wait, the more that others, whether it's China, Germany and other countries, will be moving ahead."
While legislation to fight global warming and provide stronger economic incentives for renewables energy still faces an uncertain fate in Congress, China is pushing clean energy projects on a number of fronts.
"The opportunities are stunning in China because China has enormous economic growth and that economic growth has led to enormous demands for energy," said Locke, who headed a group of 24 U.S. clean energy companies on a trade mission to Hong Kong, Shanghai and Beijing this week.
The joint venture between U.S. company Coda and its Chinese partner, Tianjin Lishen Battery, was a model of how cooperation in the clean energy sector could create jobs in both countries, Locke said.
Lishen builds the batteries for an electric vehicle that Coda plans to sell in the United States. The Chinese state-owned oil company, CNOOC, is also an investor in the project.
Locke also visited the Tianjin facility of a joint venture between United Solar Ovonic, a subsidiary of Energy Conversion Devices, and Tianjin Jinneng Investment Company to convert U.S.-made solar cells into solar modules for the Chinese market.
"We do about 75 percent of the manufacturing in Michigan and then we roll it up and we ship it to Tianjin, where they finish it, cut it up into the sizes that they need," said Uni-Solar Vice President Martha Duggan.
Uni-Solar signed an agreement during Locke's trip to sell 500 kilowatts of its thin-film solar laminates to NYKE Solar Integrators, a Chinese company, for a demonstration project.
"Our theory is that by doing this particular business model, we're creating and sustaining jobs in Michigan and in China," Duggan said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
While the Commerce Secretary is ¡°only thinking¡± that the US could fall far behind ,The Reality is that US is already far behind in the Solar and Wind and is at risk of falling behind in the other newer sectors of the Green Industry as well.
While the Commerce Secretary is ¡°only thinking¡± that the US could fall far behind ,The Reality is that US is already far behind in the Solar and Wind and is at risk of falling behind in the other newer sectors of the Green Industry as well.
May 22, 20105:43am EDT--
AGreenInvestor Actually, the US is not far behind. In fact, the US is ahead in many ways. And the US is way ahead of China. What is China doing? I am living in China and have been studying Chinese domestic policies for years, and I don¡¯t see green technology anywhere. All I see is more and more cars and pollution. China gets most of its energy from coal and oil, and they are only increasing their imports of both. The US actually increasing at a fast pace, and the numbers in China are double counted. The liberals like AGreeninvestor can spew their anti-american rhetoric, but the reality is that you don¡¯t know the real situation in China.
May 22, 20108:15am EDT--
I am not interested in spewing anti-anything. I will just give you the facts. China manufactures 50% of the world¡¯s solar modules and is taking the lead in Wind as well.Can you tell me any major wind maker from the US except GE? US is far ahead in technology but far behind in manufacturing.And eventually technology will follow manufacturing.Applied Materials has already relocated its R&D to China.
May 22, 20103:19pm EDT--
