Malaysia's 93-year-old lotus woman regrets bound feet
2010-05-26 10:18:00.0
Malaysia's 93-year-old lotus woman regrets bound feet | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Malaysia's 93-year-old "lotus" woman regrets bound feet
The feet of Lim Guan Siew are seen as she sits on her wheelchair while speaking to Reuters at her home in the Malaysian town of Sekinchan, 90 km (56 miles) northwest of Kuala Lumpur May 23, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Bazuki Muhammad
SEKINCHAN, Malaysia
Wed  EDT
SEKINCHAN, Malaysia
(Reuters Life!) - Lim Guan Siew once had bound feet that were considered the height of feminine beauty in China, but the 93-year-old who now lives in Malaysia says it is a fate she wishes she had avoided.
Lim, whose family fled Fujian province in southern China in 1946 during the country's civil war and settled in Malaysia, was born in 1917 and first had her feet bound when she was seven years old.
Foot binding was officially banned in 1912, but families continued the practice despite it being illegal, especially in remote areas.
"My family wasn't very rich, but I bound my feet just because I wanted to get married," the softly-spoken woman said in her home in Sekinchan, a small Malaysian town some 90 kms (56 miles) from the Malaysian capital.
Instead of the 3-inch "golden lotus" feet that many rich families aspired to when their daughters' feet were bound, Lim's now unbound feet have grown to 5 inches in length, but she still needs special shoes, manufactured locally to fit her.
Aged seven, Lim's mother started the process of breaking and binding her daughter's feet to achieve the then-ideal of perfection and Lim recalls bathing her feet every three to five days in order to bend them the desired pointed shape.
"I would never do that if I had a second chance," Lim said with a smile as she admired her new shoes, hand-made by a Malaysian shoemaker whose business specializes in making shoes for the "golden lotus" women.
When Lim, then aged 30 arrived in Malaysia with her 10-year-old daughter, she was forced to work as an agricultural laborer according to her son, not an easy task for a woman with deformed feet.
The tiny leather shoes that Lim was so proud of came last week from "Wah Aik," a shop in the Malaysian coastal city of Malacca, some 200 km away, that once had a lucrative business supplying the needs of the Chinese community in this mainly Muslim country in Southeast Asia.
Yeo Eng Tong, Tony Yeo and Raymond Yeo, are the third generation of shoemakers in the family business that started in 1918 and who say that foot-binding was not practiced by the substantial locally born Chinese population that started settling here in the 15th century.
"My father told me all the bound feet ladies came to this shop to order shoes, all of them came in trishaws or cars, in the 1960s and 1970s," said Raymond Yeo.
"Most of the shoes are sold to tourists as souvenirs, although sometimes we may receive orders from ladies with bound feet, but it's fewer now," said Tony Yeo in their shop in a district now popular with tourists.
"It will disappear soon, we just can't help it," added Raymond.
