Euro slump hits Mexico, Brazil
2010-05-26 18:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Latin America markets ended mixed on Wednesday with some of the region's key currencies falling after a report suggested China is reviewing its euro zone bond holdings, leading investors to scramble for safe-haven U.S. dollars.
Throughout much of the trading day emerging market, however, emerging stocks and sovereign bonds were sharply higher following Tuesday's rout. Some closed higher even as U.S. markets eased into the closing bell on the China news.
"In the absence of any major (emerging markets) data today, we believe price action continues to be driven by global risk appetite," RBC Capital Markets wrote in a research note.
MSCI's Latin America stock index rose 3.81 percent .MILA00000PUS while the broader MSCI emerging market stock index gained 3.23 percent .MSCIEF.
In the credit markets, the yield spread between emerging market sovereign bonds and weaker U.S. Treasuries narrowed by 15 basis points to 340 basis points, according to the JP Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index Plus .JPMEMBIPLUS.
The paper said Chinese representatives that manage the reserves under the country's central bank had been meeting with foreign bankers in Beijing in recent days to discuss concerns about gaping deficits in countries including Greece and Portugal.
The news drove the euro back toward four-year lows, dragging emerging market currencies with it.
Against the U.S. dollar the Mexican peso fell 0.93 percent to 13.12 per dollar. Brazil's real dipped 0.05 percent to 1.869 and Peru's sol dipped 0.21 percent to 2.8520 per U.S. dollar.
"There is a lot of sensitivity to the instability of the euro and European markets. With whatever type of news about the euro that the market does not like, markets weaken," said Jaime Ascencio, an analyst at brokerage Actinver.
However, Chile's peso firmed 2 percent to 536.10 per dollar and Colombia's peso gained 1.04 percent to 1,973.50.
Colombia's central bank meets on Thursday and analysts expect no change in the benchmark interest rate, currently at 3 percent, after the bank surprised the market with a 50-basis-point cut.
"We see last month's rate cut as an opportunistic move to give the economy an added boost as Colombia's growth recovery is proving much shallower than most of its LatAm peer," RBC wrote, but added it does not expect any more cuts.
Rising copper prices, Chile's key export, helped underpin the market. The industrial metal gained 1.86 percent after dropping 3.28 percent on Tuesday on concerns Europe's ongoing debt crisis could undermine a budding rebound in global economic growth.
On the positive side, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said on Wednesday the economies of China, India, Brazil and Russia were powering ahead. The OECD revised upward its growth outlook for all four leading emerging market nations.
