College students stabbed in dorms in south China
2010-05-20 01:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Knife-wielding men stabbed nine college-age students at a vocational school in southern China, breaking into their dormitories after a dispute at a food stall hours earlier, local media said.
More than 10 men, apparently from a nearby village, slashed a school guard, disabled a security camera, then around 2.30 am on Wednesday burst into the dormitories, where they randomly hacked at students.
One lost a hand, the China News Service said. Three attackers had been arrested, the Hainan Daily reported.
Some students from the college, the Institute of Science and Technology on the southern island province of Hainan, had earlier had a confrontation with local youth at a barbeque stall. Four of them were injured in that fracas, media said.
Triggers for the previous school violence, which has spurred public alarm, include personal grievances over job losses, business failures, broken relationships and house relocations.
Schools across the country have been required to tighten security and the police vowed to "strike hard" against any attack, but there have also been worries about the social malaise some see underneath China's rapid economic growth.
Experts have said media reports about the attacks have raised the risk of copycat attacks. On Sunday, a man attacked six women with a cleaver in southern China before killing himself by jumping from a building.
(Reporting by Liu Zhen and Emma Graham-Harrison; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I think that the ¡°hacking¡± aspect is being overstated. In China every kitchen has at least one cleaver, often several since the cleaver is the main tool in Chinese cooking. The machete is very common as well in non urban areas.
I think that the ¡°hacking¡± aspect is being overstated. In China every kitchen has at least one cleaver, often several since the cleaver is the main tool in Chinese cooking. The machete is very common as well in non urban areas.
I believe these are the first signs of an increasing civil unrest due to the growing disparity of wealth and representation in urban versus rural areas. The attack by the young men of the village against the college students can be seen as a classic illustration of poor vs privileged. The government¡¯s classic response would be brutal suppression by armed club wielding troops aimed primarily at the village. I imagine this will further polarize the situation.
May 20, 201012:33pm EDT--
I think there is much more going on here than what meets the eye. Call it what you will, economic, copy cats, whatever, but it¡¯s demonic. It doesn¡¯t stop just because an attacker gets killed or caught, it will just jump to another person and continue its destruction. What¡¯s needed is Jesus Christ. Anything short of Him will fail. Pray for China.
May 20, 201012:58pm EDT--
