Q+A: What's in and behind the Iran sanctions draft?
2010-05-20 13:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States, Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China agreed this week on a draft sanctions U.N. Security Council resolution against Iran over its nuclear program.
The 15-nation council has the resolution and is expected to vote on it in the coming weeks. If approved, it will impose a fourth round of U.N. sanctions against Tehran for refusing to suspend an uranium enrichment program Western powers fear is for developing weapons but Iran says is for civilian purposes.
WHAT'S NEW IN THE DRAFT RESOLUTION?
The draft resolution names for the first time the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) as linked to Iran's nuclear and missile programs. It describes the corps' link to "the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems."
The annexes to the resolution, once they are agreed by the six, will include a list of IRGC members and firms controlled by it that will be added to the list of those subject to asset freezes and travel bans under previous sanctions resolutions.
It specifically names the Central Bank of Iran in a paragraph calling on U.N. member states to be vigilant in all transactions with Iranian banks to ensure they are not linked to Tehran's nuclear or missile programs.
The annexes will include a list of individuals and firms linked to the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines that will be subject to asset freezes and travel bans. Other firms, banks and individuals will be listed in the annexes as well.
The resolution bans the establishment of new Iranian banks, representative offices or subsidiaries abroad, or maintaining correspondent relationships with Iranian banks, if there are "reasonable grounds" to suspect that the banks might be involved in financing Iran's nuclear or missile programs.
WHAT DID THE U.S., EUROPEANS HAVE TO GIVE UP?
During months of closed-door negotiations, U.N. diplomats say, the United States, Britain, France and Germany had to give up a number of proposed sanctions to secure the support of Russia and China, which have close trade ties to Iran.
Originally the French proposed targeting Iran's oil and gas trade. The United States suggested banning new investments in Iran's energy sector. Moscow and Beijing rejected those ideas.
All that is left of the proposed energy measures in the draft is a reference in the preamble to a "potential connection" between energy revenues and Iran's atomic program.
There was also a proposal to blacklist Iran's central bank but that was rejected by Russia, China and Germany, who feared it would make it impossible to do any business with Iran.
Russia and China also insisted that any sanctions taken against Iran be justified by a suspected connection to Tehran's nuclear or ballistic missile program.
HOW WILL THE RESOLUTION BE IMPLEMENTED?
If the resolution is passed, the European Union will approve its own rules on implementing it, and possibly additional sanctions that go beyond the U.N. sanctions.
The EU, United States and their allies have been increasingly aggressive in implementing existing sanctions against Iranian banks and other Iranian firms. The result has been that some of the voluntary measures in the three previous sanctions resolutions have become de facto mandatory.
WHEN WILL IT BE PASSED?
WILL IT BE VOTED UNANIMOUSLY?
Council diplomats expect that adoption will not be unanimous. Lebanon is expected to abstain, because the Iranian-backed militant group Hezbollah is in its government.
There are also questions about Uganda and Nigeria, though Western diplomats say they will probably vote yes in the end. Even if they do not, the West is counting on a minimum of 10 votes in favor -- enough to pass the resolution but short of the overwhelming expression of support Washington would like.
