China welcomes Iran nuclear fuel swap deal
2010-05-18 06:19:00.0
(Reuters) - China welcomed a nuclear fuel swap deal Iran announced after talks with Brazil and Turkey and urged negotiations over the dispute, but Western powers rejected the deal as too little to halt momentum for sanctions.
Iran agreed on Monday to send some of its uranium abroad, reviving a fuel swap plan drafted by the United Nations with the aim of keeping Tehran's nuclear activities in check.
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi said he was encouraged. His reaction suggested Beijing and Western powers may part ways on how much weight to give Iran's offer.
"China has noted the relevant reports and expresses its welcome and appreciation for the diplomatic efforts all parties have made to positively seek an appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear issue," Yang said, according to the Foreign Ministry website (www.fmprc.gov.cn).
Later on Tuesday, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu said his government hoped the nuclear fuel swap agreement "will benefit the process of peacefully resolving the Iran nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiations".
"China has always believed that dialogue and negotiations are the best channel for resolving the Iran nuclear issue," Ma told a regular news conference.
Israeli Trade and Industry Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, a former defense chief, said only more time would reveal if Iran was "continuing to toy with the whole world" or was open to placing curbs on its domestic uranium enrichment.
China is among the world powers that have been discussing possible new U.N. sanctions against Iran over its disputed nuclear activities. As one of the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, it has the power to veto resolutions.
"I think this will slow down talk of sanctions," said Guo Xiangang, a former Chinese diplomat to Iran, referring to the fuel swap announcement.
"I personally believe that with these positive signals from Iran, now China will be less willing to approve of harsh sanctions against it," said Guo, vice president of the China Institute of International Studies, a government think tank in Beijing.
"It's not a big enough step to please the United States and other Western powers, but at least it's a step forward that could open the way to more movement," he added. "I think China will want to see if this concession can now be built on."
Iran is a major supplier of crude to China, the world's second-biggest consumer of oil after the United States, and provided 11.4 percent of China's total crude imports last year.
Dominated by energy shipments, bilateral trade has grown from around $10 billion in 2005 to more than $20 billion last year.
China has kept close bilateral ties with Iran and is reluctant about moving toward new sanctions, but its support is not unreserved. It has backed past U.N. Security Council resolutions criticizing Tehran's stance on nuclear issues.
Beijing's position on the Iran nuclear dispute is also likely to be in focus next week, when senior Chinese and U.S. officials gather in the Chinese capital for wide-ranging talks.
The International Atomic Energy Agency, the U.N. agency that monitors nuclear security, said late on Monday it was waiting for Iran's approval of the plan in writing. An Iranian official in Vienna said Tehran would reply to the agency within a week.
(Additional reporting by Emma Graham-Harrison in BEIJING, Dan Williams in JERUSALEM and Sylvia Westall in VIENNA; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Does that mean that Iran¡¯s Ayatollahs will not have an excuse to not talk to the US? Does it mean that the Iranian people will not have sanctions imposed on them by the Ayatollahs, because the US is imposing sanctions on the Ayatollahs?
May 18, 20108:44am EDT--
U.S. policy on nuclear Iran underscores bias toward Unbreakable bond Israel,
U.S. policy on nuclear Iran underscores bias toward Unbreakable bond Israel,
AFTER IRAQ WITH NEVER BEEN FOUND WMD, IT IS CLEAR BY NOW US ANTI IRAN TIRADE
RHETORIC DOUBLE STANDARD IS ONLY ON BEHALF OF UNBREAKABLE BOND ISRAEL, NOT THE
NON PROLIFERATION TREATY OR THE WORLD, TO MAKE SURE THAT ISRAEL IS THE SOLE
With more than 200 nuclear weapons and the capacity to deliver them against its enemies or use them to buttress its policies, Israel refuses to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty or to open its nuclear facilities for International Atomic Energy Agency inspection. On the other hand, Israel and the United States insist on applying the harshest possible sanctions against Iran, which they fear may be developing nuclear weapons. The United States furthermore is responding to a regional initiative to make the Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass destruction by linking it to progress in the peace process, which means a peace customized by and suited especially to meet Israel¡¯s interests, naturally, because Israel is the sole nuclear power in the region. In promoting this deal, imposed by a nuclear Israel on a much weaker region, the United States is affirming that it certainly pays to be a nuclear power ¡ª you get things done on your terms ¡ª It is making mockery of other nations when the white house spokesman says Iran must assure THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY. In fact more than hundred countries support Iran¡¯s right to nuclear technology UNDER NPT but the white house spokesman and the media do not consider that number of countries as international community. Only the bullies are entitled speak for other countries.
INDONESIA CERTAIN IRAN¡¯S NUCLEAR PROGRAMME NOT FOR DEFENCE PURPOSES.
May 18, 20102:11pm EDT--
JOINT DECLARATION BY IRAN, TURKEY AND BRAZIL
(17 May 2010) Having met in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, the undersigned have agreed on the following Declaration: 1) We reaffirm our commitment to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and in accordance with the related articles of the NPT, recall the right of all State Parties, including the Islamic Republic of Iran, to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy (as well as nuclear fuel cycle including enrichment activities) for peaceful purposes without discrimination. 2) We express our strong conviction that we have the opportunity now to begin a forwardlooking process that will create a positive, constructive, non-confrontational atmosphere leading to an era of interaction and cooperation. 3) We believe that the nuclear fuel exchange is instrumental in initiating cooperation in different areas, especially with regard to peaceful nuclear cooperation including nuclear power plant and research reactors construction. 4) Based on this point the nuclear fuel exchange is a starting point to begin cooperation and a positive constructive move forward among nations. Such a move should lead to positive interaction and cooperation in the field of peaceful nuclear activities replacing and avoiding all kinds of confrontation through refraining from measures, actions and rhetorical statements that would jeopardize Iran¡¯s rights and obligations under the NPT. 5) Based on the above, in order to facilitate the nuclear cooperation mentioned above, the Islamic Republic of Iran agrees to deposit 1200 kg LEU in Turkey. While in Turkey this LEU will continue to be the property of Iran. Iran and the IAEA may station observers to monitor the safekeeping of the LEU in Turkey. 6) Iran will notify the IAEA in writing through official channels of its agreement with the above within seven days following the date of this declaration. Upon the positive response of the Vienna Group (US, Russia, France and the IAEA) further details of the exchange will be elaborated through a written agreement and proper arrangement between Iran and the Vienna Group that specifically committed themselves to deliver 120 kg of fuel needed for the Tehran Research Reactor (TRR). 7) When the Vienna Group declares its commitment to this provision, then both parties would commit themselves to the implementation of the agreement mentioned in item 6. Islamic Republic of Iran expressed its readiness to deposit its LEU (1200 kg) within one month. On the basis of the same agreement the Vienna Group should deliver 120 kg fuel required for TRR in no later than one year. 8) In case the provisions of this Declaration are not respected Turkey, upon the request of Iran, will return swiftly and unconditionally Iran¡¯s LEU to Iran.
May 18, 20102:12pm EDT--
