HK health IPOs provide a shot in the arm for investors
2010-05-20 06:24:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, May 19 2010
Wed, May 19 2010
Thu, May 13 2010
Wed, May 12 2010
Tue, May 11 2010
Thu  EDT
Analysts say pharma and medical technology are set to become a new focus for investors disenchanted with property and inspired by the example of a pharmaceutical researcher who became China's richest man this month after the listing of his drug firm, Shenzhen Hepalink Pharmaceutical (
London-listed Chinese medical device maker China Medical System Holdings CMSH.L last month filed an application for a Hong Kong listing to help fund an expansion of its sales network. [ID:nWLA2828] Others may do so soon, including Chinese generic drugs maker Hailing Pharmaceutical and China Central Pharma, a Chinese medicine distributor and wholesaler, according to sources.
Investor appetite for Chinese medical stocks has grown as Beijing promises to create a national healthcare safety net and as the sector's relative immunity to economic cycles offers shelter in times of turmoil.
"Weak sentiment in April did not change the market's view of the pharmaceutical sector, but further strengthened investors' belief that it is a defensive play in a volatile market," said Linus Yip, strategist at First Shanghai Securities.
CHINA'S RICHEST COUPLE
The overall China pharmaceutical market grew to 483 billion yuan ($71 billion) in 2008 from 411 billion in 2007, according to a listing prospectus from Lansen Pharmaceutical (
), which debuted in Hong Kong earlier this month.
Lansen, a spin-off of Cathay International Holdings (
), saw the retail portion of its offering 853 times covered and it rose nearly 33 percent on debut.
"Lansen's growth story was sharp and clear, and fit in well with investors' appetite and the upcoming developments in China," said Ben Kwong, chief operating officer at KGI Asia.
Beijing's promise to spend around $125 billion over three-years to create a national healthcare safety net has investors buzzing about the potential for Chinese medical stocks -- from drug makers and distributors to medical device producers.
China's 1.3 billion population hold great promise for foreign drug makers, especially those with patents on drugs with no ready alternatives. Medical devices have potential, too, as new clinics and hospitals are set up and existing ones expand and improve their facilities.
Last month, German drug and chemical maker Bayer AG (
) said it expected China's medical market to grow nearly 10-fold to around $220 billion by 2020.
Hepalink shows how the sector can be much more than a defensive play. The company's founder, Li Li, and his wife hold a combined fortune of 42.62 billion yuan ($6.24 billion) following listing on China's Nasdaq-style market for start-up stocks in May.
Hepalink, the world's biggest maker of blood-thinning heparin products and a supplier to global drug firms including Sanofi-Aventis (
), rose as much as 27 percent on debut after pricing its shares at the equivalent of 73 times reported earnings in 2009 on a diluted basis.
That's even higher than Hong Kong-listed Sinopharm (
), China's largest drug distributor, whose shares trade at about 45 times prospective earnings for 2010, and was well above the 14 times for the broader Hang Seng Index
"It is still a very bullish sector," said William Lo, an analyst at Ample Capital. "Those stock's higher valuations are justified if you take into account the China market, which is in a startup stage."
However, such rich valuations could be vulnerable to shifts in policy focus, as has been seen in the real estate sector since Beijing implemented measures to curb rising property prices.
Although healthcare stocks in Hong Kong have largely outperformed during the recent downturn, both Hepalink and Lansen Pharma have fallen after their impressive debuts, Hepalink by 22 percent and Lansen by 5 percent.
But while a number of major Hong Kong IPOs have been put off recently due to worries global debt troubles will dent investor appetite, healthcare listings remain on track.
These include Hailing Pharmaceutical, which aims to raise $80 million in a Hong Kong IPO in September in a deal to be handled by BNP Paribas and China Central Pharmaceuticals, according to sources.
"Pharmaceuticals are not a cyclical business," said an investment banker handling one healthcare IPO. "It is not affected by macro economic fluctuations."
