Senators say China suppresses IMF yuan criticism
2010-05-18 17:11:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, May 18 2010
Sat, May 15 2010
Sat, May 15 2010
Mon, May 10 2010
Mon, May 10 2010
Tue  EDT
In a letter to letter to U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, the lawmakers said that China had suppressed publication of the staff report from the IMF's annual consultation with China last summer.
Such staff reports contain assessments of a country's currency policies, but IMF member states can decide whether or not to release them.
"This report could be the smoking gun that confirms that China has been intentionally manipulating its currency to gain an unfair trade advantage," Sen. Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, said in a statement. "The fact that China insists on keeping the report under wraps is reason to believe they have something to hide. The administration should press for the report's release at next week's summit."
The letter was written by Schumer and Republican Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina a South Carolina Republican, who have proposed punitive legislation aimed at pressuring China to allow the yuan to rise, and signed by eight others, mostly from industrial states.
Most countries authorize the IMF to release the staff reports, and China had done so in previous years.
"China's failure to do so in 2009, despite regularly opting for transparency in previous years, is troubling, suggesting that China seeks to suppress any findings critical of China's manipulation of the value of its currency," the senators wrote in the letter.
However, the IMF staff report did not clearly state that China was manipulating its currency, said Eswar Prasad, a former head of the IMF's China division who is familiar with the report.
"They did not use the term 'currency manipulation', they used the term, 'substantially undervalued," said Prasad, now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
The latter term implies at least a 20 percent undervaluation of the yuan, Prasad said, adding that coupled with the report's assessment of a rapid rate of reserve accumulation, the report "could be interpreted as suggesting that China could be manipulating its currency."
The IMF has since used the term "substantially undervalued" when referring to the yuan, most recently in March in a briefing note to Group of 20 ministers. The fund has long argued that China should allow its currency to rise in value to ease global trade and financial imbalances.
Geithner, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other top Obama administration officials are heading to Beijing for the so-called Strategic and Economic Dialogue with their Chinese counterparts May 24-25. China's yuan exchange rate is expected to be a key topic.
Geithner in April delay a much-anticipated decision on whether China deliberately manipulates its currency for trade advantage, choosing instead to try to persuade Beijing to resume more yuan flexibility through a number of bilateral and multilateral meetings this spring and summer.
Among these are next week's economic summit and meetings in June for the G20 wealthy and developing economies.
China in mid-2005 began allowing a gradual rise of the yuan from around 8.2 to the dollar to about 6.83 by mid-2008. However, it has not budged from that level since then, even though China's growth rate has remained strong.
China has given some signals that it may be ready to move on the yuan. The People's Bank of China last week said in a quarterly monetary report that it would manage the currency "with reference to a basket of currencies" but giving no timetable.
But analysts say that that the euro's continuing slide on worries of the Greek debt crisis spreading could deter China from moving.
"The Greek crisis presages a period of economic weakness in the euro area which remains one of China's key export markets, so they would take a double hit if they revalued. It's very unlikely that they will engineer a move in the rmb any time soon," Prasad said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The whole world already knows China manipulates it¡¯s currency. It¡¯s time to do something about it. China has already shown they will not do the responsible thing and revalue the yuan. So, the wolrd can now either sit back and do nothing, OR we can start imposing tarriffs on Chinese goods until the Chinese start acting responsibly. It seems like a pretty easy decision to me.
May 19, 20104:24pm EDT--
