Ship sinking overshadows East Asia meeting
2010-05-15 08:52:00.0
(Reuters) - China sought on Saturday to cool South Korea's exasperation with Pyongyang, which is widely believed to have torpedoed one of the South's warships two months ago, killing 46 sailors.
In the South, unofficially there is little doubt that its isolated neighbor attacked the navy corvette near their disputed sea border in March.
"We explained where the investigations are at the current stage," Kim Young-sun, South Korea's Foreign Ministry spokesman, said after talks between the Chinese and South Korean foreign ministers.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu said all sides must exercise "calm and restrain to appropriately deal with the issues concerned," Xinhua said.
The talks were held on the sidelines of an East Asia conference between the top diplomats from China, Japan and South Korea.
China hosts the negotiations that would compensate the North with massive economic aid if Pyongyang takes moves to scrap its nuclear arms program, but the destitute state has boycotted the forum for more than a year.
China, the North's only major ally, irritated major trading partner South Korea earlier this month by hosting the reclusive North Korean leader Kim Jong-il on a rare trip abroad -- before the outcome of the investigation was announced.
Seoul, its relations with the North in a deepening chill, had been hoping China would try to rein in its unruly neighbor.
But a number of analysts believe China is so nervous about a collapse of the impoverished state that it is prepared to prop up Kim's government at almost any cost.
"(Yang) stressed the importance of conducting a scientific and objective investigation," the source said.
Senior South Korean officials declined to detail Yang's comments at the meeting in the ancient capital of Shilla, the Buddhist kingdom that ruled the Korean peninsula in the first millennium.
South Korea knows it cannot launch a retaliatory strike against the North without risking greater conflict and undermining its own economy, which is just recovering from the global financial slump.
But it does want international punishment of the North. That would likely mean even tougher sanctions by the United Nations, which would need China's support to take effect.
China last year joined the international community in U.N. Security Council sanctions against the North for a defiant nuclear test, hurting Pyongyang's once lucrative arms trade that was a key source of scarce hard cash.
On an unrelated note that reflected simmering tension between China and Japan that recently involved coast guard activities in waters that border them, Okada told Yang that China should cut its nuclear arsenal, a call rebuffed by the Chinese minister as grounded on unnecessary concern.
(Additional reporting by Linda Sieg in Tokyo and Chris Buckley in Beijing; Editing by Jonathan Thatcher and Charles Dick)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China does need to reign in Kim Jong-il as he has become progressively demented. Kim Jong-il¡¯s behavior is absolutely provocational, and is totally unnecessary. If Kim Jong-il restarts the Korean war as a desperate attempt to give his pathetic life meaning, it will surely end poorly for the North Korean people. The two Koreas are inexorably connected, and will be unified again- this is beyond any rhetorical propaganda argument North Korea could make. The process of reunification could be very difficult, and painful if the senseless, and hateful propaganda of the desperate, and illegitimate North Korean regime is allowed to take root in further generations of North Korean citizens. The power struggles of a handful of men have reaped havoc on countless generations throughout human history. When will we stop empowering demagogues to rule over us, and take back the path to civilization that lies before us?
May 16, 20104:09am EDT--
I wonder if American is being investigated as the cause of the sinking¡­ I say this because they had a real motive to sink the ship¡­ Motive = the motive would be to place fear into Japanese people to stop Japan from relocating one of the US bases in Japan which was scheduled to happen and promised by the premier of Japan. Make no mistake that I¡¯m not stating who is responsible for the sinking but am very interested if America is being investigated as they should be the number one suspect. After all, North Korea has no motive at this particular time but America does. To be fair to all, the possibility that America was the force behind the sinking should be thoroughly investigated. Nothing against America ¨C it¡¯s just the timing, the location¡­ that makes America appear to be the culprit. It¡¯s only fair to those who died to look at all partied that could have been involved. Ones with the most motive are usually the guilty¡­
May 17, 20102:49am EDT--
