CAT CEO warns on M&A protectionism
2010-05-13 07:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The top executive of Caterpillar Inc, the world's largest maker of construction and mining equipment, said on Wednesday that barring Chinese and other overseas companies from buying U.S. businesses is a form of protectionism that will ultimately do the country's business sector more harm than good.
Speaking at the Reuters Manufacturing and Transportation Summit, Jim Owens said that political efforts to discourage such cross-border deals, like China National Offshore Oil Corp's derailed effort to take over U.S. oil firm Unocal Oil Co back in 2005, encouraged retaliation that would make it harder for U.S. companies to invest and prosper in fast-growing overseas markets.
"I think the next major global competitor in our industry is likely to be the Chinese," Owens said.
"I would love it if that company is a publicly owned company and has shareholder expectations to meet. I wouldn't be at all disappointed if they bought a major U.S. or European competitor in order to give them brand and distribution."
Although Owens declined to mention any specific heavy equipment manufacturers by name, he said there were "players in our industry who could be bought at reasonable prices now" and he would be happy to see them snapped up by foreign rivals.
"We can't play this thing where we're going to be able to invest in and buy in their country and we're not going to invest in and buy in our country," he said.
"It's a two-way street. I think the world will be better off, global trade and commerce will be better off, if the major players do begin to invest around the world and the Chinese market is opened to U.S. investment and European investment."
In the aftermath of the CNOOC-Unocal non-deal, protectionism has grown in China, which for years had not only allowed multinationals like Danone and Eastman Kodak to buy stakes in local competitors but encouraged them with tax policy and cheap rent.
But lately, Chinese regulators have been blocking deals, including perhaps most notoriously Coca-Cola's bid for juice-maker Huiyuan last year.
Asked if he thought the Obama administration, which he advises as a member of the President's Economic Recovery Advisory Board, agreed with him, Owens said, "Intellectually? Yes."
But he said the administration's "political base, generally speaking, is anti-trade, anti-globalization."
Owens, who has served as Caterpillar's chairman and chief executive officer since 2004, will be stepping down next month after 38 years at the company.
During his appearance at the Reuters Summit, Owens reiterated his concerns about efforts to overhaul the regulation of the U.S. finance industry, which he fears may go too far and wind up compromising the efficiency of the country's capital markets.
Caterpillar has a huge captive finance unit that helps the company's customers buy equipment, contributes to the company's profitability and is a heavy user of derivatives to reduce interest rate risk in its $30 billion portfolio of receivables.
"There's a huge consensus in the country, and even in the business community, that we need financial regulatory reform and it was certainly inadequate in the last very difficult period we've gone through," he said.
"I want to be sure we don't get unintended consequences from a rush to judgment and doing all this regulatory work overnight ... We need to get it thoughtfully done."
(Reporting by James B. Kelleher, editing by Matthew Lewis)
