Corrected: Miners, banks help FTSE snap 3-day losing streak
2010-05-24 00:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares broke a three-day losing streak on Monday as miners spurred by upbeat comments from China, outpaced falls in oils led by BP (
ended 6.68 points or 0.1 percent higher at 5,069.61, in choppy trade. The index is down more than 13 percent since fears escalated about the euro zone sovereign debt crisis in mid-April, after a 22 percent gain in 2009, and fell below 5,000 on Friday for the first time since November.
"The upside continues to remain constrained by fears of further problems in the euro zone," Michael Hewson, analyst at CMC Markets said.
) rose 1.5 percent, along with gold, which gained as lower prices tempted buyers back to the market amid concerns over the fiscal health of the euro zone.
Banks, which have taken a beating while the euro zone tackles its debt crisis, rallied after data showed sales of previously owned homes in the United States rose more than expected in April to a five-month high, which led Wall Street stocks to pare losses.
), Barclays (
), HSBC (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
Sector gains were tempered after the Spanish government on Saturday took over the running of savings bank CajaSur after its planned merger with another of the country's small lenders failed.
Perceived defensive firms featured highly on the gainers list, as investors looked for shelter as euro zone debt problems hung in the background.
), supermarket group Sainsbury (
On the downside, energy stocks retreated as an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico soured sentiment toward the sector.
BP, down 2.7 percent, has pledged $500 million to an open research program studying the impact of the Deepwater Horizon incident that threatens an ecological disaster.
Shares in BP have fallen more than 15 percent in May, on track for its biggest monthly loss since 1992.
), off 2.4 and 0.4 percent respectively as investors worried about the UK government renegotiating terms of government contracts.
