China banks race for funds on investor fatigue fears
2010-05-03 08:00:00.0
(Reuters) - The ongoing round of fund-raising by China's top banks is turning into a dash for cash, with industry heavyweights muscling to be first in line amid worries that markets could quickly tire of China's needy lenders.
The multibillion-dollar cash call took on a new urgency over the weekend, when China's regulator announced its latest monetary tightening measure by raising reserve requirement ratios for banks.
Chinese banks could collectively request $60 billion or more from investors in Hong Kong and Shanghai, seriously testing their appetite for providing new funds to a group that doled out a record $1.4 trillion in new loans last year under Beijing's loose-money policies during the financial crisis.
), the world's two largest banks by market cap, along with Agricultural Bank of China ABC.UL, China's No.4 lender, are likely to get the first dips at the well in the looming fund-raising tsunami, said banking and other industry sources.
"As the first priority, Beijing wants AgBank to be the first among all to tap the capital market, because the number of investors that would want to put money into Chinese banks is limited," said one investment banker working on that deal, who was not authorized to speak about it publicly.
Sources have said that AgBank, the last of China's major banks to go public, could make its IPO as soon as July and raise up to $30 billion, which would make it the world's largest such offering on record.
AgBank plans to submit its IPO application to the Hong Kong stock exchange this week, as some of its underwriters hold meetings to try and line up cornerstone investors, banking sources told Reuters on Monday.
'ATM MACHINE'
While AgBank appeared to have the pole position in the upcoming feeding frenzy with the sudden acceleration of its IPO plans last month, ICBC (
) may have trumped its smaller rival with plans to launch its bid to raise up to $11.7 billion this week through a placement of shares in Hong Kong, sources said.
Under its plan, CCB said it would issue new shares roughly equal to about 7 percent of its Hong Kong and Shanghai share counts, adding up to 630 million new Shanghai-listed A shares and 15 billion new Hong Kong-listed H-shares.
All three banks, along with other majors like Bank of China (
), Bank of Communications (
), are believed to be lobbying heavily behind the scenes for a first crack at the markets.
"Banks' fundraising plans reflect the will of the State Council, and should be the result of coordination between various regulatory bodies," said Wu Songkai, analyst at Huati United Securities.
The sudden dash for cash is being driven by Beijing's broader concern that the current window for fund raising could close by the fall, said one banking source, who was not authorized to talk publicly about the deal.
"Hong Kong is like an ATM machine, it is a place for companies to raise funds because of its sufficient liquidity," said one investment banker, who did not want to be named as he is not authorized to talk to the media.
The fund-raising plans have already cooled investor appetite toward China banking stocks, which now trade well below multiples for their global peers.
Despite reporting record quarterly earnings in the first quarter, ICBC, CCB and Bank of China now trade at about 10 times 2010 forecast earnings, compared with 14-15 times for international peers like HSBC (
Investors continued to shun the big banks on Monday after China announced the reserve requirement hike. ICBC, CCB and Bank of China all shed around 1.6 percent, helping to pull down the broader Hang Seng Index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Fortunately for China there is no privately owned Federal Reserve that the government must beg for loans and pay interest to. The government of China can independently print money and juice the system as it needs to without paying international bankers for the privilege of using their fiat money.China is succeeding by using the financial model of the original US before the Fed. ¡°I sincerely believe the banking institutions having the issuing power of money are more dangerous to liberty than standing armies.¡±-Thomas Jefferson
May 05, 20101:39am EDT--
