U.S. and other big powers back Mideast nuclear arms ban
2010-05-05 00:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States, Russia, Britain, France and China voiced support on Wednesday for making the Middle East a nuclear-weapons-free zone, which would ultimately force Israel to scrap any atomic arms it has.
The move, in a joint statement, reflected U.S. concern to win Arab backing for sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program by offering a concession over its ally Israel, but Washington says the zone cannot be actually established yet.
"We are committed to a full implementation of the 1995 NPT resolution on the Middle East and we support all ongoing efforts to this end," the five permanent U.N. Security Council members said in a statement issued at a conference taking stock of the 1970 nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
"We are ready to consider all relevant proposals in the course of the (NPT) Review Conference in order to come to an agreed decision aimed at taking concrete steps in this direction," said the statement, which was obtained by Reuters.
U.S. support for the idea of creating such a zone in the future could be unwelcome to Israel, which has said it can only consider it once there is Middle East peace.
But diplomats from the Jewish state's Western allies say Arab states are pushing hard on the issue in exchange for their support in U.S.-led efforts to curb Iran's nuclear program.
Egypt, which chairs the powerful 118-nation bloc of non-aligned developing nations, circulated a proposal to the 189 signatories of the treaty calling for a conference by next year on ridding the Middle East of nuclear arms in which all countries in the region would participate.
The United States and Russia, with the support of the other three countries allowed to keep nuclear weapons under the NPT, are negotiating with Egypt to come up with an acceptable compromise proposal, Western diplomats say.
Despite U.S. support for the principle of the proposed zone and for Egypt's call for discussion of it, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Monday the time was not yet ripe for creating the zone.
Without naming specific countries, the statement also urged those outside the NPT to join it. Israel, like nuclear-armed India and Pakistan, never signed the treaty but is presumed to have a sizable atomic arsenal.
"We urge those states that are not parties to the treaty to accede as non-nuclear-weapon states and pending accession to the NPT, to adhere to its terms," the five powers said.
Israel has tried to fend off Egyptian-led scrutiny of its arsenal by urging Cairo to view Iran's atomic ambitions as the regional threat, an Israeli official has said. Egypt says both Israel and Iran are nuclear threats to the region and wants action on both countries.
"The proliferation risks presented by the Iranian nuclear program remain of serious concern to us," the statement said. The five powers and Germany are negotiating on a fourth U.N. sanctions resolution against Iran for defying Security Council demands that it halt uranium enrichment.
Tehran refuses to stop enriching, saying its program is intended solely for the peaceful generation of electricity.
The statement did not mention sanctions. Russia and China, Western diplomats say, are pushing hard in negotiations to dilute the measures in a U.S.-drafted sanctions proposal.
The five powers also called for the renewal of six-nation talks on North Korea, which withdrew from the NPT in 2003 and carried out nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
its hypocritical stance vis a vis Iran, even with US hypocritical backing, that is the question. And how long will the international community play along with this
patently obvious charade, in which no informed reader
the actual facts involved? The American insistence on
crippling sanctions against Iran is absurd on its face,in light of the above.
Who could be fooled by this rigamarole, except perhaps the brainwashed American public?
May 05, 20105:03pm EDT--
Israel should tell the US and others to take a flying leap. Obama or perhaps some future president may not be reliable. Surrounded by their hostile neighbors, they should hold onto whatever they may have. The Iranians have proven themselves untrustworthy anyways.
May 05, 20105:44pm EDT--
The NPT consists of a preamble and eleven articles. Although the concept of ¡°pillars¡± appears nowhere in the NPT, the treaty is nevertheless sometimes interpreted as a three pillar system, with an implicit balance among them:
non-proliferation,
disarmament, and
Article I:Each nuclear-weapons state (NWS) undertakes not to transfer, to any recipient, nuclear weapons, or other nuclear explosive devices, and not to assist any non-nuclear weapon state to manufacture or acquire such weapons or devices. Article II: Each non-NWS party undertakes not to receive, from any source, nuclear weapons, or other nuclear explosive devices; not to manufacture or acquire such weapons or devices; and not to receive any assistance in their manufacture. Article III: Each non-NWS party undertakes to conclude an agreement with the IAEA for the application of its safeguards to all nuclear material in all of the state¡¯s peaceful nuclear activities and to prevent diversion of such material to nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. Article IV: 1. Nothing in this Treaty shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the Parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with Articles I and II of this Treaty. 2. All the Parties to the Treaty undertake to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Parties to the Treaty in a position to do so shall also co-operate in contributing alone or together with other States or international organizations to the further development of the applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration for the needs of the developing areas of the world. Article VI. The states undertake to pursue ¡°negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament¡±, and towards a ¡°Treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control¡±. Article X. Establishes the right to withdraw from the Treaty giving 3 months¡¯ notice. It also establishes the duration of the Treaty (25 years before 1995 Extension Initiative). THERE IS NO SINGLE CREDITABLE EVIDENCE THAT IRAN FLOUTS NPT RULES OR DEVELOPES NUKES.
May 05, 20106:02pm EDT--
