China complains diplomat was assaulted in U.S.
2010-04-30 17:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Apr 20 2010
Fri, Apr 16 2010
Thu, Apr 15 2010
Tue, Apr 13 2010
Tue, Apr 13 2010
Fri  EDT
According to a CBS News report, the diplomat was arrested and injured on Saturday by Houston police, who were unaware he was a diplomat when they handcuffed him on the property of the Chinese consulate in Houston.
In a statement, the Houston mayor's office said three police officers had been placed on desk duty "pending an investigation into the arrest and injury" of the diplomat, Yu Boren, during the incident at the consulate's parking garage.
"The officers involved have stated that they were unaware the building Yu entered was the Chinese Consulate," the mayor's office said, adding the police chief is ensuring "all beat officers" receive addresses of every consulate in the city."
The State Department said it was investigating the incident, which is embarrassing to Washington because the embassies and consulates of foreign governments are treated as sovereign territory and diplomats typically enjoy immunity from prosecution by the host government.
In an entry on its website, the Chinese foreign ministry said "It is understood that China's Houston deputy consul and his family were harassed and assaulted while driving back to the consulate in their car."
"Protecting the safety of all foreign diplomatic and consular staff in the United States is essential," Jiang said in a statement on the ministry's website (
"We take it seriously," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told reporters. "It started as a police encounter based on either an expired plate or the lack of a license plate.
Beijing's relations with Washington have been strained recently over everything from the value of China's currency to U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
However, in a sign ties may be improving, Chinese President Hu Jintao attended a summit on nuclear security hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama in Washington earlier this month and the two met for 90 minutes on April 12.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; editing by Jeremy Laurence and Todd Eastham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Are there any details?
Apr 30, 20102:37pm EDT--
The Houston cops appear to have been heavyhanded. Perhaps this is the guy behind the ¡® Police barred from penis enlargement¡¯ story¡­¡­.
Apr 30, 20106:00pm EDT--
Haha, much ado about nothing. Although the idea of being unable to prosecute someone just because they are diplomats seems odd. But the cops should not be punished, they were just doing their jobs. And it seems China is just making a fuss over something they should just drop.Maybe I should try that one day, ¡°I am a diplomat from _____, refrain from giving me a speeding ticket officer!¡± Ahah, how many cops would buy that story?
Apr 30, 201011:43pm EDT--
