Somali pirates hijack China-bound oil tanker
2010-05-05 09:58:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, May 5 2010
Wed  EDT
"The oil is Chinese. It belongs to Unipec. It was sailing to (the Chinese) port of Ningbo," said a Russian shipping source.
Maritime experts said the Russian-owned tanker had a deadweight of 106,474 tonnes and a Russian shipping source said the vessel had begun its journey from Sudan with a cargo of 86,000 tonnes of oil.
"This morning we had an attack on a Liberian-flagged ship Moscow University in the northeastern horn of our operation," Commander Rear Admiral Jan Thornqvist of the European Union's Navfor naval force told reporters in the Kenyan port of Mombasa.
Somali sea bandits continue to outwit an international fleet of warships in the busy shipping lane linking Europe with Asia, raking in tens of millions of dollars in ransoms.
"Any attempt to rescue the ship will certainly endanger the crew. The ship will be docked at Garacad," Abdi said, adding it was to early to talk about a ransom.
A source at the Novorossiysk Shipping Company, which owns the tanker, said it was sailing from Sudan to China.
Some oil tankers are sailing around southern Africa and further east into the Indian Ocean away from Somalia's coastline to avoid the Gulf of Aden and pirates who are striking deeper out at sea, shipping experts say.
But many continue to run the gauntlet through the busy Gulf of Aden shipping lane, where warships operate convoys and have set up transit corridors. The tanker had not registered with the Maritime Security Center Horn of Africa, EU NAVFOR said.
The use of mother ships has enabled Somali pirates to strike as far as the Mozambique Channel and off India's coast in recent months, launching smaller boats known as skiffs against ships.
Last weekend, Somali insurgent group Hizbul Islam seized the pirate haven of Haradheere and pledged to take control of more towns in the region, the rebel group said.
(Additional reporting by Jonathan Saul in London, Abdi Guled in Mogadishu, George Obulutsa in Nairobi, Gleb Stolyarov in Moscow; Editing by Mark Heinrich)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sorry yo hear the pirates have managed once again to appropreate another oil tanker, but I am confident the the Russian Navel vessel will manage to recover it that is now in persuit¡­Good Luck in your mission.
May 05, 20108:15am EDT--
Why the Moscow Uni ship did not register with a regional EU/NATO body is another matter ¨C probably concerning other cargo matters¡­ So another great ship is held up by a bunch of rusty AK-47-wielding Africans? Where is an ass-kicking Han Solo when the world needs him? My mom shoots better than those idiots, and definitely negotiates better.
Why the Moscow Uni ship did not register with a regional EU/NATO body is another matter ¨C probably concerning other cargo matters¡­ So another great ship is held up by a bunch of rusty AK-47-wielding Africans? Where is an ass-kicking Han Solo when the world needs him? My mom shoots better than those idiots, and definitely negotiates better.
Cheers,
May 05, 201012:07am EDT--
