China eyes $3.5 billion Russian arms deal despite ire over Sukhoi copy
2013-03-27 11:26:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sun, Mar 24 2013
Fri, Mar 22 2013
Mon, Mar 18 2013
Fri, Mar 15 2013
Thu, Mar 14 2013
Russia's President Vladimir Putin (R) exchanges documents with his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping during a signing ceremony at the Kremlin in Moscow in this March 22, 2013 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Sergei Karpukhin/Files
Wed  EDT
China's state media reported this week that Moscow had agreed to supply 24 Sukhoi Su-35 fighters and four Amur-class conventional submarines to the People's Liberation Army (PLA), which would make it the first major arms deal between the two nations in almost 10 years.
The need to order some of Russia's most advanced military hardware also indicates that shortcomings remain with some of China's home-grown defense technologies, military analysts said.
"Currently the two sides are working on the relevant contracts and the results are likely to be produced by the end of the year," said Vassily Kashin, an expert on Russia's arms trade with China at Moscow's Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies.
The reports of the agreements and extensive coverage of the capabilities of the fighters and submarines on China's state television also appeared timed to enhance the domestic propaganda value of a visit to Moscow by President Xi Jinping last week, his first foreign trip since he formally took office earlier this month.
"This is all being done to pump up Xi's image," said Reuben Johnson, a Kiev-based military analyst and correspondent for Jane's Information Group. "If the deal had been ready, it would have been signed when Xi was in Russia."
Xi, as chairman of China's Central Military Commission, is also commander-in-chief of the PLA. He has carefully cultivated strong links with senior military commanders over the decades as he rose through the Communist Party hierarchy.
In a series of speeches and visits to military units since he was named Communist Party chief last November, Xi has sought to cast himself as a leader who will push for China's re-emergence as a great power with the military strength to defend its sovereignty and national interests.
Russia's defence minister, General Sergei Shoigu, welcomed Xi with full military honors and the Chinese head of state became the first foreign leader to inspect the Russian military command center in Moscow.
DEAL OR NO DEAL?
However, military experts in Russia said the arms deal had not been raised while Xi was in Moscow.
Preliminary agreements between the two sides had been signed late last year when former president Hu Jintao was still in office, they said.
But, this business began to sour in the mid-1990s when Russia accused Chinese contractors of reverse engineering what was then Russia's front-line fighter, the Su-27.
Russia sold more than 280 fighters from the Su-27 family to the PLA. There are also more than 160 of the reverse engineered version, known as the J-11, in service with the Chinese military.
Chinese aviation industry officials deny copying the Su-27, saying the J-11 superficially resembles the Russian fighter but relies heavily on locally derived technology and software.
There were also fears in Moscow that arming the PLA could pose a long-term threat to Russia if there was a deterioration in ties between the two countries that share a 4,300-km (2,600-mile) -long border.
However in recent years, sales have picked up again with steady deliveries of equipment including jet aircraft engines, helicopters and missiles.
The value of new contracts signed last year exceeded $2.3 billion, Kashin said.
This is despite the growth of defense manufacturing in China that has accompanied its rise to be the world's second-largest economy. Authoritative Chinese military analysts acknowledge that Russia's defense industry still retains a substantial lead over its Chinese counterpart.
"Although China has stepped up the development of new stealth fighters and submarines in recent years, some of these technologies are not mature in key areas," said a commentary published this week in the Chinese language edition of the official Global Times newspaper.
Aviation industry experts say that China's failure to build high performance jet engines for its fighters is one of the major reasons for its desire to buy the Su-35 in a deal that will be worth at least $1.5 billion.
"Engines continue to be the Achilles heel of the Chinese aerospace industry," said Johnson, the Jane's correspondent.
The new Russian fighter has more advanced and powerful engines than the Su-27, which give it enhanced performance and maneuverability, experts say.
But this time around, the Russian defense industry appears more confident that it can protect its intellectual property.
"It is understood that the Chinese will try to steal or copy any system they are given access to," said Kashin. "But, the amount of time they will need to do that might be very significant."
Kashin said one reason for China's earlier success in copying Russian weapons was that hardware, design data and technical experts remained in countries like Ukraine and Belarus after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
China was able to gain access to this knowhow while it reverse engineered the Su-27 and Su-33, a version of the Su-27 built for aircraft carrier operations.
"The new Russian systems cannot be found in the Ukraine or Belarus," Kashin said.
The prospective order for Amur-class submarines, estimated to be worth about $2 billion, also suggests that the PLA navy is dissatisfied with the latest versions of its home-grown Song and Yuan class conventional submarines.
Submarines are a top priority for the PLA as it attempts to build a force capable of dominating China's offshore waters and deterring the U.S. military from intervening in regional conflicts, analysts say.
Submarines would also be crucial in any territorial clash with Japan, which has a powerful navy and advanced anti-submarine warfare capability.
The PLA navy now has a fleet of more than 60, mostly conventional submarines, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies.
Most Western analysts believe the most capable vessels in this fleet are 12, Russian-made Kilo class submarines delivered from the late 1990s.
The Amur class is regarded as a significant improvement on the Kilo class with improved stealth, batteries and weapons.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China¡¯s enforcement of intellectual property is changing. Under the communist view of ¡°from each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs,¡± intellectual property rights could not be used to prevent people from having a reasonable standard of living or defending the nation. In addition, China viewed the West¡¯s patents as weapons the West used to keep China poor and weak. A reasonable standard of living has been achieved in China, and the nation can defend itself, so military purchases need not be copied for national defense. In addition, China passed the US in 2011 in patent applications, so China is beginning to benefit from the protection of intellectual property, and these benefits will increase with each passing year. Finally, the US industrial revolution was caused by the US stealing inventions and industrial processes from Britain. China¡¯s past actions are in the same company as US past actions. However, most aircraft will have similar shapes, owing to the nature of flight, so accusations of copying are likely to persist whether they are true or not. The truth may not come out until the similar planes are disassembled and the parts and avionics are compared. Given national security concerns among nations, this may not happen for awhile.
Mar 27, 20131:03pm EDT--
