Q+A: What does North Korea's Kim Jong-il want from China?
2010-05-02 19:53:00.0
(Reuters) - North Korea's iron ruler Kim Jong-il appears to have entered China by armored train for a rare trip abroad, the South's Yonhap news agency reported on Monday.
Following are some questions and answers about what would likely be a highly secretive visit by the reclusive Kim, whose few trips to China have often led to moves that decreased the security threat his state poses to the region.
WHAT WILL BE KIM'S PURPOSE OF THE VISIT?
A South Korean think-tank said the North's trade shrank last year for the first time in a decade after it was hit with the U.N. sanctions.
In 2009, bilateral trade between China and North Korea was worth $2.7 billion, a fall of 4 percent compared to 2008 numbers, according to Chinese customs statistics. North Korea's exports to China rose by 4.3 percent to $793 million.
Kim may also be looking to increase the flow of oil, food and goods that he depends upon to keep the economy going.
Kim may tour China's northeastern industrial region, spanning Jilin and Liaoning provinces and Tianjin, a port city near Beijing, looking for deals to boost business across the border.
Beijing may hope such a tour -- through a landscape not too different from North Korea's -- will encourage Kim to embrace Chinese-style economic reforms.
WHAT WOULD THE TRIP MEAN FOR SIX-WAY NUCLEAR TALKS?
China will expect something from Kim in return, and that would be for him to end his year-long boycott of nuclear disarmament talks hosted by Beijing that also involve the United States, Japan, South Korea and Russia.
The North's return to the talks could sharply ease tensions that spiked with the North's missile tests and its second nuclear test last year that triggered U.N. sanctions.
The U.N. sanctions, however, are not likely to be lifted just because the North returns to the table, South Korean and U.S. officials have said.
WHAT IS KIM LIKE AS A Traveling COMPANION?
He likes to have a large group of aides and security, and, according to a former body guard, some young women with him. Kim travels in secret aboard his personal armored train and his public appearances only are reported by his state's fawning media after he is safely back home.
Kim is believed to be averse to flying, having told aides about the possibility of getting shot down, "It'll be all over."
WHAT HAPPENED IN PREVIOUS TRIPS?
The last time Kim went to China was in January 2006, when he toured the country's commercial centers.
A previous trip to China in 2000 was soon followed by a summit in Pyongyang with South Korea's leader and the start of two major joint development projects in North Korea.
Another visit in 2004 led to a push for talks on the North's nuclear programs. That visit also included Chinese President Hu Jintao treating the guest to the renowned local treat of roast Peking Duck at a famous restaurant in the heart of Beijing.
(Additional reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing; Editing by Jon Herskovitz, Jonathan Thatcher and Sanjeev Miglani)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is making a big mistake enabling the continuity of the Kim regime based upon the wish for stability. North Korean now is analogous to Imperial Japan leading up to WWII, with a racial supremacist regime embargoed. But, worse, North Korean is enduring a terrible famine, is armed with nuclear and biological weapons, and the UN sanctions are specifically stifling the North Korean military. My strong suggestion is not to view the sinking of the South Korean warship by North Korea as an isolated incident, but as a foreshadowing.
May 06, 20101:41am EDT--
