China property bonds flying, but risks lurk
2010-04-28 07:11:00.0
(Reuters) - China's developers have been aggressively issuing U.S. dollar bonds this year, with the pace likely to quicken as they take advantage of low funding costs overseas and in anticipation of tighter monetary policy at home.
However, an oversupply in the bonds market and mounting debt problems in Greece could sap investor appetite in the near term, meaning that Chinese developers would have to price their bonds with a higher coupon rate, industry executives said.
So far, Chinese developers, such as Country Garden (
), have sold $2.3 billion U.S. dollar bonds so far this year, more than tripling from last year's $668.4 million, according to Thomson Reuters data.
More of such bond issues by Chinese developers are likely to happen over the next few months, and issues could total around $5 billion in the first half of this year, though they are watching how Greece's debt crisis evolves in the very short term.
Already, Chinese developers, such as Renhe Commercial Holdings (
), are planning on issues, which comes at a time when Beijing is setting restrictions on capital raising at home.
"The impact of lower risk appetite due to the Greek contagion will have more negative impact on the high yield space," said Desmond Soon, head of fixed income at DBS Asset Management in Singapore.
Of the four Chinese property firms that have sold dollar bonds so far this year, three issued the debt at par while Country Garden was under par.
Still, some analysts believe the opportunity is still there.
The debt woes in Greece are unlikely to affect Asia compared with other parts of the world as the region's economic and fiscal fundamentals are better off than those in Europe, they say.
"Before mid-2009, investors weren't keen to invest in bonds issued by property companies. But now, the balance sheets of these property companies are looking good again. Developers also have a lot more cash, unlike in 2008," said Michael Wu, an analyst at Fitch Ratings in Hong Kong.
On their Asian debut in mid-April, bonds issued by Chinese developer Country Garden (
) soared to as high as 101.50 cents on the dollar versus its issue price of 98.408. It is now trading at 98.75/99.25 mainly due to Greece's debt problems.
However, the property picture isn't entirely rosy.
On the other side of that bond issue, Country Garden's Hong Kong-listed stock lost a fifth of its value since the start of the year, hitting a one-year low as investors were worried about more curbs by the government to rein in the property sector.
Property stocks have been a key factor pushing down the stock markets in China and Hong Kong due to China's moves to cool the red-hot sector.
Chinese authorities, determined to prevent the property bubble from suddenly bursting, has unveiled certain measures, such as raising down payments for people buying second homes, and lifting mortgage rates.
"There is a huge supply pipeline coming up (in the debt market) and people will be quite selective," Annisa Lee, a credit analyst at Nomura International.
(See www.reutersrealestate.com for Reuters' global service for real estate professionals)
