Iran, at nuclear conference, hits out at bullies
2010-04-17 00:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran said China and Russia were represented at its own disarmament conference on Saturday, held in response to a summit in Washington to which it was not invited and intended to hit back at nuclear-armed "bullies."
Iran said 60 countries were represented, including "seven or eight" foreign ministers and the deputy foreign ministers of China and Russia -- the two major powers the West is pushing to accept new sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program.
U.S. President Barack Obama spoke to the leaders of both countries at his Washington summit on Monday and Tuesday where Iran's nuclear program was not on the official agenda but dominated talks on the sidelines.
With new sanctions looking ever more likely, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad used his address to the conference to hit back at the "bullies" who were trying to prevent Iran gaining the nuclear knowhow it says is for purely peaceful purposes.
"Unfortunately, the American government has both used nuclear weapons and has also officially threatened to use nuclear weapons," Ahmadinejad told delegates gathered at the conference center of the state broadcaster IRIB.
"When those who possess nuclear weapons and use those weapons have the unequal veto right in the highest body responsible for international security, does this not mean encouraging others to proliferate nuclear weapons in order to provide their national security?" he asked.
The foreign ministers of Iraq, Lebanon and Syria supported Iran's nuclear work, calling for Israel to be stripped off its nuclear arsenal. Israel is believed to have the Middle East's only nuclear arsenal. Iran refuses to recognize Israel.
"Israel should let U.N. inspectors to visit its nuclear facilities," Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshiyar Zebari told the conference, state TV reported.
A U.S. sanctions draft proposes new curbs on Iranian banking, a full arms embargo, tougher measures against Iranian shipping, moves against members of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and firms they control, and a ban on new investments in Iran's energy sector.
While Washington hopes the U.N. Security Council will approve the sanctions in the coming weeks, Ahmadinejad has said he will not beg to avoid them and that they did not pose a huge risk to the economy of the world's fifth largest oil exporter.
"The Security Council has openly turned into a tool for the implementation of the policies of a few bullying governments," Ahmadinejad told the conference.
Mehmanparast restated that Iran was prepared to swap its low-level enriched uranium for higher-grade fuel enriched abroad, a move which would help address fears about Iran's enrichment activities, but this must happen on Iranian soil.
"We want to exchange 3.5 percent enriched uranium, 1 tonne, for 100 kg (220 lb) of 20 percent enriched nuclear fuel inside Iran under the supervision of the IAEA and we are ready for interaction," Mehmanparast told Reuters on the sidelines of the conference.
Iran would continue cooperation with the IAEA even if a new round of sanctions were imposed, its envoy to the Vienna-based body said.
"We continued our cooperation with the IAEA in the past despite three imposed (U.N.) resolutions. This is our clear policy, even in that case (of new sanctions) we will continue our cooperation," Ali Asghar Soltanieh told Reuters.
(Writing by Robin Pomeroy; Editing by Jon Hemming)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Iran, please shut your mouth. Only China is allowed to complain about bullies
Apr 17, 201010:30am EDT--
I have no love for right wing, religious regimes, whether in Iran, Israel or the United States, but, I have to say that I have gained respect for Iran and the Iranian leadership for their determined and principled resistance to hypocritical, two-faced double standards from the U.S. and the ¡°West.¡± Remember, Saddam was supposedly lying about WMD too, but, it turned out that he was telling the truth and it was the Americans and British who were lying. Is it just possible that the Iranians are really telling the truth about their intentions? Just sayin¡¯. Now, if the Iranian regime would only be as principled in their behavior to their own people, then the international community could actually embrace them, but, for now, I think the hypocrites should just ¡°get off their back.¡±
Apr 17, 201010:39am EDT--
i love iran,persian and ahmainejad
Apr 17, 201010:46am EDT--
