U.S. nears decision on China currency probe
2010-04-19 18:26:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. Commerce Department could decide this week whether to launch a groundbreaking investigation into charges China is subsidizing exports of an aluminum product by undervaluing its currency, a government official said on Monday.
In a case that could further strain U.S.-China trade ties, U.S. producers of molded "aluminum extrusions" used by the automobile and construction industries filed a petition recently asking for steep duties on imports from China.
The petition's many complaints include a charge China subsidizes exports of aluminum extrusions by undervaluing its currency. It asks the Commerce Department to impose countervailing duties to offset that.
But industry groups have continued to include the charge in their petitions, arguing that Beijing gives exporters a subsidy by undervaluing its currency.
If Commerce agrees to investigate the matter, it would be several more months before it has to decide if China's currency practices are an illegal trade subsidy, and if so, how high a duty it should impose to offset them.
China, which defends its currency practices as an internal matter, would likely be upset by a formal Commerce Department decision to investigate whether its exchange-rate actions constitute a countervailable subsidy.
In recent weeks, the Treasury Department delayed a decision on whether China was "manipulating" its currency for an unfair trade advantage, in part to give Beijing more time to revalue its currency without being hit with that label.
Tim Truman, a spokesman for the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration, said he couldn't comment on specific details of the aluminum extrusion case.
"But we will be announcing our initiation decision on the petition as a whole" on Wednesday, Truman said of the decision whether or not to launch an anti-dumping and countervailing duty investigation.
Gilbert Kaplan, an attorney at King & Spalding representing the U.S. aluminum extrusion producers, said China's undervalued currency met the "three major tests" of a subsidy because it is financial contribution from the government that provides a benefit to a "specific" industry.
"This satisfies the kind of test that Commerce has been using for many, many years to show specificity. We put in strong economic evidence that it is specific," he said.
In February, a bipartisan group of 15 U.S. senators urged Commerce Secretary Gary Locke in a letter to treat China's currency practices as a subsidy under U.S. trade law.
On Monday, a coalition of labor and manufacturing groups urged Locke to initiate currency probes in both the aluminum extrusion and coated paper cases.
"There can be no doubt that China's large-scale intervention in the currency markets and the significant undervaluation of its currency acts as a subsidy to Chinese exporters to the U.S.," said Scott Paul, executive director for the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Andrew Hay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s about time this happened. China has been given too many free passes on it¡¯s currency, and it¡¯s about time action is taken. China has proven that they can¡¯t be trusted to do the responsible thing (revalue the yuan on their own terms ¨C they keep stalling), so now it is up to the international community to show China that Chinese politicians can¡¯t use their mercantilist economic policies to trample on other countries. It¡¯s time to tax China! Make them pay back all the GLOBAL damage they have caused!!!
Apr 19, 20105:05pm EDT--
of gold?
How many U.S. $$$¡¯s does it take to buy an ounce of gold? Am I missing something ?
Apr 19, 20105:38pm EDT--
2) China functions more like an astute businessman than a nation. It acquires commodities, storing much when prices are down, negotiates favorable futures contracts, etc.
3) The US can whine all it wants. Who is going to pressure China to do anything it doesn¡¯t want to do?
5) We¡¯ve made huge mistakes for decades, our budget is way out of whack, we have inept leadership fearful of resolving old, old problems like energy, health care, entitlements, educational achievement, balance of trade, loss of manufacturing base, dictating special interests, etc.
Apr 19, 20105:53pm EDT--
