New Century eyes $1.2 billion IPO
2010-04-21 23:42:00.0
(Reuters) - China's New Century Shipbuilding is looking to raise up to $1.24 billion in its Singapore listing, two sources told Reuters on Thursday, the biggest IPO by a Chinese company on the city-state's exchange.
), Asia's second-biggest listed bourse, after drying up during the financial crisis.
SGX had been popular with private Chinese companies in the past, but has struggled in the last two years to attract companies away from Shanghai or Hong Kong listings.
Investors had been put off by a number of corporate scandals in Singapore involving Chinese companies, but a strong rebound Chinese shares, known as S-shares, over the past year has encouraged investors back.
New Century's IPO is also Singapore's second-biggest listing since CapitaMalls Asia (
) late last year raised $2 billion in the city-state's biggest IPO in six years.
Analysts said the New Century, which had abandoned its plan to list in 2008 due to a market turmoil, may be attracted by the critical mass SGX has created for shipping and real estate investment trusts in Singapore.
"SGX has continued to maintain its dominance in shipping industry. This IPO would further prove that point," said Sanjay Jain, an analyst at Credit Suisse.
Singapore's Straits Times China index .FTFSTC has risen 82 percent in the past 12 months, outperforming a 61 percent rise in the broader Straits Times Index
New Century has set an indicative price of S$0.98 to S$1.19 a share and plans to sell 1.464 billion shares which could raise between $1.025 billion to $1.244 billion, according to the sources with direct knowledge of the deal. At the top end, that would equate to around S$1.74 billion.
The bulk of the offer, 976 million shares, was in primary shares, with the remainder in secondary shares.
The indicative price will give the Chinese shipbuilder a price-to-earnings ratio of 7 to 8.5 times 2010 estimated earnings, one source said.
), the other large Chinese shipbuilder listed on the Singapore Exchange, commands a price-to-earnings ratio of around 12 times.
"A valuation of 7-8.5 times is quite cheap," said Jason Saw, analyst at DMG & Partners, who covers Yangzijiang and Keppel Corp (
). (Additional reporting by Harry Suhartono; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
