China should let yuan appreciate: EU's Rehn
2010-04-17 08:17:00.0
(Reuters) - China should let its yuan currency appreciate to help ease imbalances in the global economy, European Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Saturday.
The yuan, or renminbi, is pegged to the U.S. dollar and European policymakers generally believe it is undervalued, giving China a trade advantage and creating savings and trade imbalances across the globe.
"We are of the opinion that it would be important that China would consider reforms in this respect so that we could see a certain rebalancing in the value of the renminbi," Rehn told reporters after a meeting of EU finance ministers.
In notes prepared for EU delegations for a meeting of finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of 20 countries in Washington on April 23, the EU calls for more yuan appreciation.
"China will have to remove obstacles to stronger domestic consumption: this may include a more extensive social safety net, measures to reduce corporate retained profits, and financial market and supervisory reforms. This should also be accompanied by an effective real appreciation of the renminbi," the document on the common EU position said.
(Reporting by Jan Strupczewski, editing by Dale Hudson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Sure, let the US offend China by being the first bully to the table and then waltz in and say, ¡°ditto¡±
Apr 17, 201010:31am EDT--
How is this bullying China????? The Chinese have been bullying global economics with their undervalued currency. It¡¯s about time that China¡¯s trade partners start to call China out on this issue. China needs to start ACTING like a responsible power, rather than just SAYING that they are.
Apr 17, 201011:46am EDT--
the US can bully china all it wants, we made their economy, and if they refuse to play by the rules, we can break it
Apr 17, 20105:51pm EDT--
