U.S. nears decision on China currency probe
2010-04-19 14:51:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. Commerce Department could decide this week whether to launch a groundbreaking investigation into charges that China is subsidizing exports of an aluminum product by undervaluing its currency, a government official said on Monday.
In a case that could further strain U.S.-China trade ties, U.S. producers of molded "aluminum extrusions" used by the automobile and construction industries filed a petition recently asking for steep duties on imports from China.
The petition's many complaints include a charge that China subsidizes exports of aluminum extrusions by undervaluing its currency; it asks the Commerce Department to impose countervailing duties to offset that.
But industry groups have continued to include the charge in their petitions, arguing that Beijing gives exporters a subsidy by undervaluing its currency.
China, which defends its currency practices as an internal matter, would likely be upset by a formal Commerce Department decision to investigate whether its exchange-rate actions constitute a countervailable subsidy.
In recent weeks, the Treasury Department delayed a decision on whether China was "manipulating" its currency for an unfair trade advantage, in part to give Beijing more time to revalue its currency without being hit with that label.
Tim Truman, a spokesman for the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration, said he couldn't comment on specific details of the aluminum extrusion case.
"But we will be announcing our initiation decision on the petition as a whole" on Wednesday, Truman said.
In February, a bipartisan group of 15 U.S. senators urged Commerce Secretary Gary Locke in a letter to treat China's currency practices as a subsidy under U.S. trade law.
On Monday, a coalition of labor and manufacturing groups urged Locke to initiate currency probes in both the aluminum extrusion and coated paper cases.
"There can be no doubt that China's large-scale intervention in the currency markets and the significant undervaluation of its currency acts as a subsidy to Chinese exporters to the U.S.," said Scott Paul, executive director for the Alliance for American Manufacturing.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Jan Paschal)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s about time something is done about this. China has been holding the world economy hostage with it¡¯s manipulated currency for too long now. If they aren¡¯t going to act responsibly, then they need face the consequences of tarriffs.
Apr 19, 20102:37pm EDT--
SunnyZ, I won¡¯t disagree with you with American involvement in Colonization of China, but you conveniently leave out Japan. The rest of your statement is ridiculous but keep drinking your American hating kool-aid. China has been deliberately devaluing it¡¯s currency for decades, which is forbidden by the WTO which China agreed too, that¡¯s costing many countries around the world jobs and you respond like a little child. China will not continue 10% growth for ever and many of the problems Beijing is hiding now will bubble to the surface. China has a lot of problems and I wouldn¡¯t bet on them seamlessly bouncing it¡¯s self to the world top economy. In regards to military, I agree invading China is not really an option, but who would want too? In addition, China has no ability to invade the United States or any of it¡¯s allied countries, I fail to see your point. The point is, if and when trading with China becomes fair, people will realize manufacturing in China is not as glorious as its made out too be.
Apr 19, 201011:41pm EDT--
