China says yuan appreciation expectations rising
2010-04-19 01:56:00.0
(Reuters) - China might see increased foreign exchange inflows this year as expectations of yuan appreciation mount, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) said on Monday.
"The relatively higher domestic interest rate and mounting expectations for yuan appreciation will increase the scale of cross-border carry trade," the report said.
The currency regulator sounded an optimistic note on a greater surplus in China's international balance of payments due to an expected narrowing of its trade surplus and a quicker pace in outbound investments.
"The country's international balance of payments situation will be further improved this year, with the momentum of widening trade surplus continuing to ease," the report added.
SAFE revised the 2009 current account surplus to $297.1 billion from the $284.1 billion figure issued earlier this year, while the capital and financial account surplus was also revised up to $144.8 billion from $109.1 billion.
"China's economy is still facing some pronounced problems, as there are many uncertain factors in the global financial market, and it is a big challenge to transform the economic growth model," SAFE said.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin, Aileen Wang and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Apr 19, 20106:52am EDT--
@ Storyburn: First of all, it¡¯s the US, the EU, India, Australia, Brazil, Indonesia, and many African nations who are complaining about China¡¯s currency manipulation. Secondly, China needs to stop SAYING that they are a responsible power, and start ACTING like it!!! Stop appeasing China!!!
Apr 19, 20109:52am EDT--
@ SunnyZ: And what news source are you getting your news from??? The China People¡¯s Daily??? Or Xinhua??? If you read any newspaper that isn¡¯t censored by the Chinese government, then you¡¯ll see how infuriated the world is with China¡¯s mercantilist economic policies.
Apr 19, 201012:20pm EDT--
