Time not ripe for China to end dollar peg: adviser
2010-04-19 12:39:00.0
(Reuters) - The conditions are not ripe for China to unshackle the yuan from its 21-month-old peg to the dollar, a senior government economist said in comments published on Monday.
Zhao Jinping, the deputy head of foreign trade research with the Development Research Center (DRC), a think-tank under China's cabinet, said Beijing was not comfortable enough right now to let the yuan rise because its export sector had not fully recovered.
"As for short-term policies like tax, interest rates and exchange rates, the conditions for them to change in the near term do not exist," Zhao wrote in an opinion piece that was published on the China Economic Times, a newspaper run by the DRC.
But Zhao added: "If China's exports and imports maintain rapid growth through the second and the third quarter, China can exit (from the anti-crisis policies) in an appropriate manner."
Strong signals of a thaw in relations between Washington and Beijing have fanned expectations that China may resume appreciation of its currency soon, or even conduct another one-off revaluation.
Benchmark dollar/yuan one-year non-deliverable forwards were bid at 6.6270 at midday, implying 12-month yuan appreciation of 3 percent.
Zhong Shan, a vice commerce minister, was quoted over the weekend by Information Times, a Guangdong-based newspaper, as saying that China and the United States had reached an initial agreement to keep the yuan exchange rate "basically stable."
The ministry denied the report on Monday, saying through the official Xinhua news agency that Zhong had not made such comments and that China would keep "basic stability" in its trade policies, including the yuan.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Singapore, Japan, the United States, the EU, Korea, and even some South American economies are saying ¡°it is time.¡± China peg on the dollar is bringing down global growth. The demand for imported goods in china is huge due to the rapid development of the country. It is time the Chinese government allows the Chinese people to actually benefit from this development and increase their living standards with a higher valued RMB. So far, the only ones benefiting are the companies that export from China. The demand in China is high, but it would be higher with an accurately valued Yuan. Therefore, the peg on the US dollar is bringing down world GDP potential. China is basically attacking all other nations in the world because of their arrogant stand on becoming an export-oriented, mercantilist nation.
Apr 18, 201012:54am EDT--
Well, if you¡¯re going to act like Goldilocks, you¡¯d better be darn cute
Apr 19, 20106:54am EDT--
