China expresses serious concern over Korean peninsula
2013-04-03 04:30:00.0
(Reuters) - A Chinese diplomat has met ambassadors from the United States and both Koreas to express "serious concern" over the situation on the Korean peninsula, China's Foreign Ministry said on Wednesday, following a spike in tension.
"Yesterday afternoon, Deputy Foreign Minister Zhang Yesui met the ambassadors of North and South Korea and the United States and expressed serious concern about the present situation on the peninsula," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei told reporters at a daily briefing.
"In the present situation, China believes all sides must remain calm and exercise restraint and not take actions which are mutually provocative and must certainly not take actions which will worsen the situation," he said.
North Korea has threatened a nuclear strike on the United States and missile attacks on its Pacific bases after new U.N. sanctions were imposed for the country's third nuclear weapons test in February. It has also said it was in a state of war with South Korea.
In response, the United States has bolstered its forces in the region. Extra deployments have also coincided with annual military exercises with South Korea, which North Korea says are a prelude to an invasion.
China hopes all sides can resolve that issue through talks, Hong said.
China has long been accustomed to living with the North as an unpredictable neighbor, which acts as a bulwark against the United States.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Writing by Michael Martina; Editing by Raju Gopalakrishnan and Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I do not believe that if hostilities break out China will enter a new war on the Korean penisula. China is no longer the simple nation it was at the time of the Korean War, and no U. S. President would order crossing the border into China, as long as China stays in China or what a general proposed in the Korean War which was to make the bordcer with China radioactive, which would have threatened China with future nuclear contamination. Frankly I am certain that China would rather be next door to South Korea than North Korea.
Apr 03, 20135:49am EDT--
The days when North Korea was a bulwark are long gone. Now it is merely an embarrassing and expensive deadweight for China. South Korea, on the other hand, supplies 26% of China¡¯s imports.
Apr 03, 20138:47am EDT--
