Latest China quake brings school safety back to light
2010-04-16 21:06:00.0
(Reuters) - In the aftermath of this week's deadly earthquake in China, the schoolbags strewn in courtyards and a blackboard hanging incongruously over rubble have once again put the safety of China's schools in question.
Most of the schoolchildren in Gyegu, a wind-swept town deep in the Tibetan plateau, were able to run out of their classrooms before the buildings collapsed. Many teachers said their survival was a matter of luck and timing.
With fewer dead in schools, admittedly in a far more remote and lightly populated area, the issue is less of a rallying cry after this earthquake, in which at least 791 people died, than in a devastating quake in Sichuan province in 2008.
Then, some towns lost hundreds of children in crumpled classrooms.
Xu Haiying, a teacher at the Yushu No. 3 primary school, said many of her students escaped because they were still on their way to class when Wednesday's magnitude 6.9 quake struck before 8 am.
"We have not managed to calculate the number of dead school children. We think there are still bodies beneath the rubble but we have no tools to dig," Xu said.
Teachers have contacted about 1,000 of their 3,000 students, who were mostly boarders from rural or nomadic families, she added.
"On the day of the earthquake, we just used our hands to dig through the rubble and found some bodies. I feel there are still bodies there, but we can't do anything since we have no machinery or manpower," Xu said.
A newly-built building at Xu's school was damaged by the quake but did not collapse. Another three-storey building did tumble, along with other older one-storey classrooms.
The issue of collapsed schools is a sensitive one for the Chinese government, due to the anger and accusations of corruption after the Sichuan quake, in which school buildings collapsed while many of those surrounding remained standing.
In some regions of China, especially the poorer areas, school safety is a race against time, as better constructed buildings gradually replace older ones.
In that race against time, survival can be a matter of luck.
In the 2008 temblor in Sichuan's Xiang'e, where all but four children died at one school, the one building which did not crumble was a brand new one on the verge of completion and not yet being used.
At another Sichuan school, the classrooms stood but dorms collapsed on napping children. In yet another, the dormitory held but classes had already begun in an older building that shook to pieces.
By contrast, Yushu was lucky. At the county orphanage, all the children were eating breakfast in a stronger building or assembling outside when the dormitories completely collapsed into mounds of crumbly concrete, maths teacher Zhou Weibang said.
"The older buildings fell, but the newer ones stayed up," he said, adding that only six of the 168 children at the orphanage were injured, one seriously.
(Writing by Lucy Hornby; Editing by Jerry Norton)
