G20 polite on China forex as yuan decision eyed
2010-04-23 20:12:00.0
(Reuters) - After months under pressure from the United States, Europe and other economic powers, China's controversial yuan currency peg drew no fire on Friday from world finance leaders.
Finance ministers and central bankers from the Group of 20 developed and emerging economies, including China, skated over one of the main bones of contention in international finance.
That could be a sign that policymakers are expecting China to allow the yuan to resume its rise in its own time. Many officials say there is no point adding to outside pressure now, which would anyway be counter-productive.
"There wasn't any talk about the yuan," Japanese Finance Minister Naoto Kan said. "I know everyone is interested. But it wasn't discussed openly at the G7 or G20 probably because everyone there knew that China won't like that very much."
The heavyweights of the industrialized and developing worlds are just embarking on a process of rebalancing the global economy, "so we will for the time being watch how the situation unfolds," Canadian Finance Minister Jim Flaherty said.
A joint statement at the end of the G20 meeting made no direct mention of currencies and Brazil, among countries expressing concern about the yuan in the run-up to the meeting, said the main problem for his country was a weak U.S. dollar.
The near silence about China's foreign exchange policy, which many U.S. economists say undervalues the yuan by as much as 40 percent, is a contrast to just a few weeks ago.
Under pressure domestically on the issue, U.S. President Barack Obama took the rare step in March of calling on China to move to a more market-oriented exchange rate to help foster a more sustainable world economy.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner then made a surprise trip to Beijing and signs have emerged that China is preparing to allow the yuan to resume strengthening against the dollar, something it suspended nearly two years ago as the global financial crisis brewed.
"I'm going to repeat what I've said before -- nothing new or different in how I respond to that basic question," Geithner said, when asked about the yuan. "This is China's choice. And I believe that China will decide it's in their interest to renew the (currency) reform process... suspended during the crisis."
Behind the softer tone is a growing sense among U.S. policymakers that public pressure on China on how it should run its currency policy will yield little, a stance long held by Japan and shared by some Asian countries.
"I would be a little reluctant to offer advice to another country about what the value their currency should be," Sri Lankan Central Bank Governor Ajith Nivard Cabraal told Reuters.
"Rather than requesting others to change their policies, we need to look at our own policies to see how we compete."
"(Opponents of yuan appreciation argue that) the people who want to have revaluation are just succumbing to foreign pressure and not representing Chinese interests, so it makes it very difficult for the proponents of currency appreciation to gain a consensus in favor of appreciation," said Nicholas Lardy, an expert on China's economy at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
So, these ¡°leaders¡± didn¡¯t want to talk about China¡¯s currency manipulation because they knew that ¡°China wouldn¡¯t like it very much.¡± ??? How are these people allowed to ¡°lead.¡± This generation of leaders is spineless in the face of dictatorships. The world needs to stop appeasing communist dictators who spit in the face of freedom and equality. China will only continue to bully the international community with their mercantilist economic policies (like their currency manipulation). The only way to stop dictatroships is to stand up to them. Iran, N. Korea, and China are the most destabilizing dictatorships in the world. These countries only respond to tough actions! It¡¯s time to tax China to take back what their currency manipulation has stolen from the global community!
Apr 24, 20107:33pm EDT--
@ SunnyZ: So, you¡¯re saying that Chinese sponsorship, support, and protection of the Sudanese genocide is benefiting the world??? It¡¯s funny how similar these actions are to Hitlers Holocaust and the Rwandan genocide. The blood of millions of masacred people (Sudanese, Chinese, Tibetans, Uigyrs, Vietnamese) are on YOUR hands because of your blind support of the Chinese dictatorship¡­¡­yes it is a dictatorship. I would simply recommend that you stop reading the Chinese propoganda and actually try to read some of the information that China blocks it¡¯s own citizens from reading. If China is so pure and noble, then what do they have to hide from their own people???????? Think about that!
Apr 24, 201010:26pm EDT--
Furthermore, I laugh at your assumption that China will rule the world. This shows a clear ignorance to the problems facing China. Because China, in it¡¯s present form, will never be able to achieve it¡¯s goals of global supremacy. Why? Government corruption, ecnomic inefficiency, gender imbalances (which will lead to massive social unrest), aging population / shrinking labor market, rising costs, reliance on exports, addiction to property bubbles, lack of natural resources, pollution, lack of drinking water, civil war (possible with Taiwan, Tibet, Xinjiang, and the increasing numbers of dienchanted Han Chinese)and most of all¡­¡­¡­the contradiction in ideology (communism trying to borrow from capitalism and free markets). IF China is able to solve all these problems, they might have a chance at ¡°ruling the world.¡± GOOD LUCK!!!
Apr 24, 201010:50pm EDT--
