Geithner says will press China on fair trade rules
2010-04-13 15:53:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Apr 8 2010
Tue, Apr 6 2010
Tue, Apr 6 2010
Tue, Apr 6 2010
Tue, Apr 6 2010
Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner listens to a reporter's question during a news conference at the United Steelworkers headquarters in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 31, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Jason Cohn
Tue  EDT
Interviewed during an appearance before the American Society of Newspaper Editors, Geithner repeated that it was important for China to move toward a flexible currency rate regime and added that he felt Beijing understands it was in that nation's own interest to do so.
"We have an enormously productive, beneficial relationship with China today," he said. "It's hugely important to companies large and small across the country."
Geithner said that by maintaining a fixed currency rate, China effectively is losing control of its own interest-rate policy and said that would change if it moved to a more flexible currency system.
"It's China's choice to do it but I believe ... that they will decide it's in their interests to move," Geithner said.
"As a strong, large, independent, growing economy it doesn't make sense for that country to run a monetary policy, exchange rate regime that effectively lets the Federal Reserve set interest rates for their economy as a whole."
Geithner, who recently made a brief visit to Beijing, said the United States wants and will push for fair "rules of the game" in trade with China and other countries.
"We will be very forceful and aggressive in making sure we are promoting changes for the prospects of a level playing field in those markets," Geithner said.
China's President Hu Jintao is in Washington for nuclear summit talks and met with President Barack Obama and Geithner on Monday. Hu told Obama China won't be pushed on currency reform and would base any decision on revaluing its yuan on its own economic needs.
In wide-ranging questioning, Geithner also said it was "completely untenable" to take a position that the drive toward a U.S. regulatory overhaul should be slowed down as some Republican opponents claim.
that lawmakers, just back from a recess and starting to work on financial regulation, will agree on rules to lessen reckless risk-taking that helped create the crisis.
(Reporting by Glenn Somerville; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Somebody needs to stand up to China¡¯s currency manipulation, because they are becoming too arrogant with their foreign policy. They say they will adjust the rate at their own rate and will not bend to outside pressure. Well, sadly enough, they haven¡¯t done it by themselves for the last 10 years when it was needed, so why should we believe them now? It¡¯s time for sanctions and tarriffs against China! Send them the message that the world is serious about their currency manipulation!
Apr 13, 20103:12pm EDT--
We need to take a strong stand on the manipulation of yuan (rmb) with China. All we are getting at this point from the Chinese government is lip service. If we don¡¯t put some type of time table on when they plan on letting there currency float on the open market, then this policy will continue. We need to put tarrifs in place at some point if they do not comply.
Apr 13, 20103:37pm EDT--
I hope China revalue the RMB 20% to 40% higher at one announcement and float the RMB. It would please you guys but there will be profit takings and the RMB will come down again. What¡¯s next guys? Stop speculation or let speculators decide which way competitiveness of the USA should be heading?
Apr 13, 201012:17am EDT--
