Big powers say Iran sanctions talks constructive
2010-04-14 19:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Big power envoys said they held constructive talks on Wednesday over new U.N. sanctions to try to halt Iran's nuclear program, but diplomats forecast weeks of haggling over a text the Security Council can pass.
"We got into the substance. We are moving forward and we'll have, of course, other meetings," French Ambassador Gerard Araud told reporters after the three-hour meeting.
"We started to negotiate on the basis of the text. I think the six countries are on board," he added, without elaborating or saying when the next meeting would take place.
Ambassadors from the five permanent Security Council members and Germany met at the U.S. mission to the United Nations for their second meeting in a week since China, which has close economic ties with Iran, agreed to join the talks.
The ambassadors of China and Russia, seen as the countries least keen on sanctions, were less upbeat than Araud but called the talks constructive. "We have had a better understanding of each other's positions," said China's Li Baodong.
The envoys were discussing a U.S. draft resolution, first circulated weeks ago, that provides for a fourth round of sanctions on Iran for its refusal to stop uranium enrichment. The West accuses Tehran of seeking to produce atomic arms but Tehran says it aims only to generate electricity.
The draft proposes new curbs on Iranian banking, a full arms embargo, tougher measures against Iranian shipping, moves against members of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and a ban on new investments in Iran's energy sector.
Diplomats told Reuters this week that China's Li had indicated displeasure at the proposals affecting Iran's energy sector at a first meeting last Thursday with his U.S., British, French, German and Russian counterparts.
U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates, visiting Peru, hinted Washington might not insist on the toughest possible sanctions, saying the importance of a resolution was "less the specific content than the isolation of Iran by the rest of the world."
One diplomat in New York with knowledge of the negotiations put the chances of an agreement in April at only 25-30 percent. Diplomats see little chance of a resolution in May when Lebanon, whose government includes Iranian-backed Hezbollah, chairs the Security Council, and say June seems more likely.
"We're right at the beginning of the discussion on a text here, and it should be no surprise that they're quite far apart," the diplomat said, speaking before Wednesday's talks.
"The Chinese want something much, much weaker and much, much narrower" than the U.S. draft, he added.
Diplomats say Russia is more keen than China to slap new sanctions on Iran, but it, too, wants to water down the text.
Even if the permanent five can agree, weeks could be spent in further negotiations with the 10 temporary members of the council, three of whom -- Lebanon, Turkey and Brazil -- have indicated they may abstain or vote against a resolution.
But Brazil's President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva said on Wednesday he would say during a visit to Tehran next month that Iran would suffer the consequences if it seeks nuclear arms.
U.S. Under Secretary of State William Burns told a Senate hearing on Wednesday China was likely to agree to sanctions, but it would be "very difficult" to get Beijing or Moscow to agree to cut off refined petroleum products to Iran.
That proposal is backed by many U.S. lawmakers. Democratic and Republican party leaders in the House of Representatives both said on Wednesday they intended soon to finish legislation that would impose sanctions on Iran's gasoline suppliers.
Oil industry sources said on Wednesday state-run Chinaoil had sold a total of about 600,000 barrels of gasoline worth around $55 million to the Islamic Republic.
German carmaker Daimler said, however, that it would almost entirely sever business ties with Iran because of what chief executive Dieter Zetsche called "the policies of the current Iranian leadership.
Iran could produce enough highly enriched uranium for a single nuclear bomb in as little as one year but would probably need three to five years to build a deliverable weapon, top Pentagon officials said on Wednesday.
(Additional reporting by Adam Entous and Susan Cornwell in Washington, Phil Stewart in Lima and Carmen Munari in Sao Paulo; Editing by Vicki Allen)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Iraq had ¡°WMD¡±s. How long before we are told Iran has
Iraq had ¡°WMD¡±s. How long before we are told Iran has
a ¡°Nuke¡±? Ground Hog Day 2010. I¡¯m just bored, aren¡¯t
Apr 14, 20103:37pm EDT--
IT IS CLEAR BY NOW US ANTI IRAN TIRADE IS ONLY ON BEHALF OF UNBREAKABLE BOND ISRAEL, NOT THE WORLD. But, Iran¡¯s sanction will hurt not only The well being of the Iranian people as well as the normal economic, trade, financial and energy exchanges between Iran and many countries in the world. Washington¡¯s ¡°double standard¡± on Iran, a signatory to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), while selling ¡°nuclear technology to Israel and India,¡± a non-signatory to the NPT. Iran is a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is at the moment largely in compliance with it, has no nuclear arsenal, and does not even have a nuclear weapons program. (The treaty allows countries to enrich uranium for fuel, which is all that Iran is known to be doing). Yet the US has an extensive regime of economic sanctions on Iran, along with UN Security Council sanctions, both of which Obama is attempting to ratchet up. Iran is a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is at the moment largely in compliance with it, has no nuclear arsenal, and does not even have a nuclear weapons program. (The treaty allows countries to enrich uranium for fuel, which is all that Iran is known to be doing). Yet the US has an extensive regime of economic sanctions on Iran, along with UN Security Council sanctions, both of which Obama is attempting to ratchet up. In contrast, Israel is actively constructing more and more nuclear warheads, which it is stockpiling, and which its leaders occasionally brandish at other Middle Eastern states. The Israeli arsenal, in turn, spurs a Middle East arms race¡­ It is the most blatant double standard to threaten Iran with crippling sanctions and a nuclear strike, and to ignore Israel¡¯s massive nuclear weapons program, America exerts its weight once again as the puppet of Israel U.S. leaders often claim that they¡¯re acting against Iran on behalf of the whole Middle East region, implying that their strategy has the backing of Arab governments. Washington hawks insist that the Arabs would applaud if the U.S. bombed Iran, utilising the silence of the Arab regimes to speak as if on their behalf. That underscores the importance of the Arab voices that have begun challenging the idea that a confrontation with Iran could produce any positive outcome. At last Arab League summit, the secretary general Amr Moussa called for the stand-off to be tackled through Arab dialogue with Iran. ¡°We need to see where we differ and where we disagree with Iran and how to deal with that,¡± Mr Moussa said. ¡°Iran is not an enemy but a fraternal state and dialogue will help bring about peace and stability in the region.¡±
IT IS CLEAR BY NOW US ANTI IRAN TIRADE IS ONLY ON BEHALF OF UNBREAKABLE BOND ISRAEL, NOT THE WORLD. But, Iran¡¯s sanction will hurt not only The well being of the Iranian people as well as the normal economic, trade, financial and energy exchanges between Iran and many countries in the world. Washington¡¯s ¡°double standard¡± on Iran, a signatory to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), while selling ¡°nuclear technology to Israel and India,¡± a non-signatory to the NPT. Iran is a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is at the moment largely in compliance with it, has no nuclear arsenal, and does not even have a nuclear weapons program. (The treaty allows countries to enrich uranium for fuel, which is all that Iran is known to be doing). Yet the US has an extensive regime of economic sanctions on Iran, along with UN Security Council sanctions, both of which Obama is attempting to ratchet up. Iran is a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, is at the moment largely in compliance with it, has no nuclear arsenal, and does not even have a nuclear weapons program. (The treaty allows countries to enrich uranium for fuel, which is all that Iran is known to be doing). Yet the US has an extensive regime of economic sanctions on Iran, along with UN Security Council sanctions, both of which Obama is attempting to ratchet up. In contrast, Israel is actively constructing more and more nuclear warheads, which it is stockpiling, and which its leaders occasionally brandish at other Middle Eastern states. The Israeli arsenal, in turn, spurs a Middle East arms race¡­ It is the most blatant double standard to threaten Iran with crippling sanctions and a nuclear strike, and to ignore Israel¡¯s massive nuclear weapons program, America exerts its weight once again as the puppet of Israel U.S. leaders often claim that they¡¯re acting against Iran on behalf of the whole Middle East region, implying that their strategy has the backing of Arab governments. Washington hawks insist that the Arabs would applaud if the U.S. bombed Iran, utilising the silence of the Arab regimes to speak as if on their behalf. That underscores the importance of the Arab voices that have begun challenging the idea that a confrontation with Iran could produce any positive outcome. At last Arab League summit, the secretary general Amr Moussa called for the stand-off to be tackled through Arab dialogue with Iran. ¡°We need to see where we differ and where we disagree with Iran and how to deal with that,¡± Mr Moussa said. ¡°Iran is not an enemy but a fraternal state and dialogue will help bring about peace and stability in the region.¡±
A senior member of the Iranian parliament has reassured regional Arab countries that Tehran¡¯s nuclear work will not pose a threat to them.
http://www.presstv.ir/detail.aspx?id=122784&sectionid=351020104 SAUDIS DENY DISCUSSING PRESSURE ON CHINA OVER IRAN WITH US
(AFP) Mar 12, 2010
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405270230 3591204575169980169518418.html?mod=WSJ_hps_MIDDL EThirdNews
Apr 14, 20106:10pm EDT--
LIP, those are a lot of words. Boy. Iran needs to become a lot less scary to everybody but the crazies
Apr 14, 201010:41pm EDT--
