Starbucks eyes more stores in China, India
2010-04-13 03:40:00.0
Starbucks eyes more stores in China, India | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Starbucks eyes more stores in China, India
Mon, Apr 5 2010
Sun, Apr 4 2010
Sun, Apr 4 2010
Wed, Mar 24 2010
Wed, Mar 24 2010
Starbucks Chief Executive Howard Schultz attends a news conference in Tokyo April 13, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Yuriko Nakao
Tue  EDT
) sees the potential for thousands of stores in Greater China, where it currently has around 700, and is also keen on expanding in India and Vietnam, the head of the world's largest coffee retailer said.
"We've built 700 stores in Greater China in 10 years. I think the next 10 years will be greater than that," Chief Executive Howard Schultz told Reuters in an interview.
"At some point in the near future we will make the right announcement and the right partner in India," he said. "We are enthused about India. We are enthused about Vietnam."
Starbucks will introduce Via in Japan on Wednesday following launches in the United Kingdom last month and the United States and Canada last year, taking aim at established instant coffee leaders Nestle SA (
"There hasn't been much innovation in 50 years with soluble coffee," Schultz said on a visit to Tokyo to promote the product, which will be sold at its nearly 900 stores in the country. "We think we are sitting on a multi-billion dollar opportunity."
The iced version will be introduced in late June in the United States and Canada, a spokeswoman later confirmed.
Instant coffee is far more popular in Japan than in the United States. Japanese bought $2.3 billion worth of instant coffee in 2009, making its market more than 3 times the size of the U.S., according to Euromonitor.
Schultz said that it will in the future look to distribute the product through grocery stores and other retail channels in Japan, similar to its strategy for the United States.
"A product like this over time has to go beyond our stores," he said, adding that it was "time to start growing the company again" in Japan, where it has slowed the pace of store expansion in the past few years.
"We'll release our Q2 profits next week and the momentum in Starbucks' business is pretty good," he said.
