Obama presses Iran, gains nuclear summit pledges
2010-04-13 19:09:00.0
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama pressed for bold, swift sanctions on Iran on Tuesday but acknowledged China has concerns about the economic impact and said negotiations are difficult.
Ending an unprecedented 47-nation nuclear security summit, Obama won pledges from world leaders to take joint action to prevent terrorist groups from getting nuclear weapons, steps he said will make the United States and the world safer.
"Today is a testament of what is possible when nations come together in a spirit of partnership to embrace our shared responsibility and confront a shared challenge," Obama said.
Iran's nuclear standoff with the West cast a shadow over the summit, and it was clear that some major hurdles remain on the road to imposing a new round of U.N. sanctions on Iran over its alleged pursuit of nuclear weapons.
A day after discussing Iran with Chinese President Hu Jintao, Obama expressed gratitude that China had agreed to help negotiate a new U.N. sanctions resolution on Iran but said Beijing still has concerns about sanctions.
He said he had argued to Hu that there must be consequences for Iran's violation of its international obligations. Tehran denies trying to develop an atomic weapon, saying it wants peaceful nuclear power for electricity.
"The Chinese are obviously concerned about what ramifications this might have on the economy generally," Obama said. "Iran is an oil-producing state."
He declined to repeat the timetable on Tuesday but said he did not want a long, drawn-out process that takes months, and that he wants to "see us move forward boldly and quickly."
"I think that we have a strong number of countries on the Security Council who believe this is the right thing to do. But I think these negotiations can be difficult and I am going to push as hard as I can...," he said.
Beijing stressed on Tuesday it wanted any Security Council resolution to promote a diplomatic way out of the nuclear standoff. Iran, which is not attending the conference, is China's third-largest crude oil supplier.
Yukiya Amano, head of the U.N. nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, told Reuters he was concerned Iran might reduce cooperation with U.N. inspectors if further sanctions are imposed on it.
Obama opened a window on his "frank" talks with Hu regarding U.S. concerns about China's currency, which Washington has long felt is valued too low.
"I think China rightly sees the issue of currency as a ... sovereign issue. I think they are resistant to international pressure when it comes to them making decisions about their currency policy and monetary policy," he said.
The summit's final communique promised greater efforts to block "non-state actors" like al Qaeda from obtaining the building blocks for atomic weapons for "malicious purposes."
While the summit communique included no mechanism to enforce the measures, Obama defended the agreement, saying he believed world leaders were taking their commitments seriously.
Absent from the summit was North Korea, whose nuclear weapons program is a persistent thorn in the side to the West. Summit leaders sent a clear message to Pyongyang by announcing South Korea would host the next nuclear security summit in 2012.
The summit produced several tangible dividends aimed at preventing what Obama said was the world's top security threat -- the risk of terrorists obtaining even a small portion of the estimated 2,000 tons of plutonium and highly enriched uranium that exists in dozens of countries.
Washington and Moscow signed a deal to reduce stocks of excess weapons-grade plutonium. The United States, Canada and Mexico agreed to work together with the International Atomic Energy Agency to convert Mexico's research reactor from the use of highly enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium fuel.
Ukraine, which in 1994 gave up nuclear arms inherited in the collapse of the Soviet Union, announced it would get rid of its highly enriched uranium, and Canada said it would return spent nuclear fuel to the United States, its supplier.
The summit marked a test of Obama's ability to galvanize global action on a broader nuclear agenda that calls for eventually ridding the planet of atomic weapons.
But some countries are skeptical about the seriousness of the nuclear terrorism threat, viewing it more of an American preoccupation after the September 11, 2001, attacks by al Qaeda.
Despite efforts to keep a lid on tensions, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh made clear in closed-door remarks that his country still had concerns about the potential proliferation threat from India's nuclear-armed regional rival, Pakistan.
The gathering capped a flurry of nuclear diplomacy for Obama, who has made arms control a signature foreign policy issue. He signed a new nuclear arms reduction treaty with Russia last week and unilaterally announced the United States would limit its use of nuclear weapons, a plan that came under fire from conservative critics.
(Additional reporting by Matt Spetalnick, Tabassum Zakaria, Emanuelle Jarry, Andrew Quinn, Paul Eckert, Dan Williams, Patricia Zengerle, Jeff Mason, Ross Colvin, Andreas Rinke, Phil Stewart, Lou Charbonneau, Alister Bull in Washington; Editing by David Storey and Eric Walsh)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Apr 12, 20108:39pm EDT--
No need, you can just call them ¡®Terrorists¡¯ and go in and invade when they get out of line or have something you want to take from them. Afterall its what you¡¯ve done with every other country, all this talk of a Nuclear Attack is just build up for when America finally nukes itself and claims Terrorists did it. Terrorists stole my lunch money also.
Apr 13, 20104:24am EDT--
When the question of signing nuclear non-proliferation with nuclear commission is concerned, the name of the first should be Israel than any other country¡¯s should be taken. To day, opines the nuclear research prominent scholars that Israel is the most dangerous nuclear country in the world. It is also a self proclaimed terrorist country. Therefore, the nuclear armaments WMDS is already in the hands of the most dangerous terrorists not only that it is also a genocide committal country so why only terrorist of Al-Queda, Taliban, Iran and why not Israel, IRS etc etc. The issue to be successfully handled should be dealt with comprehensibly and without any exception because of its grave importance to the safety of the world not only a particular country. The merit of the submit warranted Israel to attend, but the intentional avoidance of the PM to attend the submit speaks louder than words as to the reason. Therefore, this country¡¯s country¡¯s activities henceforth should be strictly monitored alongwith other terroist country pron to aquire enriched nuclear materials for manufactureing . The mater is
Apr 13, 201011:04am EDT--
