Euro zone in reverse, China speeds up
2013-03-21 09:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro zone's economic downturn deepened this month, even before Cyprus' bailout troubles, but China's factories took a completely different path and moved up a gear, business surveys showed on Thursday.
Figures due later from the United States are expected to show a pick up by factories in the world's largest economy.
The euro zone survey results will add to the headache of policymakers battling to revive the currency bloc's fortunes and now to deal with the potential default of one of its members.
Most responses were received before Cyprus's parliament rejected a bailout deal that including an unprecedented levy on all bank deposits - leaving the country perilously close to financial collapse.
Data also showed leading economy Germany with signs of fatigue. French businesses turned in their worst performance in four years, probably plunging the euro zone's second-biggest economy into a recession.
"The sharp decline in the flash composite PMI in March pours cold water on hopes of an imminent end to the euro zone recession," said Martin van Vliet, economist at ING.
Markit's Flash Euro zone Composite Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), which makes up around 85 percent of the final reading and is seen as a reliable economic growth indicator for the bloc, fell to 46.5 in March from February's 47.9.
The positive news came from China, where factories increased their pace after a holiday dip, pointing towards solid but not spectacular first-quarter growth in the world's second-largest economy.
The HSBC China PMI for March revived to 51.7 in March from 50.4 in February, but remained below a two-year high of 52.3 reached at the beginning of the year.
The pullback in February had raised concerns in financial markets that China's recovery was losing steam. Indeed, official data earlier in March suggested the economy had started 2013 with only tepid growth after a burst in the fourth quarter.
"Current readings ... seem to us to be consistent with GDP (gross domestic product) growth close to 8 percent year-on-year," wrote Dariusz Kowalczyk of Credit Agricole-CIB in Hong Kong.
WORSE TO COME?
Survey compiler Markit, which released the preliminary data and will issue final figures at the start of April, said the picture could be even worse by then.
"Events that hit business confidence can have a very rapid effect on the data and so there is good reason to believe that responses we collect this week will on average be more negative," said Chris Williamson, Markit's chief economist.
Having already contracted since the second quarter of last year, Markit said the latest PMI data suggested the euro zone economy would shrink 0.3 percent in the current quarter.
Germany's composite PMI fell in March, although it held above 50 for the fourth month, suggesting some strength in Europe's largest economy. But France's sank to a four-year low.
Some of the factory activity in the euro zone was generated by running down order books and incoming new business for services firms dropped at the fastest pace since October, suggesting next month's PMI will also be weak.
"The only bright spots are in the backwards looking indicators, like employment, holding up a bit better than expected. But the worry is these surveys were collected before the bad news on Cyprus really hit, so you have to wonder what impact that will have on business sentiment," Williamson said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Continually repetitive irrational exuberance on China economic and financial performance. Over the last several months the western financial press cites Chinese ¡®market statistics¡¯ that claim slight or great rises, only to be ¡®revised¡¯ downward a few weeks later. This latest is a good example of this idiocy: ¡°Chinese exports up! But Europe and the US down.¡± Okay, so who¡¯s buying all those exports? Zimbabwe? Please instruct your editorial staff to occasionally review the past months¡¯ reports and try to avoid the same mistakes.
Mar 21, 201310:18am EDT--
China develops other countries as markets by adding infrastructure projects when it buys raw materials. Africa grew at twice the rate of the US in 2012, and China¡¯s trade with Africa grew while US trade fell. Similar Chinese trade increases are occurring in central, southern, and southeast Asia, Australia, Russia, Canada, and Latin America. Economic problems in the US and EU cause China to shift its trade and investment activities to other areas. China also develops its internal market. In 2011, China raised the minimum income tax deduction by 75%, reinstated old age pensions, and began construction of 46 million low cost housing units, enough for 138 million Chinese or 10% of its population. Add to that a GDP growth rate of 9% in 2011 and 7.8% in 2012, and 8% to 9% in 2013. Reuters predicts 8%; my partners and I predict 9%. It will be much better than the US or EU. The point is that China increases its total trade and economic growth and reduces its dependence on the relatively declining US and EU economies.
Mar 21, 20133:32pm EDT--
