China says Iran sanctions talks in NY constructive
2010-04-08 21:27:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Apr 8 2010
Sat, Apr 3 2010
Fri, Apr 2 2010
Fri, Apr 2 2010
Fri, Apr 2 2010
Russian (L and R) and Iranian operators monitor the nuclear power plant unit in Bushehr, about 1,215 km (755 miles) south of Tehran, November 30, 2009. Credit: Reuters/ISNA/Mehdi Ghasemi
Thu  EDT
"It's a very constructive negotiation," China's U.N. Ambassador Li Baodong told reporters after a nearly three-hour meeting with his counterparts from Russia, the United States, Britain, France and Germany.
He said the group planned to meet again next week. Details of the discussions were not immediately available, but diplomats familiar with talks said the delegations were far from agreement on a fourth round of U.N. sanctions on Iran.
After months of delay, China reluctantly agreed to join the other permanent members of the U.N. Security Council and Germany -- a group often referred to as the "P5-plus-one" -- in New York to draft a sanctions resolution.
"We are working to get this done swiftly, within a matter of weeks in the spring," Rice said, reiterating a desire by U.S. President Barack Obama for a tougher global stance against Iran's development of nuclear capabilities.
Li made clear China was committed to the group's two-track approach on Iran's nuclear program -- offers of economic and political incentives if Tehran suspends its nuclear enrichment program, and threats of sanctions if it refuses. He reiterated that Beijing is more interested in pursuing the first track.
"The dual-track approach is actually focused on diplomacy," he said.
After Thursday's meeting at the British U.N. mission, Rice described the meeting as "worthwhile" but declined to provide any details.
"If Iran wants to negotiate, they should start negotiating," Churkin said, adding that the "aim of these negotiations is to bring Iran back to the negotiating table."
Iran, a major oil and gas exporter, says its nuclear ambitions are limited to generating electricity and refuses to suspend its enrichment program. The Security Council has passed five resolutions ordering it stop enriching uranium.
A U.S. draft sanctions proposal agreed upon with the three European allies and passed on to Russia and China a month ago is the basis for discussions, U.N. diplomats say.
It targets the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and shipping and other firms but not Iran's oil and gas sectors.
Although the U.S. and European delegations would like a resolution adopted this month, diplomats say negotiations could go on at least until June as China and Russia are expected to work to dilute any proposed punitive steps before handing a draft resolution to the Security Council.
The issue may also come up on the sidelines of Obama's April 12-13 summit on nuclear security in Washington, which Chinese President Hu Jintao, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and dozens of other leaders plan to attend.
(Editing by John O'Callaghan and Todd Eastham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s nice to see the US media reporting a positive story about china for a change.
It¡¯s nice to see the US media reporting a positive story about china for a change.
Apr 08, 201011:46pm EDT--
Enriching uranium is permitted to all NPT members. Based on what laws would it really be acceptable for the security counsel to sanction Iran for abiding by the NPT? There is as yet no proof that Iran is in fact working on a nuclear weapon. That it will eventually acquire enough nuclear knowhow to build one, possible. But so do many other countries. Neither the US nor Israel ¨C both nuclear states, and the ones most interested in limiting Iran ¨C are not members of the NPT. How can a non-member enforce any rules of a treaty to which it didn¡¯t subscribe? The US brouhaha doesn¡¯t make much sense unless you substitute US hegemony over resources for nuclear weapons.
Apr 08, 201012:27am EDT--
1964 ¨C hey this is the Obama way.. we will continue to wage war throughout the world for at least 4-8 more years. But shame on you. I still think Bush invaded Iraq to establish a launch pad against Iran. Obama same thing but in Afghanistan. Afghanistan will not be ¡°won¡± what will we stay there for 100 hundreds of years? As soon as we leave or sooner they will return to their way of Life and be glad to see the Americas go!
Apr 09, 20102:06am EDT--
