Gates, ahead of Latam trip, to sign Brazil accord
2010-04-08 20:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Defense Secretary Robert Gates will sign a defense accord with Brazil and then travel to South America next week, looking to strengthen ties in a region being courted by Iran, China and Russia.
Gates will sign the agreement on Monday with Brazilian Defense Minister Nelson Jobim in Washington, a senior U.S. defense official said on Thursday, confirming plans announced by Jobim and diplomats earlier in the week.
He will travel to Colombia, Peru and attend a Caribbean security conference in Barbados that same week.
The U.S. official, who asked not to be named, described the agreement with Brazil as a "huge deal," establishing the first framework of its kind in more than 30 years for defense ties between the two countries.
Still, tense issues like Iran were likely to loom large when Jobim and Gates meet at the Pentagon. Brazil has so far rejected U.S. calls to support a new round of sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program.
Brazil's President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva plans to visit Tehran in May, after receiving Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad last year.
"I think the Secretary will state the U.S. position on (the Iran) issue to Minister Jobim," the U.S. official said.
"We would like the Brazilians to choose (Boeing's) Super Hornet, which would add to our strategic relationship," the U.S. official said.
The United States has been accused of not paying enough attention to Latin America due to policy priorities in Iraq and Afghanistan, even as Tehran makes inroads with the region's leftist leaders, and as Russia and China deepen trade ties.
"We remain very much engaged in the region -- notwithstanding sort of perceptions that we are somehow not interested, or neglect(ful), disengaged, which is simply not true," the U.S. official said.
The agreement with Bogota, signed last year, allowed U.S. troops expanded use of Colombian bases. It initially raised eyebrows in the region and Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez branded it part of a U.S. plot for an invasion.
Chavez, who is ramping up military purchases from Russia and China, has accused U.S. military jets of making illegal incursions into Venezuelan airspace and "provoking us." Washington strongly denies the claims.
Washington, in turn, accuses Chavez's government of supporting FARC guerrillas waging war against the Colombian government.
The U.S. official said Gates, in meetings in Colombia and Peru, would likely discuss Chavez.
"We will obviously state our position with respect to Venezuela, but what we won't do is fall into the trap or be provoked by the rhetoric," the official said.
