Timeline: The obstacle course for U.S.-China ties in 2010
2010-04-05 01:59:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Apr 5 2010
Mon, Apr 5 2010
Sun, Apr 4 2010
Sun, Apr 4 2010
Sat, Apr 3 2010
Mon  EDT
January 21 - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton delivers speech calling for Internet freedoms, names China as a country that has stepped up censorship of the web.
January 29 - Obama administration notifies U.S. Congress of proposed arms sales to Taiwan worth $6.4 billion. China condemns the sales to the island, which it considers its territory, and threatens sanctions on companies involved.
February 17 - U.S. aircraft carrier USS Nimitz visits Hong Hong, the self-administered territory under Chinese rule, despite a Chinese pledge to curtail military exchanges with the United States after its announced arms sales to Taiwan.
March 2-4 - U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg and Jeffrey Bader, Senior Director for the U.S. National Security Council for Asian Affairs, visit Beijing for talks, seeking to overcome tensions.
March 15 - One hundred and thirty members of U.S. Congress issue a letter demanding more pressure on China to let its yuan currency appreciate. The next day, a bipartisan bill on the issue goes before the Senate.
April 1 - China says Hu will attend a summit on nuclear security in Washington, adding to signs that tensions between the two nations are ebbing.
April 12-13 - Obama hosts a multi-nation nuclear security summit in Washington, opening an opportunity for a bilateral meeting with Hu.
April 15-16 - Hu due to attend "BRIC" summit in Brazil, bringing together the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China for their second such meeting.
May 15-25 - U.S. Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke leads trade mission to Hong Kong, China and Indonesia, promoting deals with American companies in clean energy.
Late-May - Senior officials from the United States and China due to meet in Beijing for Strategic and Economic Dialogue, an annual meeting to discuss broad economic, foreign policy and security concerns. The U.S. side is likely to be led by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Geithner.
June 26-27 - Meeting of G20 leaders of major rich and developing economies scheduled in Toronto, Canada, giving Hu and Obama an opportunity to meet.
Later in the year - The two countries are preparing for their Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, a regular meeting that focuses on economic ties. Last year's was held in late October in the eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou.
November 2 - Mid-term elections for U.S. Congress. With economic concerns uppermost in many voters' minds, trade and currency tensions with China may become a electoral issue.
November 13-14 - Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, to be held in Yokohama, Japan, presents another opportunity for the two leaders to meet.
November - South Korea scheduled to host second summit for the year of the G20 group of major rich and developing economies, where Hu and Obama will have a further chance to meet. The summit is likely to take place immediately before or after the APEC summit.
November-December - When Obama visited China in November 2009, Hu accepted his invitation to visit the United States in 2010. This would be a state visit separate from his attendance at the nuclear summit. No date has been set for the trip. One possibility is June, when Hu attends the G20 summit in Canada, but a date after the U.S. mid-term elections appears more likely.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing; Jim Wolf, Doug Palmer and Paul Eckert in Washington; Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Editing by Nick Macfie)
