U.S. says China nuclear programs lack transparency
2010-04-06 13:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Lack of transparency surrounding China's nuclear programs raises questions about its strategic intentions, the United States said on Tuesday.
"China's nuclear arsenal remains much smaller than the arsenals of Russia and the United States," the administration said in a nuclear policy document published on Tuesday.
"But the lack of transparency surrounding its nuclear programs -- their pace and scope, as well as the strategy and doctrine that guides them -- raises questions about China's future strategic intentions."
"The United States and China's Asian neighbors remain concerned about the pace and scope of China's current military modernization efforts, including its quantitative and qualitative modernization of its nuclear capabilities," it said.
China last month unveiled its 2010 military budget with a spending hike of 7.5 percent, a relatively low figure that surprised outside analysts after more than two decades of double-digit rises.
The U.S. report reiterated the Pentagon's oft-stated wish to hold a strategic dialogue with the Chinese military that would "provide a venue and mechanism for each side to communicate its views about the other's strategies, policies, and programs on nuclear weapons and other strategic capabilities."
"The goal of such a dialogue is to enhance confidence, improve transparency, and reduce mistrust," the report added.
Washington angered Beijing by announcing a $6.4 billion arms package for Taiwan early this year, and China responded by postponing several high-level exchanges between U.S. and Chinese military leaders.
(Reporting by Phil Stewart and Paul Eckert, Editing by Alan Elsner)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
We really don¡¯t want to make China angry
Apr 06, 201012:36pm EDT--
China¡¯s entire economy depends on US consumption. Militarily we have first strike capability from Japan/South Korea/Aircraft Carriers. China doesn¡¯t want to make the US angry.
Apr 06, 201012:42pm EDT--
That¡¯s pretty simplistic, like saying the entire US consumer economy depends on china. Regardless, they are doing a good thing by not building so many nukes (they certainly have the capability to ramp up production vastly) but our military can never bring themselves to compliment anybody (otherwise how would we justify our own ridiculous military budget) so they accuse the chinese of lack of transparency (as if nothing in our own military is classified or censored, what a joke).
Apr 06, 20102:32pm EDT--
