Q+A: Is China to blame for the Mekong drying up?
2010-04-05 08:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Leaders of four countries hit by falling water levels in the Mekong river, Southeast Asia's longest waterway, meet on Monday with China, blamed by activists for squeezing the river with dams.
Thailand, Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia have been affected by the Mekong's biggest drop in water levels in half a century.
Severe drought has played a part but conservationists say the problem has been exacerbated by hydropower dams, eight of which China has built or plans to build in its south.
Beijing's vice foreign minister, Song Tao, is attending along with the prime ministers of Cambodia, Thailand, Laos and Vietnam.
HOW BAD IS THE SITUATION ON THE MIGHTY MEKONG?
Originating in the Tibetan plateau and flowing through Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Cambodia before emptying some 4,800 km (2,980 miles) later into the South China Sea off Vietnam, the Mekong is the lifeblood for some 65 million people.
The upper reaches in China are called the Lancang River, accounting for about 44 percent of its total length.
Water levels in the upper Mekong in China are lower than they were even in 1993 after a serious regional drought in 1992. Thai officials found the lowest level in 50 years at one point last month near Thailand's border with Laos.
Most of southwest China has suffered drought since November, leaving about 18 million people and 11 million animals without enough drinking water and affecting 4.3 million hectares (10.63 million acres) of crops in Yunnan, Guizhou and Sichuan.
The crisis has also raised concern about falling fish stocks in one of the world's largest and most diverse inland fisheries.
In Thailand, the world's largest rice exporter, drought has destroyed tens of thousands of hectares of farmland and officials warned rice production may decline. In the delta in Vietnam, low fresh water levels are forcing salt intrusion, destroying land.
WHAT'S CAUSING THE DRAMATIC DROP IN WATER LEVELS?
China blamed the drop in water levels downstream on severe drought, which saw an early end to the 2009 wet season as well as unusually low rainfall during the monsoons due to El Nino.
NGOs, activists and some scientists say China's dams cause big fluctuations in water levels in the Mekong, disturbing the ecosystem and disrupting breeding and migratory patterns.
Beijing rejects claims it is choking off the water supply, saying that existing reservoirs are small and that the operation of hydropower stations and use of water for agricultural purposes upstream have little effect on water volume downstream.
Jeremy Bird, head of the MRC, based in the Laos capital, Vientiane, -- as well as Thai and Cambodian officials -- agrees with the Chinese, saying there is so far "no indication that the existence of dams upstream has made the situation more extreme than the natural case."
WHAT IS CHINA DOING TO ADDRESS ITS CRITICS?
Going on a public relations offensive, China has started providing daily dry-season data -- water levels, flows, rainfall -- from hydro-meteorological stations in Yunnan since March 22. Officials say China is ready for more cooperation to manage the river's resources jointly and has extended an invitation for MRC countries to visit its hydropower stations.
In general, Southeast Asian officials remain extremely careful in their public statements, putting a positive spin on cooperation with their influential northern neighbor.
Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam and Thailand rely heavily on China for investment and trade.
WHAT CAN BE EXPECTED AFTER THE SUMMIT?
High on the agenda is better management of the regional waterway and the rapid fluctuation in water levels, which reached the highest in 30 years in 2008, causing flooding in Laos and northern Thailand, before the dramatic drop this dry season.
As the Himalayan glaciers shrink and more dams in the upper reaches begin operations, scientists warn disputes over water may worsen. Smith Dharmasaroja, director of Thailand's Disaster Warning Foundation, warned of the risk of geopolitical conflict.
"We may see more conflicts over water, especially if China continues to operate in a manner which is not transparent. Drought is highlighting diplomatic tension and difficulty in sharing resources with a powerful neighbor and it will get worse over the years."
