Pulverized lime used to bleach Chinese flour: media
2010-04-08 10:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Pulverized lime, an inedible ingredient, has been added to bleaching agents widely used in flour production in China, Chinese media said.
China has been in the spotlight in recent years over food-safety scandals, including melamine-tainted milk that sickened thousands of babies in 2008, which have damaged the reputation of the country's food exports.
Bleaching agents, usually made from cornstarch, are added to flour to shorten the time needed for whitening. Substituting cheaper and heavier lime for cornstarch cuts the cost of producing the bleaching agent, which is sold by weight.
Yuzhong Food Additive Co. in Rugao, Jiangsu province, on the east coast, added 500g (1.1 lbs) Pulverized lime to every 2kg of bleaching agent, Legal Weekend, a publication run by the official Legal Daily reported, citing whistleblowers in the company.
The owner of the company, surnamed Chen, was cited as saying that his company was able to sell bleaching agent at 9,000 yuan ($1,319) per ton versus the market price of 11,000 yuan.
Flour is mostly used to make noodles, dumplings and steamed buns in China, especially in the north.
Melamine-tainted milk reappeared in the market earlier this year, in apparent re-sales of contaminated powder that was not destroyed after a 2008 scandal in which 300,000 infants were sickened and least six died from kidney stones after drinking melamine-contaminated milk formula.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Estimates differ as to the percentage of foodstuffs imported from China that make it into the U.S. without being inspected but the consensus seems to be around 80% plus. Factor in the reality that inspection doesn¡¯t necessarily mean detection and it becomes apparent that, for all practical purposes, Chinese vendors can sell us just about anything they think will make them money. We buy 5 times as much from China as it does from us and appeals to the Chinese government to help even-up the trade imbalance have been met with complete contempt by the Communist Chinese government. They want our money so that they can build nuclear submarines and couldn¡¯t care less about playing fair. When are we going to stop enabling these natural enemies from victimizing us? Selling tainted food to a customer in a foreign nation is like dropping a bomb from 20,000 feet. You are too far away to observe the death and suffering you¡¯ve created firsthand and so it¡¯s easy to rationalize away the responsibility. The death and suffering are real nonetheless. After finding my purchase options for everything under the sun virtually destroyed by the onslaught of Chinese goods combined with the daily destruction of of our job market, I think it¡¯s time to reevaluate our global trade position. Buying something at a cheaper price may seem like a free lunch to some, but if it results in the destruction of the job market in the U.S., abhorrent human rights abuses in China and the U.S. due to the drive for cheaper labor, lethally tainted products, and a gross reduction in per capita living standards, then it might be that the only people actually getting the free lunch are those who came up with the idea. Global corporations have lusted after China¡¯s virtual bottomless pit of cheap/free/slave laborers for decades. Nixon continued his legacy of corruption by normalizing relations with the crooked Chinese government after resigning the Presidency. Some three decades later and we¡¯ve become a nation of $7.00/hr hamburger cooks who are rapidly being replaced by illegal aliens. The cheaper imports of inferior quality that replaced local brands began rising in price after the local brands went out of business. The end result is that we lost an employer, traded a quality product for a defective one, and are now paying as much or more than we were originally for the U.S. made product. It¡¯s bait and switch brought to your doorstep by a collusion of your government representatives and global corporations. Let¡¯s help find your child a summer job that pays enough that he might have a real chance at college. Tell McDonald¡¯s you think they are betraying the Pledge of Allegiance by hiring illegal aliens instead of U.S. Citizens after becoming wealthy from marketing their ¡®instant heart attack¡¯ fair to U.S. citizens through warm cuddly TV ads. Tell your Congressman that ¡®nicking¡¯ import tariffs at Walmart¡¯s lobbyist¡¯s request is destroying what¡¯s left of the domestic manufacturing sector. Even if a product isn¡¯t manufactured here, there¡¯s no chance of it eventually becoming one if tariffs are nicked for even short periods of time. The benefit of global trade is destroyed for all but a few U.S. Citizens. The savings from cheaper products are largely internalized in corporate profits rather than equitably distributed across the population. Those corporate profits are then either gobbled up by a privileged few executives with unbelievably lucrative salary options or are vaporized in the stock market after the laws that stabilized the markets were gutted by your favorite Democrat and then Republican Presidents. What was left of real value in the market was given away to his friends by the Secretary of the Treasury. Enough is enough. Somebody please start yelling while your still allowed to do so. The Supreme Court just ruled that corporations can back their favorite candidate with
Apr 09, 20109:13pm EDT--
enough money that for all practical purposes, your elected representative will be whomever corporations choose to be your representative. A corporation is a legal entity that is formed by people wishing to circumvent personal liability or as a vehicle to minimize tax liability, depending upon the circumstances. It¡¯s employees are duty bound to maximize the ¡®net present value¡¯ of the corporation stockholders equity and are generally not held liable for the damage done in the process. Management of a corporation can make decisions that they know will inevitably result in the deaths of thousands without fear of prosecution. What would the government do to you if you killed a thousand people while increasing profits? Do you believe that everyone who knew from the beginning what was wrong with Toyota vehicles will be held accountable for the loss of life? We need commerce to survive. Economic output is a product of commercial activity. Just as a nation of one has no gross domestic product if the sole citizen does nothing that day, so too has the nation of 300 million if 15% of it¡¯s workforce are looking for jobs that were moved to China while they slept. The real unemployment rate in this country goes by the name ¡°U-6¡å and is explained here.
enough money that for all practical purposes, your elected representative will be whomever corporations choose to be your representative. A corporation is a legal entity that is formed by people wishing to circumvent personal liability or as a vehicle to minimize tax liability, depending upon the circumstances. It¡¯s employees are duty bound to maximize the ¡®net present value¡¯ of the corporation stockholders equity and are generally not held liable for the damage done in the process. Management of a corporation can make decisions that they know will inevitably result in the deaths of thousands without fear of prosecution. What would the government do to you if you killed a thousand people while increasing profits? Do you believe that everyone who knew from the beginning what was wrong with Toyota vehicles will be held accountable for the loss of life? We need commerce to survive. Economic output is a product of commercial activity. Just as a nation of one has no gross domestic product if the sole citizen does nothing that day, so too has the nation of 300 million if 15% of it¡¯s workforce are looking for jobs that were moved to China while they slept. The real unemployment rate in this country goes by the name ¡°U-6¡å and is explained here.
http://www.bls.gov/opub/ils/pdf/opbils67.pdf The lower numbers published by the newspapers are misrepresentations of the real problem that are favored by politicians seeking to minimize the bad news. Bush was notorious for manipulating the truth of almost everything while in office. Most politicians use similar tactics. Excessive world trade that enriches a few while destroying the country is not a good policy. The people that think that it is are comprised mostly of those getting rich off the idea along with their kept politicians who are told how to vote. Mass amnesty for foreign invaders pretending to be downtrodden hopeful patriots is not a good policy. If they were genuine patriots, they would have done something to solve problems in their own country. People who think it is a good idea are comprised mostly of people getting rich off the cheap illegal labor while U.S. Citizens are left to the unemployment line and then the alleys after their benefits run out. These people betray their Pledge of Allegiance we teach our children to make to each other. The churches that foster this invasion are benefiting from it under the guise of being ¡®humane¡¯. Humane is not fostering increased population growth 3 times over the sustainable level because the Pope thinks birth control is wrong.
The Pope gains greater power every time a new Catholic is born, regardless of how miserably impoverished that child will likely become. The political parties maintain a political oligopoly that is a ¡®de facto¡¯ unconstitutional trust which violates every U.S. Citizens right to free elections. The reduction in voter turnout is largely the result of more and more people coming to the realization that their real choice is either a crony from the Republican Party or a crony from the Democratic Party. Neither party, nor any other, was mentioned in the Constitution. George Washington, along with numerous other founding fathers, despised political parties and rightfully identified them as natural enemies of our Republic (our form of government is a Republic, not a democracy). It¡¯s normal for citizens to desire different outcomes for any particular national issue. It¡¯s normal for more citizens to aggregate on both sides in an effort to sway the results. The problem is that once that particular issue has been decided, the sides tend to remain together as a result of the psychological bonding process inherent in any community struggle. Those groups then take on a life of their own aside from the issues that catalyzed their formation and tend to skew the outcomes of other issues totally unrelated to the original. When the individual members choose loyalty to the political party members over loyalty to the countries entire citizenry, then the best interest of the country, as a whole, is sabotaged. Free elections aren¡¯t free when you always have only two or three de facto choices. We need to unlock the unconstitutional grip the parties have on the management of our government before they destroy our home. Which of them do you think will then take credit for that?
Apr 09, 201010:20pm EDT--
there were laws against this in ancient Rome, it¡¯s not a new trick. the shame is on us for being stupid enough to continue to buy from cheats
Apr 09, 201011:08pm EDT--
