China, Taiwan move closer to trade pact by June
2010-04-01 07:50:00.0
China, Taiwan move closer to trade pact by June | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China, Taiwan move closer to trade pact by June
Thu, Apr 1 2010
Opposition Democratic Progressive Party protesters march with a banner during cross strait talks on a proposed economic cooperation framework agreement (ECFA), in Taoyuan March 31, 2010. The second round of formal talks on the proposed comprehensive trade pact agreement between China and Taiwan began on Wednesday. The banner reads ''Ma Ying-jeou's ECFA betrays Taiwan''. Credit: Reuters/Pichi Chuang
Thu  EDT
Officials from Taiwan said the two sides had put aside sensitive items in order to sign an economic cooperation framework agreement (ECFA) by June, a move that would boost the island's markets and listed companies in the parts of China closest to it.
Negotiators meeting in Taiwan this week took LCD panels and agricultural products off a list of sectors eligible for early trade tariff reductions, putting off some items to future talks.
China also agreed to avoid hurting the most vulnerable sectors of Taiwan's $390 billion economy.
This week's momentum eases doubts about whether the agreement, expected to slash tariffs in hundreds of sectors, would be delayed until late 2010 and become a divisive issue in year-end local elections involving most of Taiwan's voters.
Economic powerhouse China and export-reliant Taiwan began talking trade in 2008 under the island's Beijing-friendly President Ma Ying-jeou after six decades of hostilities.
"ECFA will go forward. It will be implemented," said Lin Chong-pin, strategic studies professor at Tamkang University in Taipei. "The highest priority of the Ma administration is to deliver these goods."
Taiwan says the trade deal will enable it to get a piece of China's vast economy as well as its blessing to sign FTAs with other countries. Beijing regards it as part of a charm offensive that could lead eventually to political unification.
(Reporting by Ralph Jennings and Argin Chang; Editing by Ron Popeski)
