Microsoft backs review of foreign bribery allegations
2013-03-19 16:04:00.0
(Reuters) - Microsoft Corp said on Tuesday that allegations of potential bribery by employees in China, Romania and Italy should be reviewed by U.S. agencies and its own compliance unit, but declined to address the specifics of any cases.
The software giant's comments came after the Wall Street Journal reported that the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) had launched investigations over tips from a former Microsoft employee that the company handed kickbacks to foreign government officials in return for software contracts.
"The matters raised in the Wall Street Journal are important, and it is appropriate that both Microsoft and the government review them," wrote John Frank, the company's deputy general counsel, in a blog post on the company's website.
"We take all allegations brought to our attention seriously and we cooperate fully in any government inquiries," he added, without confirming that the software company was aware of any investigation.
Investigations of potential violations of the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) are fairly common among U.S. companies. Microsoft rival International Business Machines Corp agreed in 2011 to pay $10 million to resolve SEC charges over improper gifts to government officials in South Korea and China, but is still waiting for a judge to sign off on the deal.
The DOJ and SEC brought 23 FCPA cases last year, down from 48 in 2011 and 74 in 2010, according to statistics compiled by the law firm Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher.
The China allegations spring from information passed by a former Microsoft employee to U.S. investigators last year, according to the Journal report, which cited an unnamed source it said was familiar with the matter. Microsoft hired outside lawyers to conduct a 10-month internal investigation which found no wrongdoing, the report said, citing unnamed people briefed on the investigation.
Microsoft declined to talk about specifics of any inquiries, but in his blog post Frank offered what he called "perspective".
"In a company of our size, allegations of this nature will be made from time to time. It is also possible there will sometimes be individual employees or business partners who violate our policies and break the law. In a community of 98,000 people and 640,000 partners, it isn't possible to say there will never be wrongdoing," wrote Frank.
"Our responsibility is to take steps to train our employees, and to build systems to prevent and detect violations, and when we receive allegations, to investigate them fully and take appropriate action. We take that responsibility seriously."
(Additional reporting by Aruna Viswanatha and David Ingram in Washington; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick, Nick Zieminski and David Gregorio)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
It¡¯s Microsoft, they throw money under the table all the time in stealthy manners to block their competition. But their days of dominance is swiftly coming to an end as ¡®Windows¡¯ becomes increasingly irrelevant because of Open Source Software such as Linux that replaces Windows. They can¡¯t even get 2% market share in the Mobile market. When people have choices, it seems as if they disregard the Microsoft products. With good reason, secret back-doors for Law enforcement and Government agencies. The only reason Xbox sells are OK is because it isn¡¯t branded as a Microsoft or Windows product. But even with Xbox, they still lose Millions on it. Even stating they would like to sell that division. This old dog is tired, hopefully somebody puts them out of their misery soon.
Mar 19, 20134:05pm EDT--
FYI the liberal corruption in King Co. Washington is some of the worst in the Country. It is just not very ¡°transparent¡±. MS is just the surface¡­Boeing da da da. Yeah, I know, I have been in this area for almost 50 years. If I am dead tomorrow it will not be of natural causes, if you get my drift.
Mar 19, 20134:39pm EDT--
Back in the mid 90s, Bill Gates improperly gave CINCPACFLT at least one copy of Windows NT before its official release. As a result, CPL made it the operational system onboard a new destroyer, which soon thereafter, went dead in the water. The ¡®gift¡¯ violated federal law, both in terms of value and because it wasn¡¯t an item available to the general public.
Mar 19, 20135:41pm EDT--
