Factbox: Impact of expected China-Taiwan trade deal
2010-04-01 07:50:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Mar 26 2010
Tue, Mar 30 2010
Mon, Mar 29 2010
Sat, Mar 27 2010
Fri, Mar 26 2010
Thu  EDT
China has claimed sovereignty over self-ruled Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong's forces won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists (KMT) fled to the island. But ties have warmed since 2008 as the two sides began to talk trade.
The following is an overview of the economic cooperation framework agreement's (EFCA) likely content and expected impact.
Tariffs would fall to varying degrees in sectors included on an "early harvest list" seen as a highlight of the deal. Negotiators meeting in Taiwan this week took LCD panels and agricultural products off a list of sectors eligible for early trade tariff reductions, putting off some to future talks.
China also agreed to avoid hurting the most vulnerable sectors of Taiwan's $390 billion economy.
Import tariffs would remain highest for sectors in Taiwan that might lose ground to a greater flow of goods from China. Financial services and institutional investors will benefit from more openness in each side's financial market, while legal transparency rules should help Taiwan high-tech R&D.
Chinese officials say they want to fast-track the deal, despite its complexity, while the Taiwan government has said it aims to sign it at formal talks by the end of June.
Taiwan's parliament could hold up ECFA by demanding revisions subject to Beijing's approval.
The Taiwan Stock Exchange and the Taiwan dollar will firm slightly when the deal is signed. Shares of listed companies from China's Fujian province, geographically closest to Taiwan, would gain in Chinese markets.
* LIKELY GAINS FOR TAIWAN, CHINA
Taiwan will get a first-time blessing from Beijing to discuss free-trade agreements with the United States, Singapore and other countries, which would react positively to the export-dependent island's tie-up with China's much larger economy
If negotiations carried into the second half of the year, ECFA would become enmeshed in fractious Taiwan local elections, with anti-China opposition candidates saying the deal could flood the island with cheap Chinese goods or herald cross-Strait political unification.
