Easing of China rifts to pave way for yuan move
2010-04-01 06:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Policy wrangling over the yuan between China's central bank and its commerce ministry has grabbed the spotlight, but the two factions are in fact closer than in the run-up to the currency's landmark 2005 revaluation.
Analysts say that means it will be easier for them to reach a compromise, which will be key for building a top-level consensus on the way forward, presumably entailing a resumption of gradual yuan appreciation that could start as early as this quarter.
An announcement on Thursday that President Hu Jintao will attend a nuclear security summit in Washington on April 12-13 could smooth the way to a currency shift, some believe.
According to this line of thinking, Hu would not have agreed to the visit unless he had been privately assured that China would not lose face by being branded a currency manipulator in a U.S. Treasury report due on April 15.
"This shows that China and United States are unlikely to be confrontational on currency and trade issues," said Wensheng Peng, China economist at Barclays Capital in Hong Kong.
"Any lessening of Sino-U.S. trade tensions ostensibly would allow China to move ahead with granting a resumption of flexibility for the yuan," said Emmanuel Ng, a currency strategist at OCBC Bank in Singapore.
Still, building an internal consensus in Beijing may take time. Any indecision could be costly if the yuan's exchange rate becomes a hot political issue in the run-up to mid-term elections in the United States in November.
The latest edition of Caijing magazine cited unidentified official sources as saying that Beijing was studying the option of dropping the yuan's peg, in place since July 2008 near 6.83 per dollar, as soon as this month.
"There are still some differences, but the People's Bank of China, the Finance Ministry and Commerce Ministry have formed an important consensus on yuan exchange rate reforms," it said.
It should be possible to heal the rift as the central bank simply wants the yuan to resume its gradual appreciation, rather than demanding another one-off revaluation as in July 2005.
Qing Wang, China economist at Morgan Stanley, believes the resistance to a strengthening of the yuan will fade as data shows further recovery in exports and higher inflation.
"As a major economy, it's impossible for China to stick to the fixed currency," said Wang, who expects a policy shift, including a small revaluation, as early as June.
PBOC chief Zhou Xiaochuan has described the yuan's stability as a "special policy" to respond to the global credit crunch.
Zhou was backed this week by two new advisers to the central bank, who urged a resumption of the yuan's ascent, but they were slapped down by Commerce Minister Chen Deming.
The ministry, a staunch defender of Chinese export industries, has repeatedly warned that many firms would be ruined, with the loss of millions of jobs, by a stronger yuan.
The Commerce Ministry's concerns are largely justified as most exporters operate on thin profit margins and do not have enough tools to hedge currency risks, analysts say.
"I think because the export sector is almost entirely unhedged, it's very difficult to appreciate the yuan without causing damages to the export sector," said Ben Simpfendorfer, an economist at Royal Bank of Scotland in Hong Kong.
Pro-growth government departments, such as the powerful National Development and Reform Commission and the Finance Ministry, are wary when it comes to a stronger exchange rate but are not as vocal on the issue as they were in 2005.
Calls by Chinese academics for a big one-off revaluation are now few and far between since the yuan's 21 percent rise against the dollar between July 2005 and July 2008, including an initial 2.1 percent adjustment.
In 2005, by contrast, many influential Chinese economists were clamoring for a one-off revaluation of up to 10 percent.
Freezing the yuan for the past 20 months has enabled China to enjoy a solid economic recovery, but the tide may turn as ample liquidity risks generating price pressures.
Although the consumer price index rose only 2.7 percent in the year to February, surging property prices are a harbinger of broader inflation in an economy that is likely to record year-on-year GDP for the first quarter well into double digits.
"Appreciating the yuan exchange rate, as part of the monetary policy tightening package, has the merit of reducing the overheating pressures as well as mitigating trade protectionism against China, in our view," Helen Qiao and Yu Song at Goldman Sachs, said in a research note on Thursday.
They said they expected a "soft approach" from Beijing, featuring a widening of the yuan's daily trading band against the dollar from 0.5 percent to 1 percent in the next 3 months.
