Clinton says China playing role in Iran debate
2010-03-29 18:43:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, launching a G8 foreign ministers summit on Monday, said the world could not accept a nuclear-armed Iran and that China could help resolve the impasse with Tehran.
Speaking at a meeting expected to focus on Iran, Clinton played down fears that China was out of step with the other permanent members of the U.N. Security Council on the question of imposing a fourth round of sanctions against Tehran.
"In fact, China is part of the consultative group that has been unified all along the way, which has made it very clear that a nuclear-armed Iran is not acceptable to the international community," Clinton told CTV in an interview.
"I think, as the weeks go forward and we begin the hard work of trying to come up with a Security Council resolution, China will be involved. They will be making their suggestions," she said.
"As in any effort, we're going to have to try to come to some consensus and we're in the middle of that process."
The meeting this week brings together the foreign ministers from the Group of Eight industrialized countries, which includes the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Japan, Germany, Italy and Russia.
The three Western members of the Security Council -- the United States, France and Britain -- have been pushing hard for a new round of sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program, which they fear is a cover for producing atomic weapons.
But China, which has close economic links to Iran, has repeatedly said that the world needs more time to find a diplomatic solution to the standoff over the Iranian nuclear program, which Tehran insists is purely for peaceful purposes.
U.S. officials have indicated that while the countries at this week's G8 conference are largely agreed on the likelihood of new sanctions against Iran, the scope and severity of the new measures remained to be worked out.
U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg, speaking to reporters in Washington, said the United States was encouraged by some of the signs coming from Beijing.
"On issues of concern to us, we have seen some progress," Steinberg said.
"We've had a recognition by our Chinese counterparts of the danger of the Iranian nuclear program and the fact that there does not seem to be a willingness (by) the Iranians to take the very generous offer."
The G8 meeting was also expected to take up other issues including the impasse over North Korea's nuclear program, nuclear non-proliferation, and the threat posed by extremist groups -- underscored by Monday's suicide bomb attacks that killed 38 in Moscow metro stations.
"They vowed that they would continue to thwart and constrain terrorists and to work for a world that is safe for all, based on the principles of democracy, and respect for the rule of law and for human rights," the statement said.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov told the Interfax news agency that militants operating on the Afghan-Pakistan border may have helped organize the Moscow attacks, which saw two female bombers target metro stations during the morning rush hour.
Asked if there could have been foreign involvement in Monday's attacks, Interfax quoted Lavrov as saying: "I do not exclude that."
"We all know that the Afghan-Pakistan border, in the so called no-man's land, the terrorist underground is very well entrenched," Lavrov was quoted as saying, adding that sometimes the trails led to Russia's own restive Caucasus region.
Clinton, who earlier issued her own condemnation of the Moscow attack, told CTV that overall there was a connection between most of the terror attacks around the world.
"They get encouragement from each other, they exchange training, explosives, information," Clinton said, while saying she did not know the details of the Moscow incident.
"I don't think we want to go so far as to say they are all part of the same operation, but certainly there is a common theme to many of them," she said.
(Additional reporting by David Ljunggren in Ottawa, Paul Eckert in Washington and Conor Humphries in Moscow)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Unless, ofcourse, there is another agenda there.
Mar 30, 20102:27am EDT--
