China joins talks on Iran sanctions, still no deal
2010-03-24 15:05:00.0
(Reuters) - China took part in a conference call with five other world powers on Wednesday to discuss a U.S. proposal for a fourth round of U.N. sanctions on Iran over its nuclear program, but no deal emerged.
Beijing, which had refused talks for weeks, joined the call among senior foreign ministry officials from the five permanent U.N. Security Council members and Germany, several diplomats from the six nations said on condition of anonymity.
U.S. State Department spokesman Mark Toner confirmed the call but declined to provide further details. "It was part of ongoing consultations on our two-track policy, for which all sides expressed support," he said.
That approach refers to a combination of dialogue and incentives from the six powers -- the United States, Britain, France, Germany China and Russia -- if Tehran complies with Security Council demands that it halt its nuclear enrichment program as well as the threat of sanctions if it does not.
Western nations say Iran's nuclear program is aimed at developing nuclear weapons capability. The Iranian government denies the accusation, saying its ambitions are limited to generating electricity.
As expected, the six nations did not agree on a draft sanctions resolution on Wednesday, though envoys said the main topic of the conversation was a U.S.-drafted sanctions proposal.
Hours after the call took place, the White House said President Barack Obama spoke about Iran and other issues on Wednesday with British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Britain's U.N. Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant told reporters that senior foreign ministry officials from the six powers -- including Russia and China -- would hold another conference call on the Iranian issue next week.
"My understanding is that they have agreed to engage substantively," Lyall Grant told reporters in New York.
But the difficulties with China, whose stance on Iran has puzzled the four Western powers, may not be over.
The United States, Britain, France and Germany had hoped the Chinese would agree to a face-to-face meeting soon to hammer out the details of a U.N. sanctions resolution to submit to the 15-nation Security Council for a vote.
"China was only ready to commit to another conference call," a diplomat said, adding that it was positive that Beijing was finally willing to discuss the possibility of sanctions, something it had refused to do since a January 16 meeting of officials from the six powers in New York.
China's new ambassador to the United Nations, Li Baodong, was asked by reporters about the call. Avoiding specifics, he said China was "firmly committed to the nuclear non-proliferation regime."
"We think it's very important to maintain stability and peace in the Middle East," he said, adding that China remained "an advocate of diplomacy."
A U.S.-drafted U.N. sanctions proposal includes a possible ban on new Iranian banks abroad and foreign banks in Iran, as well as an arms embargo with international inspections similar to one in place against North Korea, Western diplomats said.
It would also urge vigilance against Iran's central bank, ban insurance and reinsurance of shipments to and from Iran and would blacklist several Iranian shipping firms.
Russia has indicated it has problems with the arms embargo and other elements in the U.S. draft but could support less stringent measures, the envoys said. It is not clear how China reacted to the draft, which it received several weeks ago.
They added that Russia and China, which reluctantly backed three previous sanctions resolutions, would do their best to dilute any proposed punitive steps while negotiating a text.
Western diplomats had told Reuters that Russia and China quietly admonished Iran's government earlier this month, saying they wanted it to accept the U.N.-brokered offer and change its nuclear policy. They added that neither Russia nor China had received a satisfactory reply.
Convincing China to vote for any new sanctions resolution in the Security Council, and not to abstain, will not be easy, diplomats say. There is also the possibility that it would just barely get the required nine yes votes needed for adoption.
NATO-member Turkey rebuffed calls from ally the United States to support more sanctions against Iran over Tehran's nuclear program.
Fellow non-permanent council member Brazil has also made clear it would have trouble supporting an Iran sanctions resolution, as has Lebanon, where the Iranian-backed guerrilla group Hezbollah is in the government. (Additional reporting by Andrew Quinn and Patricia Zengerle in Washington, Selcuk Gokoluk in Ankara, Conor Sweeney in Moscow; Editing by Paul Simao)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Poor Iran, nobody likes them. The Iraq-Iran war seems so long ago
Mar 24, 201012:51pm EDT--
Exactly the opposite, it seems that US, France and Britain are the only countries that don¡¯t like Iran. Even Germany is going along because of the Zionists pressure. China and Russia are not for it. Neither is Brazil, Turkey, India etc. So the majority are with Iran. That goes to show how stupid we are to follow the orders form the Zionists rogue state that made up these Iran Phobia and scare tactics just to get out of the peace treaty with the Palestinians. I have said that over and over that the Zionists are not going to make peace with the Palestinians and they have pegged that to the Iranian nuclear program this time. They are expanding into the East Jerusalem against our wishes, international laws and demands. Our Administration is the laughing stuck of the world. Who listens to Mrs. Clinton? She was told off and sent home by the Zionists. They told our president that the expansion is their business and do not butt in. So, the real threat is the Zionist rogue state. They have 200+ A-bombs and that gives them the umbrella that they need to expand into the Arabs and their neighbors. It gives them the courage to committee the Ethnic Cleansing of the Palestinians and to committee atrocities in the Gaza strip, which is documented in the ¡°Gold stone¡± report by the UN. Get real.
Mar 24, 20103:41pm EDT--
All that Zionist world domination and pure evil, and yet Israel is the smallest country in the middle east, and one of the smaller countries in the world. On topic:
All that Zionist world domination and pure evil, and yet Israel is the smallest country in the middle east, and one of the smaller countries in the world. On topic:
All these sanction talks in the UN are a joke, they will never pass when Russia are taking care of their business interests and China are taking care of their business interests. These are two countries that will not have the same interests as the west in the foreseen future.
If this is how the USA think they¡¯re proving to Israel that they¡¯re committed to its security we can see that the current American administration cannot be trusted.
So when the same American administration tells Israel to stop building in Jerusalem, to give the Palestinians all they want basically and assures Israel that the USA is going to take care of Israel¡¯s security ¨C Israel tells them no thanks, and rightfully so.
If the USA is too afraid of Islamic radicals to take care of its own interests how can Israel trust them with their interests? Sorry, I did go a little bit off topic.
Mar 24, 20104:39pm EDT--
