Geely-Volvo deal financing totals $2.7 billion: sources
2010-03-29 11:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Zhejiang Geely Holding Group has lined up total financing of $2.7 billion to back its purchase of Ford Motor's (
) Volvo car unit, sources said on Monday.
Ford and Geely announced their deal on Sunday, saying that China's largest privately-run car maker would pay $1.8 billion for Volvo.
The breakdown of the offer includes a $200 million note presented by Ford, $1.6 billion in equity and $900 million in so called working capital, the sources said, a sum that can be used for new product investments, launch costs, potential plant upgrades and rainy day money to weather cyclical downturns.
Of the $1.6 billion in cash, a small majority comes from Geely, while the rest comes from provincial Chinese government investment vehicles, the sources said, adding that the remaining money comes from Chinese and overseas lenders.
), China Construction Bank (
"The big thing here though is that it (the purchase) is the first of its kind," the source said, who asked not to be named because he is not authorized to speak on the record about the transaction.
"This deal does change the game significantly. In 10 years time, the Chinese auto market will double the size of the U.S. market."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Ford paid $6.4 billion and got back $2.7 billion??????? no wonder the geniuses in Detroit got into trouble. Ford was no exception ¡ª it just got into trouble first and unloaded the luxury group first.
Mar 29, 20103:43pm EDT--
Capitalism gone mad!
Capitalism gone mad!
Why dont you sell the family silver as well?
Idiots selling out to China again!! Will you ever learn?
Mar 30, 20102:23am EDT--
