Keep major currencies stable: top Chinese official
2010-03-26 06:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Holding major exchange rates stable will benefit China and the rest of the world as it strives to overcome the global credit crunch, a senior official with the ruling Communist Party said.
Liu He, deputy director of the Office of the Central Leading Group on Financial and Economic Affairs, also said on Friday that exchange rates should not be politicized -- a thinly veiled rebuke of Washington, which is urging China to let the yuan rise.
His comments offer a rare insight into the thinking of the Central Leading Group, a body that is instrumental in shaping decisions made by the Communist Party -- and hence the government -- but that rarely makes public statements.
"At a time of crisis, maintaining the stability of major exchange rates is not only beneficial to China, it is also beneficial to the world. We must be responsible," he said.
"If exchange rates are volatile, trade will have no anchor. There will be disorder in capital inflows and outflows. So as a responsible big nation, we must maintain relative stability of exchange rates," Liu said.
"We do not only wish ourselves to do so but also wish that other countries, especially those with major reserve currencies, recognize this issue," he added.
China has effectively pegged its currency to the dollar since mid-2008 to cushion its exporters from the financial crisis, a policy that has come under growing fire from Washington, where lawmakers have threatened punitive duties against Chinese products.
Some U.S. economists say the yuan is undervalued by as much as 40 percent, serving as a subsidy for Chinese goods and costing jobs in the United States, where unemployment is running at nearly 10 percent.
"We should clearly recognize, whatever happens to China's exchange rate, it will not be in the direct interest of American producers but will increase costs for American consumers," he said. "I am very regretful that some politicians are using this as an excuse. Why are they doing something that is not in the interests of their country? I cannot understand this."
Economists polled by Reuters said they expected Beijing to resume yuan appreciation in the second quarter but to keep its currency on a short leash, allowing a mere 3 percent rise over the next 12 months.
U.S. President Barack Obama's administration must decide on April 15 whether to label China a "currency manipulator" in a semi-annual report, which many in the market see as a potential flashpoint in Sino-U.S. relations.
Liu declined to comment on the looming decision, but expressed optimism that bilateral relations would develop smoothly.
"I believe the outlook is good, because China and the United States share many common interests and leaders from both countries want to increase mutual cooperation. But we resolutely oppose Cold War thinking," he said.
