Factbox: Impact of expected China-Taiwan trade deal
2010-03-26 05:38:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Mar 26 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Mon, Mar 15 2010
Sun, Mar 14 2010
Fri  EDT
China has claimed sovereignty over self-ruled Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong's forces won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists (KMT) fled to the island. But ties have warmed since 2008 as the two sides began to talk trade.
The following is an overview of the economic cooperation framework agreement's (EFCA) likely content and expected impact.
Import tariffs would remain highest for sectors in Taiwan that might lose ground to a greater flow of goods from China. Financial services and institutional investors will benefit from more openness in each side's financial market, while legal transparency rules should help Taiwan high-tech R&D.
Chinese officials say they want to fast-track the deal, despite its complexity, while the Taiwan government has said it aims to sign it at formal talks before the end of June.
Taiwan's parliament could hold up ECFA by demanding revisions subject to Beijing's approval, while the island's ruling party chief said there was no timeline as the deal becomes a year-end local election issue.
The Taiwan Stock Exchange and the Taiwan dollar will firm slightly when the deal is signed. Shares of listed companies from China's Fujian province, which is geographically closest to Taiwan, would gain in Chinese markets.
* LIKELY GAINS FOR TAIWAN, CHINA
Taiwan will get a first-time blessing from Beijing to discuss free-trade agreements with the United States, Singapore and other countries, which would react positively to the export-dependent island's tie-up with China's much larger economy
Beijing will hope that the deal helps Taiwan's $390 billion economy, winning points for any later talks about political unification.
If negotiations carry into the second half of 2010, ECFA would become enmeshed in fractious Taiwan local elections with anti-China opposition candidates saying the deal could flood the island with cheap Chinese goods or herald cross-Strait political unification. The ruling KMT is staking much of the vote on ECFA in polls seen as a bellwether for the 2012 presidential race.
(Compiled by the Taipei newsroom; Editing by Nick Macfie)
