Timeline: Chinese automakers chase global profile
2010-03-29 08:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Zhejiang Geely Holding Group, China's largest private-run car maker, has agreed to buy Volvo cars from Ford (
(Reuters) - Zhejiang Geely Holding Group, China's largest private-run car maker, has agreed to buy Volvo cars from Ford (
Following is a timeline tracing proposed, failed or ongoing global deals by Chinese automakers since last year:
March 18, 2009 - Beijing Automotive Industry Holding Corp (BAIC) said to want U.S. auto parts maker Delphi Corp's non-core assets.
June 3 - Little-known heavy machinery maker Sichuan Tengzhong Heavy Industrial Machinery unveils tentative deal to buy GM's Hummer.
June 11 - BAIC interested in Ford's Volvo car unit.
Aug 1 - BAIC will pay up to $117 million for 40 percent stake in Fujian Motor Industry Group's 50:50 commercial vehicle venture with Daimler in southeast China.
), a GM China partner, may take passive stake in Saab by teaming up with luxury sports car maker Koenigsegg.
Sept 9 - Geely says its parent wants to bid for Volvo, with privately-held Geely Holding Group seeking full ownership.
Sept 9 - BAIC agrees to take minority stake in Koenigsegg as part of the Swedish firm's purchase of Saab.
) proposes capital writedown that would slash the stake of SAIC, its majority Chinese shareholder.
Sept 17 - Geely approaches Magna International MGa.TO about possible stake in Opel; Magna refrains for now from any such partnership.
Oct 9 - GM signs deal to sell Hummer to an investment partnership headed by China's Tengzhong.
Oct 12 - Tengzhong seeks regulatory approval for Hummer buy, aims to close purchase by early 2010.
Dec 4 - GM and SAIC to set up 50:50 JV to make small cars and commercial vehicles in India. GM also to sell 1 percent stake in existing China JV with SAIC to its partner, giving SAIC control.
December 14 - BAIC acquires some Saab assets, including intellectual property for the 9-5 and 9-3 model platforms and some production equipment.
January 11, 2010 - China overtakes U.S. as the world's largest auto market having sold a total of 10.3 million passenger cars in 2009, up 52.9 percent from a year earlier.
February 24 - Beijing rejects Tengzhong's bid to buy GM's Hummer brand.
March 28 - Zhejiang Geely Holding Group, buys Ford Motor's (
) Volvo car unit for $1.8 billion, the country's biggest overseas auto purchase.
(Writing by Carl Bagh, Bangalore Editorial Reference Unit; Editing by David Cutler)
