China urges swing toward private sector investment
2010-03-24 08:44:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Wednesday said it will take steps to encourage more private sector investment, naming sectors from communications to the weapons industry where money would be particularly welcome.
The announcement by the State Council, or the cabinet, was short on specifics, but it could mark a significant policy development in the world's third-largest economy, where private businesses have complained of an increase in favoritism shown to state-owned firms over the past year.
As Beijing winds down its stimulus spending launched in the face of the global financial crisis, it is also looking to the private sector to pick up more of the slack.
"We will further expand the fields that private sector firms can invest in," the cabinet said in a statement on the government's main web portal (www.gov.cn) after a meeting chaired by Premier Wen Jiabao.
It urged private firms to participate in a range of sectors and activities, including: transportation, telecommunications and energy infrastructure; national defense; affordable housing development; finance; and healthcare.
The private sector has generated the bulk of new jobs in the Chinese economy over the past decade, but coal miners, property developers and a host of other businesses have been squeezed recently, compelled to sell stakes to state firms or priced out of bidding for assets by government-backed players.
Although this has never been declared to be an official policy, the phenomenon has come to be widely known as 'guojin mintui' -- or, 'the state advances and the private sector retreats'.
"We will encourage and guide private enterprises to participate in the reform and reorganization of state-owned enterprises in multiple ways such as taking minority stakes or controlling stakes and acquiring assets," it said.
Investment accounted for 8 percentage points of the Chinese economy's 8.7 percent growth last year and was largely driven by government spending, which has started to fade.
Fixed-asset investment rose 26.6 percent in the first two months of the year compared with the same period a year earlier, while the central government-led portion of that was up 14.0 percent.
(Reporting by Aileen Wang and Simon Rabinovitch; editing by Patrick Graham)
