Chongqing Water makes a big splash on Shanghai debut
2010-03-29 01:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sun, Mar 28 2010
Fri, Mar 26 2010
Thu, Mar 25 2010
Thu, Mar 25 2010
Tue, Mar 23 2010
Mon  EDT
), which has a monopoly in the west-central region of China, soared on its debut, as investors shrugged off recent sluggish first-day performances to pile into a water industry that stands to gain from big government infrastructure spending.
Shares in state-owned Chongqing Water jumped 74 percent in Shanghai on Monday, well ahead of market predictions for a gain of around 25 percent, after the company had opted to keep the price of its $511 million IPO low given recent flagging interest in new offerings.
"People are just jumping into the stock," said Yuan Yuanzhang, analyst at GF Securities, noting the debut performance was much stronger than had been expected.
Chongqing Water, funded by the Chongqing Municipal People's government, is likely to benefit from state water infrastructure plans, with the Chongqing region a primary development focus.
"Profit is relatively stable for the company," said Chen Hui at Guotai Securities in Shanghai. "Investors are also confident that future expansion will be successful after the success of its 2007 plans."
With China's water infrastructure still relatively undeveloped, Chongqing Water should continue to increase profits in the years ahead, said Hui.
Chongqing Water shares opened at 10.99 yuan and ran up to 12.17 yuan by the midsession, versus its IPO price of 6.98 yuan.
The broader market also rose, with the benchmark Shanghai Composite Index
up more than 2 percent at a 2-month high, as investors welcomed news of the imminent launch of stock index futures trading.
Analysts had expected Chongqing Water to rise on its debut given the sector's strong fundamentals, including a growing population and urbanization trends that are set to boost water consumption in China.
Chongqing Water, which is located by the Yangtze river, will use the IPO proceeds for new water projects, including sewage treatment, in the Chongqing and Three Gorges reservoir area.
The company's IPO price values it at 34.9 times its 2009 earnings, taking into account dilution by the additional share offering.
About a dozen water supply and environmental protection firms listed in Shanghai and Shenzhen have an average historical price earnings ratio of around 50 times, with major rival Tianjin Capital Environment Protection Group Co (
