Yuan not cause of China-U.S. trade gap: minister
2010-03-30 05:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Letting the yuan rise is not a solution to the imbalance in trade between China and the United States, Commerce Minister Chen Deming said.
He pointed to Chinese data showing that the yuan, also known as the renminbi, rose by 21 percent against the dollar between July 2005 and July 2008, but the U.S. trade deficit with China grew by 21.6 percent during the period.
"Renminbi appreciation cannot redress the trade imbalance," Chen said in a statement posted on Tuesday on the ministry's website, www.mofcom.gov.cn. Unusually, it was posted in Chinese and English.
"It has been proved both in theory and practice that the appreciation of a nation's currency provides little help for improving balance of payments."
The yuan was kept stable in 2009, but the U.S. trade gap with China narrowed by 16 percent, he said.
China is under pressure from the United States to let the yuan rise or risk being labeled a currency manipulator by the U.S. Treasury in a report due on April 15. Separately, U.S. lawmakers have threatened to impose tariffs on imports from China unless Beijing allows the yuan to climb.
"It does not help if one side, driven by its political agenda at home, puts pressure on the other with unwarranted threats of trade sanctions," Chen said.
He reiterated the official view that the U.S. trade deficit has been over-estimated. He said the trade gap was a reflection of globalization, with U.S. firms moving to China to lower their costs while U.S. consumers benefit from cheap Chinese goods.
"China gets the surplus yet the United States gets the real gains," he said.
The trade gap was partly fueled by Washington's long-held restrictions on high-tech exports to China, Chen said.
He also cited arguments by Western economists that the dollar's role as a global reserve currency was a factor behind America's global trade deficit.
"Today, the United States is still caught between generating liquidity for the rest of the world through current-account deficits and maintaining the stability of its currency."
Still, Chen pledged that China would boost imports to help reduce its trade surplus with the United States; rejecting political pressure, he said Beijing would also maintain dialogue and cooperation with Washington to solve disputes.
