China's leaders focus inward, wary of distraction: Singapore
2013-03-19 07:59:00.0
(Reuters) - China's leaders face daunting domestic problems and would be wary of any foreign entanglement, and the growth of its military was a reflection of its rise as an economic power, Singapore's foreign minister, K. Shanmugam, said on Tuesday.
President Xi Jinping and other new leaders of China's 1.3 billion people need to restructure the economy to rely more on consumption, clean up the environment and tackle rising income inequality, he said.
"The Chinese leadership know the last thing they need is an external distraction," Shanmugam told Reuters in an interview.
The new leaders of China, who have taken over after a once-in-a-decade reshuffle, are being scrutinized by outside powers as growing economic and military influence propel it to superpower status.
The relationship between the United States and China would define how Asia develops, Shanmugam said.
They have recently exchanged angry accusations over computer hacking, while China, Japan, Vietnam and the Philippines have conflicting claims over various groups of islands.
Singapore, most of whose people are ethnic Chinese, is widely regarded as a U.S. ally, but the wealthy Southeast Asian city-state also has close ties with China where it has invested billions of dollars.
Shanmugam said China's development of its military capabilities was consistent with its growing economic influence.
"You go to a museum in Beijing you will see a big poster on how many of the Western countries and others combined together and tried to carve China up like a melon. That's deeply ingrained in the Chinese psyche," he said.
"The legitimacy of government in China today has to depend both on economic progress for its people and protecting national sovereignty," he said.
Shanmugam said that despite the economic and military competition between China and the United States, and tension in the South China Sea, they "both know that the cooperation is going to be far more important".
Southeast Asia should not have to choose between then, he said.
The 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) were making progress towards integrating their economies by 2015, with substantial reductions in tariffs on goods negotiated and efforts now on the services sector, he said.
But as well as the danger of conflict between the United States and China, Southeast Asia faced the danger of conflict within the region of 600 million people over territorial claims.
"One of the things that one can see on the horizon that can throw ASEAN off balance from continued progress in bettering its people's lives is any kind of conflict."
Rival claims would take a long time to resolve but in the meantime, rules, such as a maritime code of conduct (COC), were necessary to ensure free navigation and the flow of trade, Shanmugam said.
"Progress on the COC has not been as good as we had hoped," he said.
"The way to avoid the disputes spilling over into something nasty is to have a code of conduct that would give a framework as to how countries behave with each other, for example in how their ships interact with each other, without having to deal with the underlying issues of sovereignty."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China is already working on the main suggestions of Singapore¡¯s foreign minister. In 2011, China raised the minimum income tax deduction 75%, reinstated old age pensions, and began building 46 million low-cost housing units, enough for 138 million Chinese or 10% of the population. This will create more customers to drive China¡¯s economy with consumption and move away from its export-driven model. At the Durban Conference on Climate Change in late 2011, China presented a $1.7 trillion, 5 year ($340 billion per year), 22 point plan to address pollution. Some results have been noticed; more serious results should be seen by mid-2014; and greater improvements should be obvious by late 2016 when a second 5 year plan should begin. President Xi Jinping has a degree in chemical engineering that makes him able to oversee the plan. China¡¯s leaders always said that they would address pollution when they had the economic resources to solve the problems without risking the economic well-being of China¡¯s people. China continues to stress peace, prosperity, and trade in foreign affairs, and new approaches have been made to Japan and South Korea. China has also made statements critical of North Korea and the US as reported in other Reuters articles and confirmed in Xinhua. China knows that both sides should show restraint because conflicts can come from either side. The US most often forgets that it is still at war with North Korea, and the US ignores its threats against the DPRK in Bush¡¯s Axis of Evil speech in 2002 that was followed by the illegal US regime change in Iraq. North Korea is a small country that cannot ignore its state of war with the US, the US threats followed by US aggression against Iraq, and the US threats that may be followed by US aggression against Iran. Americans often act like sleepwalkers who cannot understand that their words and actions may cause responses from others that surprise the ignorant Americans. China does its best to preserve peace between the threatened North Koreans and the clueless Americans.
Mar 19, 20138:07pm EDT--
