Senators vow action on China forex bill
2010-03-23 16:00:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
A quick-fix on the day's news published with Reuters videos and award-winning news photography and delivered at your choice of one of four times during the day.
The latest Reuters articles on M&A, IPOs, private equity, hedge funds and regulatory updates delivered to your inbox each day.
Tue, Mar 23 2010
Tue, Mar 23 2010
Tue, Mar 23 2010
Tue, Mar 23 2010
Mon, Mar 22 2010
Tue  EDT
Senator Charles Schumer, a New York Democrat, said he wanted a vote on the bill by the end of May regardless of whether President Barack Obama's administration has formally labeled China a currency manipulator in an April 15 report.
Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, said he agreed quick congressional action was needed because the pace of China's currency reforms have been so slow.
"I think our pressure is going to make a difference, not only to China, but to the administration," Schumer said.
"I think Treasury is seriously considering it," he said, when asked if thought the Obama administration would label China a currency manipulator in the upcoming report.
Graham said he was prepared to meet with Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Zhong Shan, who is due to visit Washington this week for talks on trade and currency issues.
But "at the end of the day, China is too big to be allowed to have this advantage ... The only thing they seem to respond to is pressure," Graham said.
Schumer and Graham's bill would no longer require Treasury to decide every six months whether China or any other country is manipulating its currency.
Instead, it would be required to identify countries with fundamentally misaligned currencies, and allow U.S. companies to seek anti-dumping duties against any targeted country that does not reform its policy.
"My belief is that China will not do anything unless they're required to, and every day we wait is a day we lose wealth, we lose economic advantage, we lose jobs," Schumer said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer and Paul Eckert; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
