GoDaddy plans to stop China domain registrations
2010-03-24 17:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Internet domain company GoDaddy.com said it planned to stop registering domain names in China, joining Google Inc in protesting cyber attacks and censorship in that country.
"We believe that many of the current abuses of the Internet originating in China are due to a lack of enforcement against criminal activities by the Chinese government," Christine Jones, Go Daddy Group Inc general counsel, told a congressional commission hearing on Wednesday.
Jones said GoDaddy, based in Scottsdale, Arizona, would continue to manage .cn domain names of existing customers.
"Our experience has been that China is focused on using the Internet to monitor and control the legitimate activities of its citizens, rather than penalizing those who commit Internet-related crimes," Jones said.
Google said visitors to its China search engine, google.cn, were being redirected to Hong Kong-based google.com.hk.
"I compliment Google and I compliment GoDaddy," said Democratic Senator Byron Dorgan, chairman of the Congressional-Executive Commission on China, which focuses on human rights in China.
Republican Representative Chris Smith said GoDaddy's action was "a powerful sign that American IT companies want to do the right thing in repressive countries."
"We are well aware that the Chinese government can, at any time, block access to our services," Alan Davidson, Google's director of public policy, said in prepared testimony.
Internet censorship has drawn increased attention from U.S. lawmakers since Google's spat with China began and a policy initiative by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to promote global Internet freedom.
"This is a foreign policy priority of the United States," said Democratic Senator Ted Kaufman, co-chair of the Senate's newly formed Global Internet Freedom Caucus.
(Reporting by John Poirier; additional reporting by Diane Bartz; Editing by Tim Dobbyn)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
LOL, the sleazy ball GoDaddy wants to jump on the Google bandwagon? STFU and GTFO
Mar 24, 20104:28pm EDT--
It¡¯s too bad there is not more unity on this kind of ethics issue instead of the divide that can be drawn from the other giant MS with ¡°Bing¡±.
It¡¯s too bad there is not more unity on this kind of ethics issue instead of the divide that can be drawn from the other giant MS with ¡°Bing¡±.
Mar 24, 20108:59pm EDT--
Good for GoDaddy, another company that puts principles above profits.
Mar 25, 20101:22am EDT--
