U.S. economist says China could act on yuan if U.S. quiet
2010-03-23 06:55:00.0
(Reuters) - China will have more scope to allow its currency to appreciate if the U.S. government adopts a low-key stance on the issue, a Harvard University economist who also advises the U.S. government on economic policy said.
"If the U.S. Congress and the Treasury don't talk about the Chinese manipulating their currency, if the U.S. can be quiet for two months, then I think the Chinese will be able to say that because of the great strength of the Chinese economy ... they are unilaterally raising the value of the RMB," said Martin Feldstein, a member of U.S. President Barack Obama's economic recovery board.
Tensions over China's currency practices have grown increasingly acrimonious after U.S. lawmakers threatened to impose trade tariffs unless Beijing allowed the yuan to rise.
"With the politicization of the issue, it's more difficult (for the Chinese government) to take economic decisions separate from politics," said Laura D'Andrea Tyson, another Obama advisor speaking at the same event.
Separately, Feldstein said the strength of the U.S. dollar against the euro was only temporary, adding that the euro remained the only major alternative to the dollar.
The euro hit a three-week low of $1.3464 on Monday amid concerns about Greece's debt problems, but rebounded to $1.3554 on Tuesday.
In addition to his role as an advisor to Obama, Feldstein is also president emeritus of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Mar 22, 201011:10pm EDT--
In other words the U.S. must allow China time to let itself and the world believe allowing their currency to float is solely their idea. Is China a nation or a petulant child the world must play games with?
Mar 23, 20102:21am EDT--
China, whether you like it or not, is a great power. It also has a long-standing history of Western imperialism that both the government and the people treat very, very seriously. The Communist party will never give into direct (and hostile) demands to the West, especially with something so nationalistically important as currency. Take a step back: imagine if China demanded that we revalue our currency against the yuan to lower its value even more. I think the outrage in the USA would be unparalleled. The USA has to treat China with respect, though it can still push for what it wants (we are still the strongest great power in Asia). This means that behind the scenes negotiations and allowing China to create mythology around the reasons for its currency revaluation (like the move is in accordance with economic resurgence) is a much smarter plan of action than picking a fight with them. For more, see http://www.philosoguy.com
Mar 23, 201012:39pm EDT--
