Yuan in global FX reserves as soon as 2025: c.banker poll
2010-03-21 20:05:00.0
(Reuters) - China's yuan could become a reserve currency accounting for at least five percent of global foreign-exchange reserves as early as 2025, central bankers said in an annual global survey.
The poll of reserve managers from 43 central banks also revealed a renewed respect for gold as a reserve asset and store of value with more than half saying official attitudes to the precious metal had changed resulting from its price rise and high profile purchases by monetary authorities in India, Russia and China.
Carried out by Central Banking Publications between September and December last year, the survey polled central bankers around the world controlling $2.4 trillion worth of reserve assets and accounting for 30 percent of global reserves.
Nearly all respondents saw the euro's standing as a leading reserve currency rise after the world financial crisis while 65 percent of them said the dollar's status had weakened.
But several large reserve holders were among those that thought the status of both the euro and dollar had been enhanced, with the greenback displaying its value as a "safe haven" asset.
The idea, notably floated by the Chinese, was seen as unfeasible by 65 percent of those surveyed, with some pointing out that the allocation of SDRs remained decided by politics.
Over half said it would take more than 16 years for the yuan to make up 5 percent of global foreign-exchange reserves while a third said this was possible by 2025, with China's trade ties with Asia seen spurring this development.
(Reporting by Sebastian Tong; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Mar 21, 20108:21pm EDT--
China is going to rule nothing!! A country true power is based on productivity and innovation not on cheap labor. Sad to say buy slavery is not over in the world, and China is just that is a country based in modern remote slavery. We in the USA only see the products (just go to Wall Mart) not the slaves. China need first to be a true democracy, with freedoms and free market. Then comes the increases in productivity and better standard of living.
Mar 21, 20109:32pm EDT--
China is going to rule nothing!! A country true power is based on productivity and innovation not on cheap labor. Sad to say buy slavery is not over in the world, and China is just that is a country based in modern remote slavery. We in the USA only see the products (just go to Wall Mart) not the slaves. China need first to be a true democracy, with freedoms and free market. Then comes the increases in productivity and better standard of living.
========= 1, you have to know that, for those products you bought from china, more than 50% was produced by multi-national companies, many of those companies are from US. So when you insert ¡°slavery in china¡±, you actually mean ¡°Slavery in China from US.¡± 2, i don¡¯t believe china will rule the world, because that¡¯s not in our tradition; 3, about democracy, it¡¯s so funny that, when another country dose not agree with your democracy, Uncles Sam will sell it with plots, killings or just wars¡­ look what happened in VN, Iraq or Afganistan¡­. 4, about the ¡°slaves¡± again, I live in here, I don¡¯t think any of us see us as slaves, so please stop being stupid.
Mar 22, 20101:17am EDT--
