China more concerned about Iran, wary on sanctions
2010-03-16 13:32:00.0
(Reuters) - China has become more concerned about international tensions over Iran's nuclear program, but remains doubtful sanctions can resolve the stand-off, the Chinese foreign minister said on Tuesday.
Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi was speaking after talks with visiting British Foreign Secretary (minister) David Miliband, where one of the key issues on the table was Iran.
Yang's comments suggested he had given little ground on Western calls for Beijing to back proposed new sanctions over Tehran's disputed nuclear activities, which China could block as a veto-wielding permanent member of the U.N. Security Council.
"Regarding the Iran nuclear issue, I wish to point out that this issue is the subject of widespread attention in the international community," Yang told reporters.
"China has become more concerned about the current situation," he said, adding Beijing still sought a diplomatic solution.
China has resisted calls to tighten the economic screws on one of its major suppliers of oil, and Yang repeated Beijing's long-standing position that sanctions could not resolve the tensions. But he stopped short of outright opposition.
"I have said before that sanctions do not provide a fundamental solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, ultimately this issue has to be resolved through peaceful negotiations," he said.
A draft Western proposal calls for restricting more Iranian banks abroad, but does not press for sanctions against Iran's oil and gas industries.
At the news briefing, Miliband described tackling Iran's nuclear program as a "test for all of us" and noted China had registered its increasing concern.
"We have a shared goal in ensuring that Iran lives by its commitments under the non-proliferation treaty, and we are going to work very closely together to achieve it," he added.
Miliband later told reporters Iran was the main topic of his meetings with Yang and Premier Wen Jiabao, where he said he made "detailed and lengthy presentations" on the issue.
"No one pretends that sanctions on their own are a golden key -- that's why we've got a dual-track policy. It is the combination of engagement and pressure that I think is most important," he said.
"I don't want to provide a running commentary on the Chinese position, but I think it's clear to all that Iran is not in compliance with the requests of the U.N. Security Council," Miliband added.
China is one of the five permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, each holding the power to veto resolutions. It backed previous Iran resolutions, after working to cut measures that could threaten flows of oil and Chinese investments.
In 2009, Iran was China's third biggest source of imported crude oil, behind Angola and top supplier Saudi Arabia. Iran supplied China with 23.1 million metric tonnes of crude, or 11.4 percent of China's total crude imports.
While Beijing abstains from Security Council votes on decisions it dislikes, it is much less willing to use its veto and risk diplomatic isolation, especially if fellow Security Council member Russia backs a resolution. (Additional reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Jerry Norton)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Obviously the US multinationals like Wal-Mart, can help in this matter, by letting China know that it can influence the mullahs.
Mar 16, 20106:37pm EDT--
