U.S. tells China yuan issue is of real concern
2010-03-18 17:43:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Mar 18 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Wed, Mar 17 2010
Thu, Mar 18 2010
An employee counts U.S. dollar banknotes at a branch of Huaxia Bank in Shenyang, Liaoning province March 18, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Sheng Li
Thu  EDT
China faced important negotiations over the yuan in coming weeks, U.S. Ambassador Jon Huntsman said, adding Washington was not alone in wanting Beijing to unshackle its currency from the 20-month-old peg.
"We hope to see more flexibility on the exchange rate," he told students at Tsinghua University, an elite Beijing school.
"I would be misleading you if I left you with the impression that this wasn't a very, very important issue in the United States, and will continue to be. We'll see how the next few weeks play out," Huntsman said.
The comments, as well as plans unveiled by senators on Tuesday to pass a law that would slap duties on Chinese products unless China abandons the peg, did little to alter investors' expectations that the yuan will start rising gradually by the end of June.
A semi-annual U.S. Treasury report due on April 15 could label China a "currency manipulator," adding to pressure on Beijing and threatening a deepening rift between the world's biggest and third-biggest economies.
The U.S. Congress goes on Easter recess on Friday until April 12, leaving very limited opportunity for lawmakers to pass a China currency bill before April 15.
"I suspect there will be many important negotiations in the weeks ahead. This is of real concern to people in my country," Huntsman said. "Many see the trading relationship with China as a little out of balance, partially because of the currency issue."
"My Chinese friends like to pitch this as just an American issue. I like to say that there are many countries that feel the same way," Huntsman said.
Visiting Washington, Indian Commerce and Industry Minister Anand Sharma said China's exchange rate policy created problems for Indian exporters.
"We feel that the policy should be such that exporters should not be disadvantaged," he told Reuters after a speech.
But Kaushik Basu, chief economic adviser in India's Finance Ministry, said New Delhi is unlikely to join other states in putting pressure on China to revalue the yuan.
UNFAIR, HARMFUL
In a discussion paper for a meeting of officials from the Group of 20 industrialized and emerging nations, Canada said that stalling on economic and financial reforms agreed at a G20 summit in Pittsburgh last year would bring unsustainable debt levels, higher interest rates and another crisis.
The Canadian discussion paper did not mention China by name, but said in a scenario where rich countries cut deficits, but emerging markets neither let their currencies float, nor encourage their own consumers to spend more, "by 2011, deflation would occur in advanced countries, real interest rates would increase sharply, and growth would stall."
Chinese officials have given no ground, saying they will stick to a stable exchange rate while asserting that their nation is being made a "scapegoat" for the United States' own economic woes ahead of congressional mid-term elections.
Qin Gang, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said U.S. demands for a stronger yuan were unfair and harmful to Sino-American ties. China is the world's biggest exporter.
Resolving such trade frictions "requires that both sides be calm and rational," Qin told a regular briefing on Thursday.
A stronger yuan would spell the end for many Chinese exporters in labor-intensive sectors such as garments and furniture, a semi-official trade group said.
"If the yuan rises, these companies will face the immediate risk of going bust as their profit margin is already very narrow," said Zhang Wei, vice-chairman of the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade.
While external pressure on China to push up the yuan is intense, domestic pressure to hold it down is even greater, said Zhang, whose members include China's biggest exporters.
He said his group was checking with more than 1,000 exporters on whether they could cope with a stronger exchange rate.
"The more this goes on the more China will go against what the U.S. is wishing for," said Jinny Yan, an economist at Standard Chartered Bank in Shanghai.
Several branches of the Chinese government, including the ministries of commerce and industry, also conducted currency stress tests last month.
A government source familiar with one of the field trips to China's coastal exporting hubs said the mission came back unconvinced that the pros of a stronger yuan would outweigh the cons because of the razor-thin margins Zhang mentioned.
"But having said that, we found that these companies are quite flexible in adapting to new market conditions," he said.
Because they can make a steady profit on their current margins, thanks to high volumes, they have little incentive to move up the value chain, the source added.
"So yuan appreciation would be a nice catalyst to force these firms to change for the better, which is also what the government wants to see," he said. "It's true that jobs are a major concern. But we're also seeing labor shortages in many places. So I think it should be manageable."
"The last thing China will do is be seen bowing to foreign pressure, even if it's the right thing to do. The Americans should keep quiet and not lecture the Chinese. Once it's left alone, China is quite likely to move on the yuan," he said.
(Additional reporting by Eadie Chen in Beijing; Writing by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Kazunori Takada and Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The chinese are trying to deal with inflationary pressures. Yet, the rising Yuan would help decrease some of these pressures. The chinese are in it for face, but even some real economists in China know that a Yuan unpegged from the dollar is good for china and the chinese consumers. The old guard still in the chinese government will be the ones who ruin china¡¯s growth by adhering to old fashioned ideas such as ¡°face.¡± The rising Yuan might not help the US much, but it will help china transition from an export economic dependent on nations like the US and the EU for export to a domestically driven economy that can compete in finance and investments. The prices of oil and natural resources are what affect inflation, and a devalued yuan keep these prices high.
Mar 18, 20101:06am EDT--
Mar 18, 20107:15am EDT--
When will Washington understand what ¡°soft power¡± is? Trying to ¡°order¡± China to do something by pressure will inevitably lead to opposite results; even more soo if China knows that it has little too lose. It must be understood that ¡°face¡± is more important to the Beijing the economy itself.
Mar 18, 20107:16am EDT--
