World Bank tells China to tighten policy
2010-03-17 07:23:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Mar 16 2010
Tue, Mar 16 2010
Tue, Mar 16 2010
Mon, Mar 15 2010
Mon, Mar 15 2010
Labourers transport packages of cement at a cement plant in Huaibei, Anhui province, March 17, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Stringer
By Alan Wheatley, China Economics Editor
By Alan Wheatley, China Economics Editor
Wed  EDT
"In China the economy has held up very well during the global crisis and growth prospects for this year and next year remain quite good," Louis Kuijs, senior economist in the bank's Beijing office, told a news conference on Wednesday to issue the report.
Growth this year of 9.5 percent, which was the median forecast of economists in a recent Reuters poll, would vault China past Japan and make it the world's second-biggest economy.
UBS also raised its 2010 GDP forecast on Wednesday, to 10 percent from 9 percent, citing the momentum of domestic demand and a likely recovery in net exports back to pre-crisis levels.
"We think that inflation risks remain modest, in large part because of the global context. Nonetheless, the macro stance needs to be noticeably tighter than in 2009 to manage inflation expectations and contain the risk of a property bubble," the Washington-based lender said.
Meeting this year's target of 7.5 trillion yuan in new loans -- down from a record 9.6 trillion yuan in 2009 -- would be important to anchor inflationary expectations. Higher interest rates would make the tightening more convincing, the bank said.
"The world economy is still very subdued, but China's growth has been strong and, unlike in most other countries, overall output in China is, according to our calculations, rather close to its potential -- which means there is not a lot of spare capacity," Kuijs said.
As for the yuan, a stronger exchange rate would help dampen inflation pressure by lowering the price of imports and toning down demand. It would also help rebalance China's growth toward services and consumption and away from industry and investment.
"Over time, more exchange rate flexibility can enable China to have a monetary policy independent from U.S. cyclical conditions, which is increasingly necessary," the report said.
"For instance, China needs to increase administrative prices for resources and utilities that are necessary to adjust the structure of the economy. And higher prices for agricultural products and higher migrant wages can help boost rural incomes and reduce urban-rural inequality..." the bank said.
China has set a 3 percent inflation target this year, but the bank said a rate of 4-5 percent is not a major problem in many emerging markets in the throes of reform and development.
The bank described the price risks facing China this year as relatively modest. The big dangers were higher asset prices and strained local government finances, stemming from unprecedented lending by state-owned banks unleashed to prop up growth.
Overall, China's prospects are much less uncertain than a year ago at the peak of the financial crisis, the report said.
As government-led investment slows, the bank expects the composition of growth in 2010 to shift markedly.
Total investment will expand at only half last year's rate, but real estate spending will provide a big boost. Consumption should remain strong. Overall, domestic demand will contribute 9.1 percentage points to this year's projected GDP growth.
Net exports will account for the remaining 0.4 percentage point as global demand for Chinese goods recovers. Last year, by contrast, net exports shaved 3.9 points off headline growth.
(Reporting by Alan Wheatley; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Why no one comments in here?
Why no one comments in here?
Its about CHINA damn it!
Level of sophistication?
Mar 17, 20103:11am EDT--
Where have all the previous comments gone? there were 13 a few minutes ago!!!!
Mar 17, 20104:05am EDT--
OOPS!
Similar artical under similar header. My mistake!
Mar 17, 20104:24am EDT--
