Rio, Chinalco sign iron ore JV as price talks drag
2010-03-19 11:59:00.0
Rio, Chinalco sign iron ore JV as price talks drag | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Rio, Chinalco sign iron ore JV as price talks drag
Fri, Mar 19 2010
Thu, Mar 18 2010
Thu, Mar 18 2010
Thu, Mar 18 2010
Thu, Mar 18 2010
Fri  EDT
) signed a $2.9 billion pact with Chinese metals group Chinalco to develop an African iron ore mine, amid tense price talks with China's steel mills and ahead of a trial of four Rio employees.
The venture in Simandou, Guinea, not binding at this stage, marks a turnaround for the firms after Rio (
"This is a great deal for Rio Tinto," said analyst Peter Davey at Ambrian in London.
"In one clever move Rio has de-risked this West African project, repaired its relationship with Chinalco, introduced the Chinese influence into the country and covered the next $1.35 billion of capex spend," he said in a note.
The new alliance, rumored for some time, comes just days before four Rio Tinto employees stand trial in China on charges of commercial spying during price talks with Chinese mills last year. Rio Tinto has said its workers are innocent of the charges.
The trial -- due to start on Monday in Shanghai -- will not influence the sensitive iron ore price negotiations, Australian Trade Minister Simon Crean said on Friday.
Rio Tinto, the world's No. 2 iron ore producer, has remained a big supplier of the ore to China and is again locked in discussions to set prices for the next 12 months.
With spot market prices for iron ore surging in the last year, the world's big miners are pushing steel mills to accept one of the highest annual price hikes on record.
Brazil's Vale (
), the only iron ore producer larger than Rio Tinto, has asked mills to pay 90 percent more for ore this year.
Iron ore suppliers were making unreasonable price demands on China's steel makers, the chairman of Chinese metals trading house Sinosteel, Huang Tianwen, said.
Under the latest deal between the Anglo-Australian miner Rio and Chinalco, a portion of the iron ore from Simandou would be earmarked for China, though it may take years to complete development.
"We have long believed that Rio Tinto and Chinalco could work together on major projects for mutual benefit," Rio Tinto Chief Executive Tom Albanese said in a statement.
Chinalco has been Rio Tinto's largest shareholder since 2008, holding 9 percent of the stock.
Rio's London shares, which have around 7 percent so far this year, fell 1.9 percent to 3658 pence by 1512 GMT, largely in line with a weaker UK mining index .FTNMX1770.
State-run Chinalco's interests are focused mainly on aluminum, a sector where Rio Tinto holds the world No. 1 spot after acquiring Alcan two years ago, but has made it clear it wants to diversify into other sectors.
Under the deal, Rio Tinto would put its current 95 percent holding in Simandou into the new joint venture. Chinalco would invest $1.35 billion for a 47 percent stake, an effective 44.65 percent interest in the project itself.
Rio Tinto postponed development of the Simandou project in 2008 as markets plunged, but spot iron ore prices .IO62-CNI=SI have since rocketed on a recovery in steelmaking.
The firm says Simandou holds 2.25 billion tonnes of iron ore, making it the world's biggest undeveloped iron ore deposit.
The project, forecast to cost $6 billion, is earmarked to produce 70 million tonnes of ore in its first year.
Chinalco said in a separate statement Rio Tinto would operate the joint venture but they would have an equal number of directors, with ore being sold to China, the world's biggest steel-maker and importer of iron ore.
Major additional capital would be required on top of Chinalco's investment to fully develop Simandou, Rio Tinto said, though it did not give a figure.
Guinea last year canceled Rio's rights to two of four blocs of the huge Simandou concession, granting them to private firm BSGR.
Rio is still convinced it has a valid claim to the whole concession, spokesman Nick Cobban in London said. "We will continue to develop the southern section, which is extremely prospective, but we would like to have discussions at some point (with authorities)."
(Additional reporting by Eric Onstad in London; Editing by Himani Sarkar and David Cowell)
