Britain looks to China to pressure Iran
2010-03-15 08:22:00.0
(Reuters) - China and Britain agree on pressing Iran about its nuclear activities while seeking engagement, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said on Monday at the start of a visit to China that is likely to focus on the dispute.
"Britain and China have not only agreed on the goal that Iran should respect the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, but also respect that we need to keep a combination of engagement and pressure," Miliband told reporters at the Shanghai World Expo site, shortly before flying to Beijing.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is the pact seeking to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons beyond the formally recognized nuclear-armed states, including China and Britain.
But despite Miliband's upbeat comments, his talks in Beijing about Iran -- one of China's major oil suppliers -- could be one of the most difficult parts of his three-day trip.
Western powers want China to approve a proposed U.N. resolution imposing new sanctions on Tehran, which they say is seeking the means to make nuclear weapons and has violated non-proliferation safeguards.
Beijing however has previously resisted calls for harsh sanctions against Iran. And as one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, it has the power to veto any resolution.
Miliband's meetings in the Chinese capital include one with Premier Wen Jiabao, when they will discuss "how we can address the real threat that the Iranian nuclear program poses to international stability and security," the foreign minister said during an afternoon visit to a training center for peacekeeping police outside Beijing.
"Foreign investors seek transparency and fair competition so they can be confident in their investment," Miliband said.
China and Britain have recently sparred over climate change negotiations and Beijing's stance on human rights, after China executed a Briton for drug smuggling, although his family said there was convincing evidence that he was mentally ill.
"We don't pretend to agree on everything," said Miliband. "Our relationship is one of many layers and one of growing strength and growing engagement."
