Japan says U.S. shouldn't punish China over yuan
2010-03-18 05:48:00.0
(Reuters) - A Japanese deputy finance minister said on Thursday that China should understand global calls for a more flexible yuan, as the United States kept up pressure on China to let the Chinese currency rise.
The currency debate has turned acrimonious, with 130 U.S. lawmakers demanding sanctions unless China gives up what they see as an unfair competitive advantage by allowing the yuan to appreciate.
But Yoshihiko Noda, one of Japan's two deputy finance ministers, said it would be "wrong" for Washington to resort to sanctions.
"I don't know if the United States will impose sanctions, but I don't think that would be the right way of dealing with it," Noda told a news conference.
"Basically, such an action is not desirable. But I want China to understand there are expectations for a more flexible yuan, not only from the United States," he said.
Noda repeated that Japan and other Asian neighbors want a flexible yuan, which he said would benefit both the world and China.
Tokyo has said that a more flexible yuan is desirable but has been more reserved than its G7 peers in its criticism of China's currency system on the view that pressuring Beijing won't work.
A semiannual U.S. Treasury report due in mid-April could label China a "currency manipulator," adding to pressure on Beijing and threatening a deepening rift between the world's biggest and third-biggest economies.
Chinese officials have given no ground, saying they will not waver in sticking to a stable exchange rate while asserting that their nation is being made a "scapegoat" for the United States' own economic woes ahead of Congressional midterm elections.
China hasn't allowed the yuan to fluctuate much against the dollar since the financial crisis and also has restrictions on its convertibility and capital controls.
While Chinese officials aren't trying to elevate the yuan to an international currency, neither the euro, the yen nor the yuan are likely to replace the dollar as the world's leading currency, a senior Japanese Finance Ministry official said.
The dollar's role as the world's reserve currency has come under attack since the global financial crisis spread from the United States two years ago, International Bureau Director-General Takehiko Nakao said at a seminar.
Despite doubts about the dollar's status, it has become such an essential part of the global financial system that other countries should work to stabilize the system, he said, adding that no other currency offers the depth and liquidity to replace the dollar.
"Even if the use of the euro, the yen and the yuan were to spread, it is difficult to expect any of them to become a global reserve and payment currency," Nakao said, according to the text of a speech.
Overseas investors have reduced holdings of dollar-denominated assets, while some countries have diversified their reserves away from the greenback, due to worries about over-dependence on the U.S. economy and a growing U.S. budget deficit.
Japanese Finance Minister Naoto Kan has asked his staff to examine Japan's cash reserves in special accounts, including the special account for the country's $1 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, to see if the money could be used more efficiently.
Kan has said he won't tap the foreign exchange reserves to fund government spending, but other members of the ruling Democratic Party have called for Japan to devote some of its reserves to a sovereign wealth fund.
Nakao said Japanese citizens would be unlikely to accept active investment of some of the country's foreign exchange reserves, the bulk of which are held in U.S. Treasuries.
"Fiscal policy is an important backstop for financial stability and for a country's currency," he said.
"The most important policy the United States should pursue is responsible fiscal policy. I don't think the United States is an irresponsible country."
A fragmented government bond market makes it difficult for the euro to replace the dollar, the text of his speech showed.
Investor confidence in the euro has suffered a blow in the past few months, due to worries about Greece's fiscal deficit and its ability to pay its debts.
The common currency fell sharply on Thursday, with traders citing a Dow Jones report that Greece could seek aid from the International Monetary Fund next month.
