European shares slip as banks, miners weigh
2010-03-15 08:05:00.0
(Reuters) - European shares fell by midday on Monday, led lower by banking stocks on uncertainty over U.S. banking reforms, while miners fell on concern over a potential tightening of China's monetary policy.
By 1137 GMT, the pan-European FTSEurofirst 300
index of top shares was down 0.4 percent at 1,055.30 points after hitting a seven-week high on Friday. The index, which gained around 26 percent in 2009, is little changed this year.
"We have had quite a lot of macro uncertainties out there," said Jeremy Batstone-Carr, head of private client research at Charles Stanley in London.
"The equity markets have had a high degree of complacency regarding these concerns ... we have had our revival and we are now in double dip territory." Banks took the most points off the index on concerns a bipartisan financial regulation reform bill could still be worked out in the U.S. Senate, despite a breakdown in negotiations.
), Societe Generale (
), Barclays (
), Antofagasta (
), BHP Billiton (
), Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation (
), Rio Tinto (
Defensive stocks were in favor, with drugmakers adding the most points to the index. GlaxoSmithKline (
), Sanofi-Aventis (
Later in the session, investors will eye the New York Fed's March Empire State Index at 1230 GMT and U.S. February industrial output and capital utilization numbers at 1315 GMT.
Finance ministers from countries using the euro hope to agree on Monday on a way of providing heavily indebted Greece with financial aid, despite French and German doubts that a deal will be reached.
"The Greek bail out is likely to be approved but economic growth is still going to be very weak," said Batstone-Carr.
The main economic focus this week is on the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee meeting, scheduled for Tuesday.
Across Europe, the FTSE 100
index slipped 0.2 percent, Germany's DAX
was down 0.03 percent and France's CAC 40
(Reporting by Joanne Frearson; editing by Simon Jessop)
