T Rowe Price in talks to buy China fund stake: sources
2010-03-14 23:21:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sun, Mar 14 2010
Sat, Mar 13 2010
Sat, Mar 13 2010
Fri, Mar 12 2010
Thu, Mar 11 2010
A security guard is seen under the logo of CITIC Securities at a branch of the security brokerage house in Shanghai in this September 18, 2008 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Aly Song
Sun  EDT
) is in advanced talks to buy a stake in China's biggest asset management firm from Citic Securities Co (
), two sources with direct knowledge of the deal said on Monday.
T Rowe Price has been in talks with Citic Securities for months to buy a stake in China Asset Management Co and it has completed due diligence on the target company, the sources said.
Citic Securities, China's biggest listed brokerage, has been told by regulators to sell a 51 percent stake in China Asset Management, one of the sources said, in a deal that could be worth more than 9 billion yuan ($1.32 billion).
Citic Securities said on Saturday that it would sell part of its holdings in China Securities Co, a brokerage unit, and its fully owned unit China Asset Management, to bring it in line with regulatory requirements, as it seeks licenses for potentially lucrative new businesses such as margin trading and short selling of shares.
China Asset Management, which manages more than 260 billion yuan, is a major contributor to Citic Securities' revenue.
(Reporting by Samuel Shen and Edmund Klamann; Additional reporting by David Lin)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Make your money now while china is in a growth bubble. But, make sure you pull your money out before the coming crash of the chinese economy after the housing bubble crashes and banks fail to recover their massive loans they gave out last year and this year. Any investments in china should be short term. Their economy is going to hit a wall soon. If anything, inflation is coming.
Mar 15, 20101:01am EDT--
If anything, lets all give this ¡®blahhhh¡¯ our deepest sympathy, its hard to be a Internet Commentator, earning 5 US cents each comment.
Mar 15, 20102:12am EDT--
