Sen. Schumer says plans China currency bill
2010-03-12 16:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Mar 12 2010
Fri, Mar 12 2010
Thu, Mar 11 2010
Thu, Mar 11 2010
Thu, Mar 11 2010
Senator Charles Schumer speaks at the NAACP's Centennial Convention, in New York in this July 12, 2009 file photo. Credit: Reuters/Chip East
Fri  EST
"Now more than ever, there is a consensus to finally confront China's currency manipulation," the New York Democrat said in a statement.
"It is the single biggest step we can take to promote U.S. job creation, particularly in the manufacturing sector. We plan to move forward with revamped legislation on this issue in the coming days," he said.
Schumer's statement comes as President Barack Obama's administration faces a decision by April 15 on whether to formally label China as a currency manipulator in a semi-annual Treasury Department report.
Many U.S. lawmakers complain that China's currency is undervalued by as much as 40 percent, giving its companies an unfair price advantage in international trade.
Schumer co-authored a bill several years ago that threatened to slap a 27.5-percent across-the-board tariff on Chinese goods because of its currency policies. However, he and Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, later withdrew that plan.
Obama, in speech on Thursday on his plan to boost U.S. exports, said it was important China move to a "more market-oriented" exchange range.
Also on Friday, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said China needs to move away from export and investment-driven growth and toward "strategies that rely more on domestic consumption and domestic demand for future growth."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
About Time!
About Time!
Thank You Senator!
Mar 12, 20104:38pm EST--
Finally, a Democrat doing, or talking about doing something that makes sense.
Mar 12, 20104:55pm EST--
Blame China for your own stupid policy failures, Chucky. Whatever you do that disfavors China will come back around to disfavor Americans. Your calculations are based on personal incompetence and a doomed to fail. You know you, Obama, Reid, and Pelosi and your fellow Democrats are actively working to turn the dollar into toilet paper. It isn¡¯t China currency causing our lack of exports. It is American Democrat policies and taxation killing exports,killing manufacturing, killing jobs, and devaluing our own currency. The Democrats should be in jail for criminal US currency manipulations.
Mar 12, 20104:58pm EST--
