Oil pauses above $82; China inflation spikes
2010-03-11 16:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil settled nearly unchanged above $82 a barrel on Thursday amid uncertainty about whether China will tighten monetary policy, which could dent energy demand in the world's second-largest oil consumer.
Crude received little direction from the foreign exchange market where the dollar was little changed against other major currencies, while investors also awaited the outcome of OPEC's meeting next week to discuss output policy.
U.S. crude for April rose 2 cents to settle at $82.11 a barrel, after touching $83.03 on Wednesday, the highest level since oil's 15-month high of $83.95 on January 11.
"There's a lot of uncertainty on what the next market move will be. It's consolidating at this point," said Andy Lebow, broker at MF Global in New York.
Consumer inflation in China has soared to a 16-month high, and a raft of economic data showed broad-based strength. This provided fresh arguments for policy tightening in a bid to stop the economy overheating.
China's booming economy has seen oil imports soar, hitting their second highest ever monthly level in February [ID:nTOE62A08Q]. On Wednesday, OPEC said Chinese daily oil demand has jumped by almost 2 million barrels in just five years to stand around 8.6 million barrels per day.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), which pumps at least one in every three barrels of oil, meets in Vienna on March 17 to discuss production policy. Officials have said they do not expect a change in targets while prices are within their desired range.
"You are going to see $75 to $85 until OPEC changes their views," said Peter McGuire, managing director of Commodity Warrants Australia in Sydney. "Given that the U.S. dollar is appreciating, they are relatively content with what they are receiving for their oil."
OPEC has restricted output since the onset of the financial crisis in a bid to support prices. But the group's compliance with its officially targeted cut of 4.2 million barrels per day (bpd) has slipped to just 53 percent as prices have risen.
A stronger dollar boosts the purchasing power of oil exporters, including OPEC members. A weaker greenback usually supports oil prices as it makes dollar-denominated commodities less expensive for holders of other currencies. <USD/>
The U.S. trade deficit narrowed unexpectedly in January as oil imports fell to their lowest since February 1999, a government report showed, which helped pressure crude prices. U.S. exports fell, but not as much as the oil-led drop in imports.
"The U.S. trade deficit being lower than expected this morning speaks of a U.S. consumer that continues to struggle," said John Kilduff, partner at Round Earth Capital in New York.
A smaller-than-expected drop in the number of U.S. workers filing new applications for unemployment benefits also weighed on sentiment, but falling gasoline inventories in the United States and the first signs of a recovery in demand in 18 months supported prices.
U.S. crude inventories have climbed for the past six weeks, showing a 1.4 million-barrel gain in the week to March 5, the Energy Information Administration (EIA) said on Wednesday.
The nation's gasoline stockpiles showed a surprise decrease of 2.9 million barrels, the EIA said, while distillate stocks including heating oil and diesel fell by 2.2 million barrels.
U.S. total oil product demand over the past four weeks was 19.41 million bpd, up 3.8 percent from a year ago, showing the first consistent recovery in demand for 18 months.
(Additional reporting by David Sheppard in London, Robert Gibbons and Gene Ramos in New York, Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; Editing by David Gregorio)
