Is a woman's place in the home? 1 in 4 say yes
2010-03-07 00:17:00.0
Is a woman's place in the home? 1 in 4 say yes | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Is a woman's place in the home? 1 in 4 say yes
Fri, Mar 5 2010
Susan, a 36-year-old maid from the Philippines, works at her employer's house in Singapore April 29, 2008. Credit: Reuters/Vivek Prakash
Sun  EST
(Reuters Life!) - Women head governments, run companies and comprise about half the world's workforce, but a global poll shows that one in four people, most of them young, believe a woman's place is in the home.
The survey of over 24,000 adults in 23 countries, conducted by Reuters/Ipsos and released on the eve of International Women's Day, showed that people from India (54 percent), Turkey (52 percent), Japan (48 percent), China, Russia, Hungary (34 percent each) and South Korea (33 percent) were most likely to agree that women should not work.
And, perhaps surprisingly, people aged between 18 and 34 years are most likely to hold that view, not those from the older, and more traditional, generation.
However, the majority, or 74 percent, of those polled believe a woman's place is certainly not at home.
"Over the past century, women, collectively, have made great gains not only in terms of societal participation - from politics to the workplace to sports and the media and to intellectual pursuit - but there are still barriers to many," said John Wright, senior vice president of market research company Ipsos.
"This poll has a fundamental expression embraced by a full majority that women, individually or otherwise, should have the ability to choose to do what and where they believe they can make their greatest contribution" he said.
In countries where most people believed women should stay at home, or where the majority held the opposite view, there was little difference between the sexes, the survey showed. For example, in India, the country where more than half of those polled said women should stay home, an almost equal number of men and women held this view.
The following results table from the survey conducted between November and January begins with the countries where citizens are most likely to agree that "a women's place is in the home." All figures are percentages.
"A woman's place is in the home"
(Writing by Miral Fahmy, editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Questions like the one this poll asks are skewed when phrases such as ¡°BELONG IN THE HOME¡± are used. ¡°Belonging¡± implies ¡°ownership¡± which triggers a fundamental resistance to the question (except in nations that still view women as property). There is NOTHING inherently wrong with women being ¡¯stay at home mothers and wives¡¯. Those who feel that such a wonderful choice is contemptible need to do some deep soul searching and resolve their own inner conflicts. ANY choice a woman makes should be honored and in my humble opinion, motherhood should rank far above that of president, prime minister, CEO, and any other corporate position. Being a mother/parent is THE MOST IMPORTANT JOB ON THE PLANET! Without good mothers/parents there will not be ANY good presidents, prime ministers, CEOs or any other responsible human beings.
Mar 09, 201010:54am EST--
