Google chief sees outcome soon in China row
2010-03-10 16:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Google expects an outcome soon from its talks with China over a censorship and hacking dispute, Chief Executive Eric Schmidt said on Wednesday.
Google threatened in January to shut its Chinese Google.cn portal and to pull back from China, citing problems of censorship and a hacking attack from within the country.
"I'm going to use the word 'soon', which I will not define otherwise," Schmidt told journalists at the Abu Dhabi Media Summit.
"There is no specific timetable. Something will happen soon," he added, without elaborating.
Google shocked business and political circles when it declared on January 12 it would stop censoring Chinese search results, and said it was considering pulling out of the country.
Google said more than 20 other companies had been infiltrated, and cited the attack, as well as Chinese Web censorship practices, as reasons for the company to consider pulling out of the country.
In Washington, a second Google executive said the world's largest search engine had not changed its decision to stop censoring its Chinese language search site in compliance with Beijing's dictates even if it means leaving that market.
Nicole Wong, the firm's vice president and deputy general counsel, told the U.S. House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee that Google would stop censorship and "(if) the option is that we will shutter our .cn property and leave the country, we are prepared to do that."
Searches of the Google.cn site turn up vastly different results for sensitive subjects such as "Tibet" and "Tiananmen" than the search engine's sites outside China.
Wong told the congressional hearing on U.S. cyberspace policy that Google's decisions on dealing with Chinese hacking and censorship were taken by American executives without the involvement of employees in China. But she said Google was moving cautiously, in part out of concern for its hundreds of Chinese employees.
She urged lawmakers to ensure that the U.S. government presses international Internet openness as a priority in diplomatic, trade and development policies and work with like-minded governments to craft rules to ensure free flows of information.
The top U.S. trade official said the government was studying whether it could legally challenge those restrictions, which also hurt other U.S. firms operating in China.
But Schmidt said any possible appeal by Washington to the World Trade Organization to challenge Chinese Internet restrictions would not affect Google's actions.
"Google's discussions are with the Chinese government and are not related to the U.S. government. The U.S. government is doing its thing, unrelated to Google," Schmidt said.
WTO rules state that countries have the right to censor Internet content, Zheng Zhihai, deputy director and general secretary of the China Society of World Trade Organization Studies, wrote in China Daily.
"If someone intends to challenge China's right to govern its Internet by resorting to WTO rules, they are apparently misguided and bound to fail," wrote Zheng, whose organization reports to China's Ministry of Commerce.
The WTO ruled last year that China's import monopolies on books, films and other entertainment materials violated market access rules, but upheld its right to censor specific materials.
(Additional reporting by Lucy Hornby in BEIJING and Melanie Lee in SHANGHAI; editing by Chris Wilson)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I was trying to go into the electronic massage chair industry, but backed out of the chinese supplier, when I discovered Israel did all their IT work, and was intercepting the emails before the recipiant received them, and in some cases deleted them or altered them. When I approached this problem with the chinese supplier, Out of nowhere I was contacted by a florida company ¡± Takemi ¡± Who was selling the chairs at wholesale on the internet, or pretending to. The company offered to supply and stock chairs for me, the catch, prepay the order. In a short period the Takemi company dissappeared from the market, probably leaving people awaiting goods that never arrived and unresolved warranty issues. The Israeli interference made me wonder, why would the company not do their own IT work, and allow a 3rd party controling their marketing. The questions, many go unanswered. I wonder who is really in charge in china ? Cyber crime is common place in a realm where the people are IT illiterate. Google has the right attitude, make its own decisions without anyone elses influence. Why would our government think it has the right to make decisions for Google. Its like all the hype I hear about IBM selling IBM machines to the German government post WW1 as a reason to dissallow them to manufacture the PC, setting back the internet into the 90¡¯s when we could have had it in the 70¡¯s. I mean , What part of International Business Machines does the patent tribunals not understand, and where does it say in the constitution, the legal-political community can make decisions about when a company can or cannot make its own designs. IBM used the Nortel silicon telephone switching station chip technology computer architecture to design the worlds first PC, yet were not permitted to use it. The same tribunals allow gates to shove windows down everyone but apples computers getting him more revenue in a quarter than IBM¡¯s Net Worth, A system where he didn¡¯t; develop the math platform, write the code, design the programming language, or the computer. All he did was hire criminal attorneys with clout to enforce his patent. Clout being defined as the legal team with an inside conference in the judges chambers Clout=Corruption=Gates/Buffet. The world is rift with corruption. Bravo for googles standing up for its own sense of responsibility, the legalists are obviously not on the same page. If China won¡¯t/can¡¯t enforce a sense of ethics and logic in the IT community, then Google should ignore them, until such time as they are on the same page, Censorship is a convoluted word, in a world of trolls
Mar 10, 20105:44pm EST--
Bill should have come to some agreement with IBM, my Code cutting Team are 45% of 70% with Apple to get 30% of 100%. Code to be Cut in INDIA. If CHINA wants to GROW UP it might be more open to FREEDOM of the Net and PRESS. Good on you GOOGLE and all GOOGLER¡¯S. Have a nice day, from the GYROMETER.
Mar 10, 201010:38pm EST--
i¡¯ll say most of we chinese people don¡¯t deserve to use the searching service from google, most people here who even never concern about things like this! i¡¯m a chinese now in mainland, i totally disappointed about all of this not just censoring but a lot of more which are obviously not good for china¡¯s future, i¡¯d like to help our country better but we need the right to say sth freely and safely not like this finding a foreigner web replying news articles, and what worse is, it is labeled as radical. so i love and will support google, even most westerners may think google¡¯s not doing enough.
Mar 11, 20109:27am EST--
