Firm commods, banks help FTSE gain 0.7 percent
2010-03-10 00:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's leading share index added 0.7 percent on Wednesday, buoyed by strength in commodity issues, supported by trade data from China, and in banks and insurers as Wall Street put in an early advance.
At the close, the FTSE 100
was 38.27 points higher at 5,640.57, a 20 month peak, at levels not seen since June 2008. The blue chip index remained over 60 percent above levels hit almost exactly a year ago when the market reached a trough.
"Wall Street came in with some early gains and stirred the FTSE from an earlier torpor late afternoon," said Mic Mills, senior trader at ETX Capital.
"But aside from strength in heavyweight commodity issues there really looks to be little underlying the advance and with new multi-month peaks being struck, investors might start to find the air getting a bit rarified at these levels," Mills added.
), Xstrata XTA.L, Lonmin (
), Vedanta Resources (
), and Rio Tinto (
) were among the best performers, ahead 1.8 to 3.2 percent.
Energy issues were higher supported by a rally in crude prices, which rose above $82 a barrel after a U.S. government oil inventory report showed an unexpected drop in gasoline stockpiles.
), BG Group (
), BP (
) missed out, losing 0.3 percent after it posted a 92 percent fall in 2009 net profit.
Banks were higher, with global heavyweight HSBC .HSBA.L up 0.7 percent, while part-nationalized lenders Royal Bank of Scotland (
) gained 3.9 percent and 3.6 percent, respectively.
) gained 0.6 percent. The bank was said to be looking to buy a retail bank in the United States to extend its presence after acquiring Lehman Brothers' North American operations in 2008, the Wall Street Journal reported.
Among individual risers, inter-dealer broker ICAP (
Tullett shares surged 25.7 percent higher, topping the FTSE 250
index leader board with Australia's Macquarie MQC.AX and Bank of China mentioned as possible predators.
British Airways BAY.L gained 3.7 percent after it, American Airlines AMR.N and Spain's Iberia IBLA.MC offered to cede a number of lucrative transatlantic slots in a bid to gain EU antitrust immunity for their alliance.
U.S. blue chips were marginally higher by London's close, up 0.1 percent as a number of merger and acquisition deals offset an unexpected drop in January wholesale inventories.
) was the biggest faller on the FTSE 100, down 3.1 percent as it traded ex-dividend. Admiral (
), Schroders (
), Serco Group (
), Shire (
), and TUI Travel (
Food retailers were weak, with Wm Morrison Supermarket (
General retailers were weak as well, with Marks & Spencer (
