Factbox: Shell, PetroChina bid $3 billion for Australia's Arrow
2010-03-08 02:31:00.0
Factbox: Shell, PetroChina bid $3 billion for Australia's Arrow | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Factbox: Shell, PetroChina bid $3 billion for Australia's Arrow
Wed, Mar 3 2010
Wed, Mar 3 2010
Tue, Mar 2 2010
Tue, Mar 2 2010
Tue, Mar 2 2010
Mon  EST
) jointly bid more than $3 billion for Australia's Arrow Energy AOE.AX, marking a Chinese firm's first foray in the country's burgeoning coal-seam gas sector.
* Coal-seam gas, also know as coal-bed methane, is largely methane gas which is trapped in the molecular structure of coal seams. In contrast, conventional natural gas is stored in the gaps between rock formations. As a result, coal seams are able to contain several times more the gas than that found in conventional gas reservoirs.
* The level of gas produced from a coal bed is dependent on the thickness of the coal, gas content, permeability and the depth of the coal seam. Coal seams that can produce gas economically are usually between 200-1,000 meters below the surface.
* In the past decade, coal-seam gas has become an important source of energy in the United States and it became a major play in Australia in 2008. Energy majors such as BG Group (
), ConocoPhillips (
) and Petronas have poured in a total of about A$20 billion, with the aim of converting the abundant gas resource into higher-value liquefied natural gas for export to Asia.
* Australia's coal-seam gas reserves at the end of 2008 were 16,590 petajoules (PJ), or 15.1 trillion cubic feet (tcf), with total identified coal-seam gas resources estimated at around 168,600 PJ, or 153 tcf, according to a government report.
* In Australia, there are five different groups jockeying to build coal-seam gas-fueled LNG plants in Australia's Gladstone port in Queensland state. Below is a list of the projects:
(Reporting by Fayen Wong; Editing by Muralikumar Anantharaman)
