China seen opening soon to U.S. pork: report
2010-03-06 13:34:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Mar 4 2010
Sat  EST
"There is a tremendous effort by the U.S. government to work with the Chinese -- we're looking for the Chinese market to open up very soon," Phil Seng, president and chief executive officer of the U.S. Meat Export Federation, told Reuters on the sidelines of the National Pork Forum being held here.
"There's a delegation of USDA folks that will be in China and we're expecting this (final OK) to come very soon, as far as the opening of China. We're looking at the USDA being there in the next week," Seng said.
In early December China reopened their market to pork from the United States, Canada and Mexico. But problems finalizing export certificate language has kept pork exports from flowing and so far only Canada has meet China's certification requirements.
Seng noted that the Chinese look at the market as being basically open to U.S. pork, but there is language on the certificate they are asking the United States to provide and that has been somewhat of a problem.
"We expect for us fully to get back in that market very soon," Seng added.
"If China really left markets work and gave us 5 to 10 years we could be exporting 50 percent of what the U.S. produces just to that one country," Dermot Hayes, professor of Economics at Iowa State, told Reuters before speaking to pork producers here. "Their industry is four times bigger than ours and if they just imported a quarter of what they buy and bought half of that from us it would be a big deal."
He noted that short term, imports are dependent on the whim of the government and China is using H1N1 and concern over unwanted additives to keep imports from other countries down.
"Long term, China is land scarce and Asian countries that are land scarce traditionally import a lot of pork, as much as 25 percent of what they consume. Japan is up at 50 percent," Hayes said.
"They have a lot of inefficient pork production -- very labor intensive -- and they have a better use for those individuals in the cities at construction sites. So as they leave the countryside, there is a huge potential for pork to replace the backyard production that will quit," Hayes added.
