Air China plans $950 million share sale
2010-03-11 11:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Air China, the world's most valuable airline in terms of market cap, said it will raise about 6.5 billion yuan ($952 million) via an issue of new shares, becoming the second Chinese carrier to announce fundraising plans this week.
A recovery in domestic and regional traffic has rekindled investor interest, allowing Chinese carriers battered by the global financial crisis to tap the market to reduce debt, and fund fleet expansion and acquisitions in response to growing competition.
Air China's announcement on Thursday came just three days after rival China Southern Airlines said it would issue $1.6 billion shares to repay debt.
Air China and China Southern plan to sell their new shares privately to a handful of investors, including their state-owned parents.
Air China, the biggest of the country's three major airlines including China Southern and China Eastern Airlines, said in a statement it would use the proceeds of the new share issue for working capital and to help lower debt.
After the deal, Air China's gearing could fall by 4.58 percentage points to 71.8 percent from 76.4 percent, it said in a statement to the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
If the company used all the money raised from the share issue to repay debt, it would cut its interest expenses by 345 million yuan a year, Air China added.
Shares of the company, which more than doubled in value in 2009, have risen 11.5 percent this year in Hong Kong as industry sentiment improved on strengthening domestic demand and as the global economy stabilized. Trading was suspended on February 26 for Thursday's share announcement and is expected to resume Friday.
China Southern's shares have risen 42 percent this year, partly helped by its capital replenishment plan, which will cut interest expenses and enhance earnings growth.
China Eastern's shares have risen 18 percent, beating the benchmark Hang Seng Index's 3 percent loss and a 5 percent drop in the index for major Chinese companies listed in Hong Kong.
Air China Chairman Kong Dong told Reuters last week that the company's earnings were expected to improve in 2010 and it was keen on mergers and acquisitions at home and abroad.
