Arrow gets non-binding bid from Shell, PetroChina
2010-03-07 18:39:00.0
Arrow gets non-binding bid from Shell, PetroChina | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Arrow gets non-binding bid from Shell, PetroChina
Sun, Feb 28 2010
Thu, Feb 25 2010
Wed, Feb 24 2010
Sun, Feb 21 2010
Sun, Feb 21 2010
Sun  EST
) have made a joint bid for Australia's Arrow Energy AOE.AX in a deal worth at least A$3.3 billion ($3 billion), as they seek a slice of the booming coal seam gas sector.
Arrow said on Monday that the non-binding, conditional bid from a company jointly owned by Royal Dutch Shell and PetroChina would give shareholders A$4.45 of cash per share plus a share in a new entity comprised of Arrow's international business.
The move would be the latest move by major energy firms into Australia's coal seam gas sector, after energy majors such as BG Group (
), ConocoPhillips (
) and Petronas PETR.UL, already pumped in about A$20 billion since 2008, with the aim of converting the abundant gas resource into higher-valued liquefied natural gas (LNG) for export into Asia.
The bid was likely sparked by Arrow's decision last month to acquire the full ownership of its A$2.2 billion Fisherman's Landing LNG project, which will be fed by coal seam gas, the Australian Financial Review reported on Monday.
In particular, a potential sell-down of Arrow's stake in its domestic coal-seam gas acreage to help fund the cost of the project was believed to have concerned Shell, the paper said.
Shell already holds a 30 percent stake in Arrow's domestic coal seam gas assets as well as a 10 percent share in its international business.
Arrow shares closed at A$3.48 Friday and will open at 8 p.m. EST on Monday, an hour later than usual.
(Reporting by Fayen Wong; Editing by Balazs Koranyi)
