GM to shut down Hummer after China deal fizzles
2010-02-25 08:05:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Feb 23 2010
Tue, Feb 23 2010
Mon, Feb 22 2010
Mon, Feb 22 2010
Mon, Feb 22 2010
A Hummer vehicle sits outside of a dealership in Scottsdale, Arizona June 2, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Joshua Lott
Thu  EST
GM had been trying to complete the deal by the end of February after reaching a definitive agreement in October to sell Hummer to Tengzhong, a little-known heavy machinery company based in Sichuan province.
The collapse of the deal represents another setback for GM, which had been working to shed unprofitable brands and focus on its four core brands -- Chevrolet, Cadillac, Buick and GMC -- after emerging from bankruptcy in July.
Closure of Hummer would put about 3,000 jobs at stake, including manufacturing workers, dealers, staff members, and other areas, GM spokesman Nick Richards said. The brand has 153 U.S. dealers.
A brand that grew out of the U.S. military multipurpose vehicle known as the Humvee produced by AM General, Hummer was lauded early on for a tough image but became synonymous with gas-guzzling excess when consumers became more interested in high oil prices and environmental responsibility.
"We have considered a number of possibilities for Hummer along the way, and we are disappointed that the deal with Tengzhong could not be completed," John Smith, GM vice president of corporate planning and alliances, said in a statement.
"GM will now work closely with Hummer employees, dealers and suppliers to wind down the business in an orderly and responsible manner," Smith said.
Tengzhong, in an emailed statement to Reuters, said it and GM have decided to terminate the agreement after failing to win Chinese regulatory approval within the proposed time frame.
"Tengzhong worked earnestly to achieve an acquisition that it believed to be a tremendous opportunity to acquire a global brand at an attractive price," the company said.
The privately owned Tengzhong was formed in 2005 through several mergers and has fewer than 5,000 employees.
This marks the third sale of a GM brand that has fallen through or been abandoned by the automaker, which was restructured in bankruptcy last year, backed by some $50 billion in U.S. taxpayer funding.
) also collapsed at the end of September, just before it was expected to close.
The wind-down of Hummer is expected to take several months and GM will continue to entertain viable offers early in the process, Richards said.
GM has not built any new Hummers at its plant in Shreveport, Louisiana, since mid-January and currently has about 2,500 vehicles in dealer inventory.
GM put Hummer up for sale initially in summer 2008, a full year before the automaker fell into a government-supported bankruptcy reorganization in which it planned to divest Hummer, Saturn, Saab and a controlling stake in Opel.
Hummer's U.S. sales have plunged to just above 9,000 last year from nearly 56,000 in 2007. About two-thirds of its sales have been in the United States and one-third internationally.
(Reporting by Soyoung Kim and David Bailey, editing by Matthew Lewis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
welcome to: www.kogoin.com The website wholesale for many kinds of fashion shoes, like the nike,jordan,prada,****, also including the jeans,shirts,bags,hat and the decorations. All the products are free shipping, and the the price is competitive, and also can accept the paypal payment.,after the payment, can ship within short time. free shipping competitive price any size available accept the paypal www.kogoin.com jordan shoes $32 nike shox $32 Christan Audigier bikini $23 Ed Hardy Bikini $23 Smful short_t-shirt_woman $15 ed hardy short_tank_woman $16 Sandal $32 christian louboutin $80 Sunglass $15 COACH_Necklace $27 handbag $33 AF tank woman $17 puma slipper woman $30
Feb 25, 20109:14am EST--
