Pudong Bank in $6 billion stake sale to China Mobile: reports
2010-02-26 05:03:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Feb 25 2010
Thu, Feb 25 2010
Thu, Feb 25 2010
Wed, Feb 24 2010
Wed, Feb 24 2010
By Samuel Shen, Victoria Bi and Jason Subler
By Samuel Shen, Victoria Bi and Jason Subler
Fri  EST
), part-owned by Citigroup Inc (
), will raise about 40 billion yuan ($5.9 billion) by selling a roughly 20 percent strategic stake to China Mobile, two brokerages said.
China Mobile Ltd's Hong Kong-based spokeswoman Lei Yu declined comment on the reports.
Pudong Bank is joining other Chinese lenders, including Bank of Communications (BoCom) (
), in a rush to raise cash to replenish capital bases that were weakened by last year's lending spree and in order to meet tighter capital rules.
In a report on Friday, Guotai Junan Securities said Pudong Bank would sell about 2.2 billion shares to China Mobile at no less than 17.82 yuan each.
Guotai's report did not specify whether the stake was being sold to Hong Kong-listed China Mobile (
The strategic investment "would help boost Pudong Bank's profitability and is beneficial to the lender," Guotai Junan analyst Wu Yonggang said in the report dated February 25. Wu expects the shares to rise once trading resumes.
Wu also estimated the fundraising would increase Pudong Bank's core capital adequacy ratio by about four percentage points to above 10 percent, while boosting its capital adequacy ratio to nearly 14 percent.
Chinese listed companies sometimes brief analysts about major developments ahead of official announcements, but after share trading suspensions.
Shares in Pudong Bank, 3.4 percent owned by Citigroup, have underperformed recently as investors worry the lender's expansion could be restricted by a shortage of capital, Guotai Junan said.
The lender's capital adequacy ratio, a key measure of banks' ability to absorb potential losses, stood at 10.16 percent as of September 30 of last year, below the 12 percent minimum required for small- and mid-sized lenders.
Chinese banks lent nearly 10 trillion yuan last year to support government stimulus, weakening their balance sheets.
In the latest sign banks could face even greater demands to raise funds, the 21st Century Business Herald newspaper said on Friday that Beijing may ask big banks to increase their capital adequacy ratio to 11.5 percent this year from an 11 percent average at present.
Introducing China Mobile as a strategic investor would ease market concern of an oversupply of shares due to banks' fundraising plans, and would support Pudong Bank's expansion over the next three years, CICC said in its report.
This week, BoCom, China's fifth-biggest lender by assets, said it planned to raise as much as $6.1 billion via a rights issue in Shanghai and Hong Kong to bolster capital.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
welcome to: www.kogoin.com The website wholesale for many kinds of fashion shoes, like the nike,jordan,prada,****, also including the jeans,shirts,bags,hat and the decorations. All the products are free shipping, and the the price is competitive, and also can accept the paypal payment.,after the payment, can ship within short time. free shipping competitive price any size available accept the paypal www.kogoin.com jordan shoes $32 nike shox $32 Christan Audigier bikini $23 Ed Hardy Bikini $23 Smful short_t-shirt_woman $15 ed hardy short_tank_woman $16 Sandal $32 christian louboutin $80 Sunglass $15 COACH_Necklace $27 handbag $33 AF tank woman $17 puma slipper woman $30
Feb 26, 20108:57pm EST--
