Money means more to people since financial crisis: poll
2010-02-22 09:37:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
An employee of the Korea Exchange Bank works next to stacks of one hundred dollar notes at the bank's headquarters in Seoul February 3, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Jo Yong-Hak
Mon  EST
(Reuters Life!) - As the saying goes, money isn't everything, but it certainly means more to people now than before the global financial crisis, and especially in China, Japan and South Korea, according to a Reuters/Ipsos poll.
A survey in 23 countries found two-thirds of 24,000 people questioned, or 65 percent, agreed money was more important to them now than previously, with younger people particularly putting more emphasis on money and seeing it as a sign of success.
Citizens of South Korea, Japan and China were the most likely to say money meant more to them now, with 84 percent in each putting more value on cash, followed by India with 78 percent.
People in these countries were also more likely to believe that money was the best sign of a person's success with 69 percent of Chinese and South Koreans linking money to success, followed by India and Japan at 67 percent and 63 percent.
On average only four in 10 people questioned, or 43 percent, thought money was the best sign of a person's success with seven out of every 10 Canadians, or 73 percent, disagreeing that money was the best sign of success, followed by Sweden, Mexico and the Netherlands.
"Perhaps not surprisingly, those nations (saying money was more important now) directly correlate with those who put the greatest weight in money as a determinant of success," said John Wright, a senior vice president at opinion research firm Ipsos.
"With only a few exceptions, we can clearly see the subtle but incredible gulf between the two groups: the value of money and success compared to the values because of money and success."
Men and women were evenly divided on the importance of money with 65 percent of men and 64 percent of women agreeing money was more important now while more men than women, 47 percent to 40 percent, were likely to say money was the sign of success.
People aged under 35 were also likely to see money as the sign of a person's success with 48 percent believing that statement compared to 40 percent of people aged 35-54 and 35 percent of those aged 55 and over.
The countries where citizens were least likely to say that money was more important now than previously were the Netherlands at 50 percent, Mexico, Germany, Britain, Belgium and Canada.
About 1,000 individuals participated on a country by country basis via an Ipsos (
) online panel with weighting employed to balance demographics and ensure that the sample's composition reflected that of the adult population according to the most recent country census data.
(Writing by Belinda Goldsmith, Editing by Miral Fahmy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Who cares!!! My boyfriend thinks the same with me. He- is eight years older than me, lol. We met online at- Agemingle @ co¨Cm a nice and free site for Younger- Women and Older Men, or Older Women and Younger Men, to- interact with each other. Maybe you wanna check out or- tell your friends.
Feb 23, 20109:23am EST--
