Rosneft deal to put China top of Russia's oil customers
2013-03-20 14:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Russia will sharply boost oil supply to China, making Beijing its top customer, in a package of deals to be signed this week, industry sources said on Wednesday.
Russia's top crude producer Rosneft (
) will increase exports to China by some 34 million tonnes to around 50 million tonnes (1 million barrels per day) by 2018, the sources told Reuters.
The deal could be signed later this week during a visit to Moscow by China's new president, Xi Jinping, as a part of a broader agreement which may include more arms deliveries and long-discussed gas supply.
The oil agreement may also involve loans up to $30 billion for Rosneft, which is in a process of acquiring Anglo-Russian oil company TNK-BP (
"No one expected that Rosneft would venture for such a massive oil supply increase to China," a source said, adding that thanks to possible cheap money from China, Rosneft may refinance the loans it amassed from Western banks for the TNK-BP deal.
The source said that on Thursday, Russian President Vladimir Putin was expected to chair a meeting attended by Igor Sechin, his long-standing ally and Rosneft's president, as well as newly-appointed Central Bank head Elvira Nabiullina and Federal Customs Service officials, to discuss the deal.
Putin has urged domestic companies to forge closer ties with Asia as demand for energy in Europe, Russia's largest oil and gas market, has been sluggish due to the financial crisis there.
The sources said Rosneft plans to increase oil supplies via the East Siberia-Pacific Ocean (ESPO) pipeline by 1 million tonnes this year already, by a further 2 million tonnes next year and by a further 5 million tonnes from 2015 to 2017.
Starting from 2018, the ESPO would ship 30 million tonnes in total, double the current volumes.
) it secured a $25 billion deal to finance construction ESPO, which now supplies China and other Asian customers with crude.
Russia, the world's biggest oil producer, and China appear to be natural partners when it comes to trade in raw materials, but they have failed so far to seal a gas supply deal over nearly two decades, largely because Moscow will not cut its price to levels within reach of Chinese end-users, who are highly sensitive to input cost inflation.
"It will be very difficult to agree a gas deal by itself," a source said adding that the price issue was still live.
According to Interfax news agency, a Russian Deputy Energy Minister Yury Sentyurin said that the ministry is preparing an inter-government agreement on increasing oil supplies to China. He declined to give details.
(Reporting by Vladimir Soldatkin and Denis Pinchuk, additional reporting by Melissa Akin and Olesya Astakhova, editing by William Hardy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a smart move because the world¡¯s biggest oil and gas station sits next door to the world¡¯s biggest automobile market. The US and EU are in declines that they created for themselves with deregulated financial casinos. In addition, fracking gives the US more oil and gas, so its reduced economy need not buy Russia¡¯s oil and gas.
Mar 20, 20133:51pm EDT--
Mar 20, 20134:22pm EDT--
