China conducts yuan rise stress tests: report
2010-02-25 21:28:00.0
(Reuters) - China is conducting "stress tests" in the country's labor-intensive export sectors to see how much yuan appreciation firms can withstand, the local 21st Century Business Herald reported on Friday.
The newspaper cited industry sources as saying that the results of the test, conducted jointly by the Ministry of Commerce and the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, would serve as a reference for the government's future yuan policy.
It added that these tests did not mean that Beijing was about to let the yuan appreciate, having frozen it in place against the dollar since mid-2008 as the government has tried to cushion exporters from the global financial crisis.
Nevertheless, the report marks a rare discussion in Chinese media about the feasible scope for yuan appreciation and comes amid rising speculation that Beijing may be on the verge of allowing yuan appreciation to resume.
According to the initial results of the tests, which focused on textile, garment, shoe and toy exporters, every percentage point of yuan appreciation would erode one percentage point of their profit margin. This would be a serious blow to profitability since their net profit margin is often only 3 to 5 percent, the newspaper said.
China has consistently said it will keep the yuan basically stable, a line that the commerce ministry repeated on Thursday.
A bipartisan group of 15 U.S. senators on Thursday insisted China's currency practices are effectively a subsidy and urged Commerce Secretary Gary Locke to consider action against Chinese imports.
(Reporting by Zhou Xin and Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°China has consistently said it will keep the yuan basically stable, a line that the commerce ministry repeated on Thursday.¡± ¡°keep the yuan basically stable¡± means to manipulate the Yuan for trade benefits. The chinese have been waging a trade war against us for 15 years now; the obama administration is finally realizing this. We let them export to our market for over 15 years and grow their economy on the backs of our consumers and at the expense of our hard working manufacturers. If the chinese do not act, the US and the EU need to take action. Support trade sanctions on China and support other, smaller nations who do not manipulate their currency or have huge subsidies for trade advantages. I would prefer to buy from some south american countries than China.
Feb 25, 201010:26pm EST--
Unfortunately, trade sanctions on China, at this point, would backfire on us, since our economies are so interrelated now.
Feb 25, 201010:31pm EST--
Blah, why dont you go bark somewhere else as you disgust not only Chinese but also real Americans and Europeans
Feb 25, 201010:44pm EST--
