China cuts U.S. Treasury holdings
2010-02-17 11:01:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Feb 11 2010
Tue, Feb 16 2010
Tue, Feb 16 2010
Tue, Feb 16 2010
Tue, Feb 16 2010
Wed  EST
As one of the biggest creditors of the United States, China has complained over the past year about U.S. policies and worried publicly about the security of its dollar-denominated assets.
China was a net seller of all Treasuries to the tune of more than $34 billion, bringing its total holdings down to $755.4 billion from $789.6 billion in November, according to U.S. Treasury data released on Tuesday. China bought more than $4 billion in longer-dated Treasuries but was a net seller of Treasury bills.
"Net-net this data is only going to add to second guessing of Chinese behavior and raise concerns that they are not showing much enthusiasm for U.S. dollar-denominated paper," said Alan Ruskin, chief international strategist at RBS Securities in Greenwich, Connecticut.
Ties between China and the United States have been tested several times recently on issues including currency, trade, Internet censorship, human rights and U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.
Japan, by adding $11.5 billion, raised its total holdings to $768.8 billion, surpassing China for the first time since August 2008.
Ruskin said China has sold some $45 billion in Treasury debt over the past five months, calling it "a long enough period to hint strongly at a trend.
Still, the data showed the United States attracted overall net inflows of $60.9 billion. Treasuries of all maturities saw a net inflow of $69.9 billion, and net inflows into stocks rose to $20.1 billion from $9.6 billion in November. But U.S. corporate debt suffered a net outflow.
In addition to Japan, strong Treasury buying was also seen from Britain, Luxembourg and Hong Kong, the data showed.
Win Thin, a currency strategist at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York, called the data "a cause for modest concern that bears watching," but added, "we do not think the big global reserve managers are dumping U.S. dollar assets on a sustained basis."
Net inflows into long-term securities totaled $63.3 billion, down from November's $126.4 billion, the data showed.
Meanwhile, net outflows from Treasury bills hit a record $53 billion, with China leading much of the selling, Ruskin said.
Also, U.S. Treasury officials said earlier this month that they ended December "with an avalanche of cash," primarily from repayment of Troubled Asset Relief Program funds by banks such as Citigroup (
), Bank of America (
(Additional reporting by David Lawder in Washington; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama)
