Nikkei slips as China worry outweighs GDP rise
2010-02-15 01:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average fell 0.8 percent on Monday, with worries about global growth after China's lifting of banks' reserve requirements outweighing better-than-expected Japanese gross domestic product data.
A range of shares in firms that do business in China fell in the wake of Beijing's latest measures to curb bank lending, with Komatsu Ltd, the world's second-biggest maker of earth-moving machines, shedding 2.3 percent.
Toyota Motor Corp fell 3 percent after announcing on Friday that it would recall 8,000 pickup trucks in the United States, the latest in a series of recalls that have hurt the automaker's sales and its reputation for quality.
Tokyo shares received little cheer from data showing that Japan's gross domestic product grew 1.1 percent in October-December from the previous quarter against forecasts of 0.9 percent.
"The GDP was not too bad, but the factors market players are worried about right now are all issues that could pour cold water on the prospects for a further economic recovery," said Masayuki Doshida, a market analyst at Matsui Securities.
Global stock markets have taken a hit over the past several weeks due to concerns that China's efforts to curb bank lending may dent global economic growth, coupled with worries over Greece's fiscal woes and a White House proposal to rein in banks' risk-taking.
The fact that the GDP deflator, a broad gauge of price trends, fell a record 3.0 percent in October-December from a year earlier took some of the shine off the better-than-forecast headline figure.
"GDP growth was better than expected, but the overall numbers show that Japan is still in deflation, and it still appears to be in a situation where it's relying heavily on exports," said Nagayuki Yamagishi, a strategist at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
The benchmark Nikkei share average fell 78.89 points to 10,013.30.
With much of Asia closed for the Lunar New Year, and U.S. markets closed for a holiday as well, Tokyo investors were reluctant to trade actively, market players said.
Trading volume dwindled to 1.7 billion shares on the Tokyo exchange's first section, the lightest so far this year.
Resource shares fell after copper and aluminum lost ground on Friday, hit by demand worries in the wake of the tightening move by China, the world's largest metals consumer.
Mitsubishi Corp lost 1.5 percent to 2,192 yen and fellow trader Mitsui & Co shed 2.2 percent to 1,321 yen.
Komatsu fell 2.3 percent to 1,776 yen.
Shinsei Bank tumbled 6.7 percent to 97 yen after the Nikkei business daily said on Saturday that Shinsei and Aozora Bank, both owned by overseas investors, have decided not to merge in October as planned.
Shinsei said in a statement over the weekend that it had no comment on the report, while Aozora said in a statement on Monday it had made no decisions that need to be disclosed.
The reported failure of the talks follows dropped plans by brewers Kirin Holdings and Suntory to merge -- all of which may have a longer-term negative impact on the market, said Masayoshi Okamoto, head of dealing at Jujiya Securities.
"This is making it look as if it is difficult for large mergers to take place in the Japanese market," he said.
Toyota Motor Corp lost 3 percent to 3,355 yen after the company said on Friday it would recall 8,000 pickups due to possible cracks in a common drive shaft component that Ford Motor Co and Nissan Motor Co Ltd said posed no safety risk to their vehicles.
"Even though Toyota is dealing with the recall issue relatively quickly, it will still take several months to sort everything out," said Yamagishi at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
(Additional reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
