China raises profile of its choice of Dalai Lama's No 2
2010-02-28 19:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China has moved to raise the profile of the teenage Panchen Lama, traditionally the second-most powerful figure in Tibetan Buddhism who plays a role in the controversial selection of the next Dalai Lama.
The Panchen Lama, who turns 20 this year and is being groomed to win over restive Tibetans in China, was named a member of the national committee of an advisory body that will hold its annual meeting this week, the Xinhua news agency said Monday.
The Panchen Lama was selected by Beijing in 1995 over a boy chosen by the Dalai Lama who has never been seen again, creating a crisis of legitimacy for devout Tibetans.
China considers the aging Dalai Lama, who fled into exile in 1959 after an abortive uprising against Chinese rule, a dangerous separatist. The Dalai Lama says he is merely seeking greater autonomy for Tibet.
He was among 13 people named to the national committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, a body of private entrepreneurs, religious and cultural figures designed to provide input to the ruling Communist Party.
The CPPCC's annual meeting, which coincides with that of China's rubber-stamp legislature, begins this week.
He is believed to be a reincarnation of the 10th Panchen Lama, who remained in China when the Dalai Lama left and was subsequently imprisoned for many years.
The Panchen Lama, a slight man with thick glasses, debuted with a speech in English at a Chinese-organized Buddhist congress in eastern China in 2009.
(Reporting by Lucy Hornby; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Isn¡¯t the Panchen Lama selected by the Dali Lama? If so, then the current Panchen Lama is illegitimate, plainly. Do you want a Chinese puppet in that Holy Seat? Some investigative reporting is in order. Were is the actual designee?
Mar 01, 20109:15am EST--
Gedhun Choekyi Nyima is the true Panchan Lama. The chinese government is naive to expect Tibetans would accept anyone other than the Dalai Lama¡¯s choice for Number 2. The question remains: Where is Gedhun Choekyi Nyima and his family (a North Korean labour camp)?
Mar 01, 20109:44am EST--
It is just like cultural revolution, only with the media in such a state as in China, the people don¡¯t seem to realize they are being played for fools. IN the cultural revolution, the CCP went into temples etc. to subvert people¡¯s¡¯ beliefs from that key position. This is just a game for those who hold power over what people think. http://mythisandthatblog.wordpress.com/
Mar 01, 201010:25pm EST--
