Nikkei to drift; gains limited by Greek woes, China
2010-02-14 18:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average is expected to drift on Monday, supported by a weaker yen but with gains limited by China's move to raise the level of reserves that banks must hold, raising concerns about global growth.
At home, attention may center on Shinsei Bank (
), the two Japanese banks owned by overseas investors, after the Nikkei business daily said the two have decided not to merge in October as planned.
Overseas markets were rattled on Friday by China's move, which came on the heels of a similar action last month and was earlier than expected.
The move, announced after Tokyo markets closed, raised fears that monetary tightening in the world's third-largest economy would be more aggressive than thought and potentially damage global growth.
"Uncertainties about details of a support plan for Greece, along with concerns about China's hike in the level of bank reserves, will keep the market top-heavy in the absence of many overseas markets due to holidays," said Hiroichi Nishi, general manager at the equity division of Nikko Cordial Securities.
"But signs that things are improving for Japanese companies, as shown by their recent results, will keep the market supported."
Concerns about Greece's debt problems have weighed on world markets in recent weeks. On Sunday, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said Greece must take all appropriate measures to fix its budget deficit and scrutiny of its economic indicators must be heightened.
Japanese gross domestic product figures due out just before the open are likely to show the economy expanded at the fastest pace in almost two years last quarter, or by 0.9 percent, as a recovery in exports spurred capital spending while government stimulus supported private consumption, according to a Reuters poll.
Additional support was seen from a weaker yen. The dollar edged up 0.1 percent to 90.04 yen, extending gains made on Friday after a stronger-than-expected U.S. retail sales report, which offset a decline in U.S. consumer confidence for February.
is likely to move between 9,900 and 10,200, market players said. It closed at 10,092.19 on Friday.
Nikkei futures traded in Chicago closing at 10,105, virtually unchanged from the Osaka close of 10,100.
Markets in much of the rest of Asia are closed for the Lunar New Year holiday, while U.S. markets are closed for a holiday as well.
Dow, S&P dip on China lending curb; Nasdaq up .N > Euro drops on Greece; China news dents high-yielders <USD/> > US bond prices rise off Dubai, China worries.
Gold drops on Greek woes, China reserve hike <GOL/> > Oil falls after China moves to curb bank lending.
Japanese telecoms firm KDDI said on Friday it plans to take 31.1 percent of voting rights in Jupiter Telecom (J:Com) 4817.Q, down from an initial plan of 37.8 percent.
Mitsubishi Heavy will build a wind turbine factory in the United States, in the southern state of Arkansas, the Nikkei business daily said.
Toyota, reeling from its largest ever recall, is considering increased incentives and an extended warranty programme to combat consumer concerns about a deepening product safety crisis, a source briefed on still-developing plans said on Sunday.
Separately, a U.S. Toyota executive said on Saturday that U.S. executives of Toyota will meet with the company's top management in Japan over the next few days.
Nissan expects to be debt-free by the end of 2010 and is looking to double its market share in the Middle East region, its chief executive said on Sunday.
(Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Michael Watson)
