China Unicom denies bid for Nigeria telcom company
2010-02-22 06:17:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sun, Feb 21 2010
Fri, Feb 19 2010
Fri, Feb 19 2010
Thu, Feb 18 2010
Thu, Feb 18 2010
Mon  EST
), China's No. 2 mobile carrier, on Monday denied it was bidding for Nigeria's former state telecoms monopoly.
"The company has not participated in any direct discussions or negotiations with any relevant parties involved in the proposed privatization," Unicom said in a statement.
"The company will continue to observe the development of the proposed privatization, and will make announcements as and when appropriate."
Unicom's remarks are the latest twist in Nigeria's ongoing effort to sell its former telecoms monopoly, Nitel.
Nigeria's National Council on Privatization, responsible for privatizing Nitel, said last Tuesday that a consortium including Unicom had bid $2.5 billion for Nitel.
But Unicom fired back two days later by denying involvement in the project by its Hong Kong-listed company, its state-run parent or any of their units.
The managing director of GiCell, the small Nigerian operator fronting the bid, responded by saying, "We didn't pull all this out of the air."
GiCell also provided copies of a letter that allegedly came from Unicom's European unit saying the company was willing to be a technical partner to the consortium and would consider equity participation of 20 percent or more.
The confusion over Nitel's sale highlighted the unpredictability of cross-border African telecoms deals at a time India's Bharti Airtel Ltd (
) is bidding $9 billion for the African assets of Kuwait's Zain (
Reports of Unicom's participation in the Nitel bid surprised many, as the company has little experience in overseas mergers and acquisitions.
Nigeria tried to sell Nitel in 2001, but preferred bidders failed to pay the $1.3 billion price tag by the deadline.
(Reporting by Sui-Lee Wee and Doug Young; Editing by David Cowell)
