China's military warns Washington, denies hacking
2010-02-25 08:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China's military warned the United States on Thursday to "speak and act cautiously" to avoid reigniting tensions between the two powers, denying the People's Liberation Army played a part in Internet hacking.
Huang Xueping, spokesman for the Chinese Ministry of Defense, said his government would not reverse its decision to suspend "bilateral military plans" with Washington after it said in late January that it would sell $6.4 billion of arms to Taiwan, the self-ruled island Beijing claims as its own.
In January, the giant Internet search company Google Inc threatened to pull back from China after complaining of censorship and hacking attacks on it and other companies.
Analysts said those attacks were sophisticated operations, possibly overseen or abetted by the Chinese military.
The hacking dispute has added to tensions with Washington over quarrels ranging from trade and the Chinese currency to a meeting last week between U.S. President Barack Obama and exiled Tibetan leader the Dalai Lama, who China reviles as a "separatist" for demanding self-rule for his homeland.
Huang's remarks, reported by the official Xinhua news agency, shed no new light on how China plans to act on its threats to punish U.S. companies involved in arms sales to Taiwan.
But his comments indicated China has not entirely put aside public ire with Washington, despite allowing a U.S. aircraft carrier to visit Hong Kong last week.
"China demands that the U.S. speak and act cautiously, to avoid causing further damage to relations between the two countries and their militaries," said Huang.
"Linking Internet hacking activities to the Chinese government and military is totally unfounded and utterly irresponsible," he said. "This is stirring up a fuss for ulterior motives."
The Internet hacking dispute made fresh headlines recently after reports that the attacks had been traced to two schools in China, and that the writer of the spyware used had been identified as a Chinese cyber-security consultant.
The prestigious Shanghai Jiaotong University and the previously little-known Lanxiang vocational college, a high-school level institution, have both denied any role.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley; Editing by Benjamin Kang Lim and Paul Tait)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The problem in China is that there is no real oversight of the PLA. Everytime the PLA does something stupid, it is the chinese government that has to make up something to smooth over the ties. This happens all the time with neighboring countries like vietnam and india; the PLA does something arrogant and stupid, and the government has to break out the propoganda machine to fix it. Until the Chinese government gets real control over the PLA, China will continue to be a dangerous country. Foreign companies in China beware! They are watching you. Once the China-ASEAN free trade agreement goes into full force, I would set up shop in a friendly ASEAN nation and export to China. China has proven they are not friendly to foreigners nor our businesses. Google is not the only foreign company that was harrassed and attacked in China; they are only the biggest one.
Feb 24, 201011:44pm EST--
Feb 24, 201011:58pm EST--
Feb 25, 201012:45am EST--
