Censorship at heart of Tibet/China issue: Dalai Lama
2010-02-21 12:46:00.0
(Reuters) - The Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader of Tibet, said the United States and other countries could help his campaign for a free Tibet by promoting an open society in China.
"Censorship ... is the source of the problem," the Dalai Lama said in an interview with Reuters on Saturday in Beverly Hills.
"The Chinese people have no opportunity to know our issue," said the Buddhist monk, who Beijing has branded as a dangerous separatist for demanding Tibetan self-determination.
"Once China becomes an open society -- freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of information -- all this unnecessary fear and doubt will reduce," he said. "That's the real answer for this problem.
"American can help in this change," he said, adding that the lack of free information has helped the Chinese government portray him as a demon and a terrorist.
"Do I look like a demon?" the winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize joked, holding his fingers beside his head to make devil horns.
The Dalai Lama, who was to speak on behalf of Whole Child
International, an organization that works for orphans around the world, said Western search engines like Google Inc were important to the free flow of information within China. He noted they had ceded to pressure from the Communist government there to limit what users can see.
The Dalai Lama's visit to the Los Angeles area came on the heels of his low-key meeting on Thursday with U.S. President Barack Obama, which upset Beijing.
Obama used his first presidential meeting with the Dalai Lama to press China to preserve Tibetan identity and to respect human rights in the region, which has been under Chinese rule since 1950.
Tibetans living near the Dalai Lama's birthplace in northwest China celebrated the meeting with a rare display of fireworks while China, the second-largest creditor to the United States, condemned the move.
"We will have to wait ... it's very difficult to predict," he said.
The Dalai Lama had no comment on golfer Tiger Woods' high-profile public apology on Friday. In the televised statement that riveted Americans and slowed trade on Wall Street, Woods said he had strayed from the teachings of Buddhism, a religion he practiced in his youth, when he carried on extra-marital affairs with multiple women.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What is newsworthy about the Dalai Lama¡¯s reaction to Tiger Wood¡¯s apology?
Feb 20, 201011:22pm EST--
We just sit and watch this old dog die, then this whole soap opera can come to an end.
Feb 21, 201012:47am EST--
Are you talking about China? There is no way that in 50 years they are not going to have access to the whole internet, but their government wants to control it for as long as it can. Although they have an almost non existent crime rate, they have A LOT (128,000) incidents of civil unrest every year. Or maybe you were talking about Tiger Woods, I don¡¯t know. As intelligent as they are, you will have to be more clear in your comments.
Feb 21, 20103:17am EST--
