Israel to push China to support Iran sanctions
2010-02-24 09:22:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Feb 24 2010
Tue, Feb 23 2010
Mon, Feb 22 2010
Mon, Feb 22 2010
Sat, Feb 20 2010
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad waves to journalists after a news conference in Tehran February 16, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Raheb Homavandi
Wed  EST
Fischer, known to China from his time as a senior official of the IMF and World Bank, was accompanied by Israel's minister for strategic affairs, Moshe Yaalon, and representatives of Israel's National Security Council, Yaalon's spokesman said.
"They will discuss issues of common interest with the Chinese. This includes the Iranian issue, which is important for the Chinese as well as Israel," he said.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu this week called for an immediate embargo on Iran's energy sector.
Of the five members of the United Nations Security Council with veto power, China is most resistant to employing global sanctions to force Tehran to abandon its alleged atom-bomb plans, saying diplomacy can resolve the issue.
Beijing sees Iran as an important oil supplier and trade partner and a major strategic actor in the Middle East, where China, the world's No. 2 crude oil consumer, is buying growing volumes of oil.
Iran has the world's second-largest crude oil reserves, but desperately needs investment to develop them. It denies working to develop a nuclear warhead but insists on its right to create nuclear power-generating capacity.
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has called for the destruction of the Jewish state. His government supports the Shi'te Hezbollah militia in Lebanon, which Israel fought in a 2006 war, and the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas, which was the target of Israel's December 2008-January 2009 offensive to put a stop to rocket fire from militias in the Gaza Strip.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
islamic apartheid,,, The Evils of Islamic Political Ideology: Oppression of non-Muslims
islamic apartheid,,, The Evils of Islamic Political Ideology: Oppression of non-Muslims
Feb 24, 20109:22am EST--
@lars007 On the contrary. It is well known that the Israeli way of achieving peace, is to take a piece of Palestine, a piece of Lebanon, a piece of Syria. Israel is also the proud achiever of a large number of war-crimes, well documented, but not yet prosecuted. One day justice will be served¡­
Feb 24, 201011:06am EST--
¡°Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has called for the destruction of the Jewish state.¡±
¡°Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has called for the destruction of the Jewish state.¡±
Still flogging that dead horse. He predicted the disappearance, but did not in any way call for destruction.
Feb 24, 201012:51pm EST--
