Free food as China TV expose puts retailers on guard
2013-03-13 16:43:00.0
(Reuters) - McDonald's Corp (
) will give away more than a million breakfast McMuffins across China on Monday, a few days after Chinese state television airs its annual expose on corporate malpractice to mark World Consumer Rights Day.
The promotion, the U.S. fast food chain says, is purely coincidental.
On Friday, news program "3.15" - one of China's most widely watched TV shows - will name and shame companies that it says violated the trust of consumers in a nation forecast to become the world's largest retail market in three years.
The TV show, similar to U.S. CBS network's "60 Minutes", often catches companies off guard, and the fallout can sting as McDonald's itself found out last year when it was criticized on food safety. McDonald's apologized, and its shares fell as China's army of microbloggers unleashed their anger online.
"The minute there are questions about your practices that appear in any way credible, that can be devastating to consumer trust and extremely difficult to get back," said Shanghai-based James Roy, a senior analyst at China Market Research Group.
While most firms deny their actions are connected to the TV show, "3.15" appears to have prompted a spike in corporate good behavior in China aimed at balancing any negative press.
In addition to the free McDonald's breakfasts, Wal-Mart Stores Inc (
) is running an 'adopt a tree' program. Last year, the Beijing Food Safety Administration accused the U.S. retailer of food safety violations, and in 2011, its China CEO stepped down after another food-related scandal.
), blasted in last year's TV expose for food safety lapses, has implemented a fruit and vegetable tagging system.
) are hosting lectures on vehicle care and safety, while Chinese furniture firm Ocalone is giving away 100 tonnes of rice, according to local media reports.
"We have been through it once and we know how it feels," said Vivian Zhang, senior director of communications at McDonald's China, in an email to Reuters.
Asked if the breakfast promotion was related to Consumer Day, she said: "There is no connection."
), dashing sales in its top market.
WHO'S NEXT?
Food safety and environmental pollution are chronic problems in China, where just this week official media said around 6,000 pigs were found dead in one of Shanghai's main water sources.
The number of Chinese who said they thought food safety was a major concern has more than tripled between 2008 and 2012, a report by private U.S. think-tank Pew Research Center shows.
Public anxiety over food safety often spreads like wildfire, keeping consumer companies from Coca-Cola Co (
"It's easy to imagine why company brand managers would stay up all night or wake up in a cold sweat," said Karl Gerth, an academic and author of a book on Chinese consumer behavior.
The Consumer Day expose is also a hot topic for China's half a billion-strong online Weibo community.
The name "3.15" was posted more than 1.5 million times over the last week on Weibo, China's version of Twitter, with many users asking who will be this year's target.
"In 2011, it was Kumho Tire Co Inc (
), in 2012 it was McDonald's and Carrefour. Who will '3.15' turn its gaze towards this year?" asked online platform Sohu Business on Weibo.
While companies are keen to pre-empt negative news, they have no guarantee their promotions will convince consumers.
"Those companies trying to make themselves look good are just making things worse," said Fang Libing, a financial analyst based in Shanghai. "The more they try to hide, the more they are exposed."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
My partners and I grow fresh fruits and vegetables in warehouse farms in cities. We use multiple technologies to raise production by a factor of 75 or 7500%. We use 4 mini-floors; deep beds; control of light, heat, and water; composting for fertilizer and insect control; shading for weed control; bees for pollenation and a crop of honey; and use of city CO2 to raise yields. We reduce city pollution by passing city air through electrostatic plates to remove SO2, NO2, and CO. Regular filters remove particulates, and the filtered CO2 raises yields. The equation is CO2 + H2O + green plants + soil nutrients + light = food + O2. In addition, we do not pollute air moving food from the country to the cities because we grow food in the cities. We grow more food and reduce pollution, and we have had no problems with bad publicity.
Mar 13, 20135:22pm EDT--
