Best to wait for China on Iran: French U.N. envoy
2010-02-11 22:31:00.0
(Reuters) - World powers discussing possible new sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program should take as much time as necessary to secure China's backing, France's U.N. ambassador said on Thursday.
"It's totally essential to work with the Chinese, even if it means waiting a bit," French envoy Gerard Araud told an audience of academics, students and diplomats at New York's Columbia University.
He declined to provide any details on negotiations on a fourth round of U.N. sanctions against Tehran currently underway among the United States, France, Britain, Germany, Russia and China.
Unlike Russia, China has indicated that it is very reluctant to pursue new sanctions against Tehran, with which both Beijing and Moscow have close economic ties.
"I wouldn't consider dumping China," he said.
"Of course there are nuances between the members," he said, adding that what bound them together was their shared concern about Tehran's nuclear program.
"This common concern is still there," he said.
Western diplomats on the Security Council say that the United States, Britain, France and Germany hope to have an agreement with Russia and China on the basic elements for a new sanctions resolution by the end of this month so that the 15-nation council could vote on it by the end of March.
But such a timetable is highly ambitious given China's reluctance to take further punitive steps against Iran.
Iran, a major oil and gas producer, rejects Western allegations that it is secretly developing nuclear weapons. It insists that its nuclear ambitions are limited to the peaceful generation of electricity.
Among the ideas that the United States and France have floated in informal papers, the contents of which were described to Reuters by several diplomats, are expanding U.N. travel bans and asset freezes to include members of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and firms owned by it.
They also hope to blacklist Iran's central bank and other financial institutions suspected of financing the Islamic Republic's nuclear and missile programs. France's paper suggests targeting Iran's energy sector, a punitive measure that was not included in the U.S. paper, diplomats said.
Asked what would happen if the international community failed to persuade Iran not to develop atomic weapons, Araud made clear that Israel might decide to use force.
"Failure would be extremely serious," he said. "There is a risk of military confrontation."
The French envoy also rejected the idea that Israel's presumed nuclear arsenal had played any role in Iran's decision to pursue a covert atomic program.
"Israel has nothing to do with the Iranian nuclear program," he said, adding that Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's threatening remarks about the Jewish state were "a smoke screen."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
To say that Iran is a major oil and gas producer is a bit of a misstatement. Iran lacks the refining capacity due to decades of embargos. China refines Iranian Oil and ships it back stop them. Almost all of the recent friction probably has more to do with pressuring China on sanctions. The fact that the Iranians capitulated on outside uranium enrichment is probably indicator they were receiving Chinese pressure. The fact that the US rejected it without a second thought tells me that we may on a course for invasion ¨C that is probably what the Afghan build up is about. If Obama does not meet with the Dalai Lama, it¡¯s almost certain that there has been a rapprochement with the Chinese and invasion may not be far off. The Neo Cons have repackaged this entire endeavor, and it appears that Obama and Bush may be working for the same man behind the curtain ¨C whoever that is, he wants a US invasion and is very patient and relentless. The US has been antagonizing the Iranians with assassinations, agitation and asset seizures. They have made it almost very difficult for the Iranians to capitulate and stay in power. The fact that they caved on outsourcing there processed uranium shows they are feeling the pressure from China. The fact that the US did not jump on the opportunity tells me there may be a different strategy at work here. Just as Hans Blix was roundly ridiculed when he screamed at the top of his lungs there were no WMD¡¯s. The reason no one listened is because there never really was any other option on the table than invasion.
Feb 11, 201011:27pm EST--
the UN should charge muslims with inciting hatred and discrimination against non-muslims,,, and crimes against humanity,,, islamic apartheid,,, The Evils of Islamic Political Ideology: Oppression of non-Muslims
the UN should charge muslims with inciting hatred and discrimination against non-muslims,,, and crimes against humanity,,, islamic apartheid,,, The Evils of Islamic Political Ideology: Oppression of non-Muslims
http://www.rightsidenews.com/200906014988/homeland-security/the-evils-of-islamic-political-ideology-oppression-of-non-muslims.html THIS IRANIAN HAS A GOOD IDEA!!! Ali Sina, an ex-Muslim from Iran. He is the creator of Faithfreedom.org.
Yet I know that by eradicating Islam we can save the world from the dangers of a catastrophe that otherwise is looming over our heads and could cause more disaster than the 1st and 2nd World Wars combined. Eradication of Islam means restoring peace among humanity and civility, democracy and prosperity in the Muslim world. http://www.faithfreedom.org/Articles/sina/why_i_left_islam.htm
Feb 12, 20103:04am EST--
