Carlyle, Fosun to launch private equity fund in China
2010-02-24 07:28:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. buyout giant Carlyle Group CYL.UL will team up with China's largest non-state-owned conglomerate Fosun Group to launch a $100 million yuan-denominated private equity fund, part of a global strategic alliance to share resources, the companies said on Wednesday.
Carlyle and Fosun, a unit of Fosun International Ltd (
), have initially committed $50 million each to form and jointly manage the co-branded fund which will invest in China's high-growth companies, and will also seek to raise capital from both international and domestic investors for subsequent funds, the companies told a news conference in Shanghai.
The fund is expected to get regulatory approval soon, they said.
"China is one of the best places in the world to invest," Carlyle Co-founder and Managing Director David Rubenstein said. "Fosun has an excellent track record in capturing China's growth opportunities."
) are seeking partnerships in order to launch local yuan-denominated funds in the hope of carrying out deals more quickly and easily in China, where approval for major foreign investments is difficult to obtain.
Carlyle also plans to launch a China-dedicated, yuan-denominated private equity fund in Beijing, the firm announced in January, which will invest alongside Carlyle Asia Partners and focus on larger investments.
Partnering with Carlyle is part of Fosun's international expansion strategy, said Fosun Chairman and founder Guo Guangcheng, China's 20th richest person in 2009 according to Forbes.
"In the past, we mainly managed our own money. In the future, we will manage more of other people's money," Guo told Reuters. "Previously, we focused on China. In the future, we will boost our global influence."
Carlyle, which manages $87.6 billion in 65 funds globally, has invested more than $2.5 billion in China in more than 40 deals.
"China is the area that most of our investors are interested in or focused on," Rubenstein said. "We do invest outside of China of course, as well, but China will get a predominant share of the money that we have for Asia because it's so much larger and it's such an exciting place to invest."
Carlyle will set up a 50-50 joint venture with Fosun to manage the planned yuan fund, with Carlyle's share of the initial investment coming from its Asia Growth Fund.
This is the second time for Carlyle and Fosun to join hands to pursue investment opportunities. In September 2009, Carlyle and Fosun jointly invested in Guangdong Yashili Group Co Ltd, one of China's largest infant formula companies.
Fosun, founded in 1992 by four graduates of Shanghai's Fudan University with initial capital of $4,000, has grown into a $4.7 billion steel-to-pharmaceuticals conglomerate with investments in more than 100 companies such as Sinopharm Group (
Blackstone announced last August that it would launch a 5 billion yuan ($733 million) fund in Shanghai, while Prax Capital, CLSA and First Eastern have also unveiled fundraising plans.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
http://www.onseeking.com (air jordan, air max, shox tn, rift, puma, dunk sb, adidas) nike
http://www.onseeking.com (air jordan, air max, shox tn, rift, puma, dunk sb, adidas) nike
jordan shoes 1-24 $32 lv, coach, chanel bag $35 Gucci(jeans, tshirts, hoody, jacket) $30 christian audigier(jeans, tshirts, hoody) $13 edhardy(shoes, tshirts, jeans, caps, watche, handbag) $25 Armani(jeans, tshirts,) $24 AF(jeans, coat, hoody, sweater, tshirts)Abercrombie & Fitch $31 Ed hardy/lacoste/polo/ca/A&F Tshirt :$12 Our website wholesale for many kinds of fashion clothing, such
as nike,jordan,prama,****, we also sell jeans,shirts,bags,hat and
many kinds of tiffany. All the products are free shipping, and the
the price is enticement , and also can accept the paypal
payment.we can ship within 24 hours after your payment. accept the paypal free shipping competitive price any size available CA POLO EDHARDY GUCCI T-SHIRT $15; TRUE RELIGION EVISU G-STAR COOGI JEAN $36; AIR MAX NIKE SHOX JORDAN JORDAN FUNSHION JORDAN
RING SHOES $35; GUCCI COACH shoes DG shoes $33 coach chanel gucci LV handbags $32; edhardy New Era POLO cap $15; coach okely prada nike DG Sunglass $17; Everything is here http://www.onseeking.com friends, please
Feb 25, 20109:15am EST--
