Q+A: What does China's indictment of the Rio four mean?
2010-02-10 18:18:00.0
(Reuters) - China indicted four Rio Tinto employees, including Australian Stern Hu, on Wednesday, opening the way for a trial that will focus attention on the country's sometimes murky business environment.
WHAT ARE THE FOUR ACCUSED OF?
Hu was formally arrested in August along with three Chinese executives from Anglo-Australian mining giant, which does extensive business with China. The three Chinese are Liu Caikui, Ge Minqiang and Wang Yong.
They were arrested on suspicion of illegally obtaining commercial secrets and bribery. They were first detained in July, but initial charges alleging they stole state secrets were dropped.
Under the commercial secrets charge, courts can jail people for up to three years, or up to seven years in "especially serious" cases.
The bribery charge could draw jail terms of up to 20 years, said Zhang Peihong, a lawyer for one of the accused Chinese nationals, Wang Yong.
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?
The four men are now virtually certain to face trial in a Shanghai court. No date has been announced, but it is likely to be after the week-long Chinese Lunar New Year holiday, which starts this weekend.
China's courts come under the heavy influence of the ruling Communist Party and rarely reject prosecution arguments. But the Australian government and Rio will be watching the trial carefully.
If convicted, the men can appeal.
At least two executives at Chinese steel companies were earlier detained in connection with the Rio case, but it is unclear whether they have also been formally charged.
WHAT DOES THE CASE MEAN FOR THE STEEL INDUSTRY?
Rio's China team negotiated and managed details of term contracts for iron ore, in demand from China's vast steel industry, as well as tracking market information.
The Rio trial will add an element of uncertainty and wariness to already contentious iron ore negotiations between China and the three big miners: Rio, its fellow Australian miner BHP Billiton and Brazil's Vale.
China's steel industry dwarfs all others. That means iron ore talks between China and the big miners matter hugely for the global steel industry.
Last year China's crude steel output accounted for almost half the world's total. The country's steel output and iron ore imports both soared to record highs in 2009.
China and Rio had hard feelings even before the arrests, following the collapse of a deal by Chinese state-owned aluminum firm, Chinalco, to increase its stake in Rio.
After more than six months of haggling in 2009, China and the miners never fully resolved the iron ore price Chinese steel mills would pay for term imports.
Traditionally, Chinese mills accepted whatever deal is settled first between any mill and any of the big three global ore suppliers.
But China's steel industry association, which led last year's negotiations, refused to settle on that price and sought to change the basis of talks for 2010 prices.
The indictment came the day after officials of the China Iron & Steel Association, which represented China's steelmakers in last year's failed talks, warned reporters not to pry into this year's negotiations.
Like last year, China will insist international miners should sell iron ore into its market at a unified price, eliminating the difference between spot and term prices, a CISA official said.
WHAT ARE THE BROADER IMPLICATIONS OF THE CASE?
The detention of the four has stoked investors' worries about doing business in China's murky legal environment, where the Communist Party controls the courts and exerts powerful sway over crime investigations and big commercial negotiations.
The indictments come as Google's dispute with China over Internet censorship and hacking complaints has also brought into focus foreign business complaints about the country's ways.
HOW WILL THIS IMPACT CHINA-AUSTRALIA RELATIONS?
But Australia has said the case would not harm trade with China, and both governments appear to want to insulate broader ties from any contention over the case, especially after the state secrets spying accusation was dropped.
Much is at stake for both sides. China is Australia's biggest trade partner. Australia exported $15 billion worth of iron ore to China in 2008 -- 41 percent of China's iron ore imports in that period.
Since the arrest of the Rio executives, Australian companies, including Rio, have continued doing business with China.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
china really stepped in it this time,,, put a fork in china,,, it is done,,, nobody will want to do business with them now,,, can you say trumprd up charges,,, sure you can,,, lol can you say kangaroo court,,, sure you can,,, hahaha china¡¯s legal system is a sham,,, Kangaroo courts are sham legal proceedings which are set-up in order to give the impression of a fair legal process. In fact, they offer no impartial justice as the verdict, invariably to the detriment of the accused, is decided in advance.
Feb 10, 20104:04pm EST--
