Poor give muted backing to Copenhagen climate deal
2010-02-02 15:08:00.0
(Reuters) - A "Copenhagen Accord" for fighting climate change has won only half-hearted support from major emerging nations led by China and India, leaving question marks over a pact they agreed with the United States.
Indian officials said the BASIC group -- China, India, South Africa and Brazil -- feared that ringing endorsement of the accord could detract from the 1992 U.N. Climate Convention, which says rich nations must lead action to slow global warming.
"There seems a deliberate ambiguity," a Danish official source said after China, India and some other emerging nations met a January 31 deadline set by December's low-key accord for outlining climate plans but did not say if they endorsed it.
The United Nations says that 55 countries, including all major emitters and accounting for almost 80 percent of world greenhouse gas emissions, submitted goals for curbing emissions by 2020 by the Sunday deadline in the accord.
One Indian official said Beijing and Brasilia had suggested keeping a question mark hanging over their support, and thereby the accord's legitimacy, fearing that some developed nations would try to turn it into a full legal treaty.
"The accord represents a political agreement which could give direction and impetus to the negotiations under the Convention and (Kyoto) Protocol," said Alf Wills, a deputy director general at the Department of Environmental Affairs.
The accord was only "noted" by the 194-member U.N. talks after opposition from a handful of developing nations such as Venezuela, Sudan and Nicaragua. In a compromise, all nations were told to say if they wanted to be "associated."
Letters sent by China and India outlining their 2020 targets did not even mention the Copenhagen Accord, even though leaders of the BASIC group worked out the deal with U.S. President Barack Obama in a late-night meeting on December 18 in Copenhagen.
By contrast, South Africa's Wills, who signed his country's letter, said that "as a participant in its development we are already associated with the accord."
"South Africa understands that the request for countries to associate with the accord is aimed primarily at those others that were not part of the small group of heads of state that developed it," he told Reuters.
"We do acknowledge that some others may have different interpretations, but that is not a concern of ours," he said.
The United States, by contrast, told the United Nations in a letter of "its desire to be associated with the Copenhagen Accord." And the 27-nation European Union, Japan, Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Norway also all explicitly said they want to be "associated."
For Reuters latest environment blogs, click on:
