Is China stalling over Hummer buy?
2010-02-10 16:32:00.0
(Reuters) - A Chinese machinery maker's acquisition of General Motors Co's loss-making Hummer brand could be stalling as Beijing frets that a failure to turn around the macho gas-guzzler may dent China's image abroad.
Chances for regulatory approval of the deal have dimmed in recent weeks, according to three sources with links to Chinese regulators, GM and the buyer, Sichuan Tengzhong Heavy Industrial Machinery -- a little-known company with no experience in either making cars or managing a foreign company.
One source said the chances of having the deal approved had dropped to 50-50, adding that the Hummer profile also works against it as Beijing pushes for a greener economy and the global trend shifts to more environmentally friendly, low-emissions driving.
"How can you say you support a low fuel-efficiency and high-cost auto project when the whole country is promoting 'green' cars?" asked the source.
Regulators in Tengzhong's home province of Sichuan support the deal and are waiting for positive signs from Beijing before seeking final approval from the Ministry of Commerce, according to two sources close to Tengzhong and the regulator.
They and other sources with direct knowledge of the deal, which was first reached last year, spoke on condition of anonymity due to the fluid situation.
The commerce ministry has said it has yet to receive an application, even as a deadline set by GM and Tengzhong -- already extended by a month -- looms at the end of this month. That may need to be extended again as much of China closes down next week for the Lunar New Year.
Sichuan likes the deal as it promises jobs, investment and global recognition for the inland province, said one source.
"For the provincial government, it's only a matter of procedure," that source said. "If the central government is supportive, they will certainly bring the case to Beijing."
But Beijing worries that China's image could take a beating if Tengzhong fails to revive Hummer, best known for its outsize all-terrain vehicles, the sources said.
Tengzhong and Hummer are keenly aware of the government's fuel-efficiency drive, Tengzhong General Manager Yang Yi told Reuters last year.
"We want to make a green Hummer," he said then.
The deal is expected to save over 3,000 jobs in the United States related to making and selling Hummer vehicles, which are sold in 38 countries around the world.
A U.S.-based source with knowledge of the situation said the deal is at a turning point, and could go either way.
A GM spokesman had no immediate comment, while a Tengzhong spokeswoman reiterated that the deal is still awaiting approval.
"We will do our best in conjunction with the government's approval process," she told Reuters, declining further comment.
The deal was first greeted with skepticism, as Hummer has long been criticized for its size and poor fuel economy, but the tone later became more positive, with observers saying late last year the deal had a good chance of closing.
Beijing Automotive Industry Holding Corp (BAIC), China's fifth-ranked automaker, closed its $200 million purchase of car designs from GM's Saab in just two weeks, and Zhejiang Geely Holding Group's bid to buy Ford's Volvo cars unit is also believed to enjoy government support.
Executives and investors at Tengzhong, founded in 2005 and now employing 4,800, are said to be well connected in Sichuan, but are feeling frustrated about the drawn-out approval process.
Suo Lang Duo Ji, a major Tengzhong shareholder cited by Chinese media as the brains behind the Hummer deal, told Reuters he is hopeful the acquisition can be concluded this spring.
"But it all depends on the government," he told Reuters last week in his first interview with foreign media.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I do not care what China does, I have a total dislike of China and it is time to cut trade with China in North America and should not be pandering to special visible minorities especially in Canada, multiculturalism is dead and majority want a melting pot society.
Feb 11, 201012:39am EST--
Don¡¯t sell it to China. They will only poison it before it quits working.
Feb 11, 20101:27am EST--
I hope it doesn¡¯t sell. We should be selling Hummers to China, not the other way around. China, as well as much of the Earth, has vast unimproved areas where off road first vehicles like Hummers are very useful. No reason why Toyota / Jeep should get to have all the off road fun.
Feb 11, 201010:10am EST--
