China military urges vigilance over Japan's defense plan
2013-07-27 03:05:00.0
(Reuters) - China's Defence Ministry on Saturday urged international vigilance of Japan's military plans after it unveiled an interim report calling for strengthened armed forces, including the possible acquisition of the ability to hit enemy bases.
Japan's proposal - its latest step away from the constraints of its pacifist constitution - is part of a review of defense policy by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's government, which released an interim report on the issue on Friday. Final review conclusions are due by the end of the year.
Japan's Defence Ministry also said it would consider buying unmanned surveillance drones, create a force of Marines to protect remote islands, such as those disputed with China, and consider beefing up the ability to transport troops to far-flung isles.
"The sections about China in this report by Japan are playing on the same old themes, exaggerating the military threat from China, and have ulterior motives," China's Defence Ministry said in a statement on its website (www.mod.gov.cn).
"This year, Japan has come up with all kinds of excuses to continue to expand its armaments ... creating tensions in the region. These moves deserve the highest vigilance from neighboring countries in Asia and from the international community," it said.
The hawkish Abe took office in December for a rare second term, pledging to bolster the military to cope with what Japan sees as an increasingly threatening security environment including an assertive China and an unpredictable North Korea.
Abe called on Friday for a leaders' summit or a foreign ministers' meeting between his country and China as soon as possible.
But Abe's appeal drew a cool reaction from China which accused Japan of lacking sincerity.
Over the past year, China's stand-off with Japan over a string of uninhabited rocky islands in the East China Sea known as the Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China has become more acrimonious.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
With all those beautiful excuses the Japanese government presents, it is clear that, with Obama¡¯s help, Japanese government is reestablishing its new military forces and planning for World War III. Japanese government never stopped the idea of genocide Asian people. Combining the already gigantic (non-transparent) USA military budget and now the Japanese military budget, there will be no peace in East Asia. Those photos of Japanese slaughtering people in cold blood during World War II brings me nightmare. Corpse are piling up like trophies for the Japanese soldiers. Thank you Clinton for bring evil to the Pacific region and relocate Middle East wars to Asia. Your name shall never be forgotten in history.
Jul 27, 20133:48am EDT--
With all those beautiful excuses the Japanese government presents, it is clear that, with Obama¡¯s help, Japanese government is reestablishing its new military forces and planning for World War III. Japanese government never stopped the idea of genocide Asian people. Combining the already gigantic (non-transparent) USA military budget and now the Japanese military budget, there will be no peace in East Asia. Those photos of Japanese slaughtering people in cold blood during World War II brings me nightmare. Corpse are piling up like trophies for the Japanese soldiers. Thank you Clinton for bring evil to the Pacific region and relocate Middle East wars to Asia. Your name shall never be forgotten in history.
Jul 27, 20134:01am EDT--
With China¡¯s belligerence knowing no bounds in the Pacific, support for Japan and it¡¯s intention to be able to defend itself is only going to rise. Let¡¯s hope China begins to understand the consequences of it¡¯s colonial mentality, coupled with it¡¯s illegal actions within other countries EEZ¡¯s and their territories. ¡°Appeasement is slow surrender¡± Winston Churchill.
Jul 27, 20134:44am EDT--
