Yuan change well off radar of China's exporters
2010-02-09 09:04:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States is once more ratcheting up pressure on Beijing to let its currency appreciate, but for many of China's small exporters the issue is not even on their radar.
In marked contrast to the lead-up to China's 2005 revaluation, when rumors of a change swept Asian markets daily, there is very little discussion these days in China beyond economists' circles of allowing the yuan to resume its rise.
That could be a sign that, despite the hopes of officials in Washington, China has no immediate intention of ending its de facto peg of 6.83 yuan to the dollar, in place since mid-2008 to help exporters ride out the global financial crisis.
"It shows they haven't been prepared. If you were a cautious senior official, you'd think you'd give the export sector a heads up," says Stephen Green, head of research for Greater China at Standard Chartered Bank in Shanghai, who does not expect any movement in the yuan before the third quarter.
"We think it's still too early. If the State Council is picking up the phone and talking to exporters, they'd be hearing the story that it's still hard for them."
Despite surprisingly strong December export data, many of the private Chinese firms that supply the world with T-shirts, toys and teacups are still struggling for new orders and profits.
The Obama administration has said the currency is its top priority in strategic talks with China, but could be disappointed if China is not prepared to move for its own domestic reasons.
"Everyone sees the exchange rate as stable around 6.83. No one's thinking of a change. If it changed, there would be too much harm. The whole export sector would suffer," says Jimi Pang, a trader for an international steel trading house.
"Steel is OK, but in other industries like furniture or clothing the margins are too thin. They'd go from barely profitable to big losses if the yuan started appreciating."
Repegging the yuan has been a boon to China's exporters, who don't need to hedge currency risk when offering razor-thin margins on a contract. They also benefited from last year's slide in the dollar, which helped keep Chinese exports competitive against those from other developing countries.
Many inexperienced exporters suffered when the yuan, after being pegged for more than a decade at 8.28 to the dollar, was revalued by 2.1 percent in 2005 and then set free to float within a tightly managed band.
Immediately after the shift in currency regime, many exporters did write provisions for exchange rate fluctuations into their contracts. But they stopped once the yuan stabilized, says industry and trade consultant Sun Jianliang.
"There's not a lot of talk about this," Sun says.
Chinese companies often get hints from ministries and state-backed industry associations when policies are about to alter. For instance, the steel industry usually anticipates export tariff adjustments by adding a clause to contracts specifying which side will shoulder the additional cost.
Most small exporters, many of whom turn around contracts in just a few months, do not currently include a similar clause for any move in the value of the yuan.
That's particularly true in the highly competitive textile industry, where orders are rushed through to keep up with fashion and margins leave no room for error, business managers say.
"Our contracts are signed according to the spot exchange rates, and we don't commit ourselves beyond three months," says a manager surnamed Li at Cathaylink Import and Export Co, which makes Chinese crafts.
"Beyond that, it's too risky. Nobody can tell how the exchange rate will change."
A trade official from Yiwu, a manufacturing and wholesale trade hub in eastern China, says exporters are flocking to trade shows overseas with no obvious concerns about the appreciation of the yuan.
Some firms, however, are worried.
"We're thinking of developing sales into Europe because we are afraid the U.S. dollar will start moving," says Johnny Chan, whose family business sells unfinished coat hangers to Vietnam for completion and export to the United States.
"Our profit margins are already very low because we have to go through a middleman," he says. "If the dollar starts to change, small businesses like us can only raise prices, and that would remove the margin."
(Additional reporting by Beijing Newsroom; Editing by Alan Wheatley and Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
When Chavez devalued his currency, he was slammed. But the USD has lost 10%-50% against almost all major currencies in the last year. The only hold-out is China. So now, Obama is pressuring the Chinese to raise the value of the yuan, in other words, devalue the USD. In doing so, he will be a hero, a protector of US interests. So Chavez devalues ¡­ BAD. Obama devalues ¡­ GOOD. Venezuelan citizens have their wealth reduced to peanuts ¡­ BAD. US citizens receive the same treatment ¡­ GOOD. I don¡¯t follow the logic.
Feb 09, 201010:16am EST--
Chavez would wet his pants if US did as much business with him as US does with Beijing. What¡¯s your point?
Feb 09, 201011:12am EST--
It¡¯s not hard to see what comment number 1 is saying. The end result will be a stronger Yuan and a weaker dollar. The Chinese will still laugh their way to the bank because they still cost less to do more then supply the world with ¡°t shirts, teacups and toys¡±. They are into heavy manufacturing. Take a look at the big box stores ¡°made in¡± labels. Take a look at any of the biz to biz directories of Chinese industries. Take a look at Beijing or Shanghai on Google earth. The Chinese have the advantage of being able to regulate all the aspects of their economy while we only talk about it. I almost envy them. They like regularity and try to avoid ¡°bubbles¡±. And their infrastructure and urban development is very up to date in the major cities. . But this readjustment of the world¡¯s economic powers works so much better if those going down think they are still controlling the buttons on the elevator. This county has an enormous ego. Anybody out of range of the ¡®charm¡± and flag waving can see that. All the growth opportunities are in the developing nations. That is not likely to change with a revalued currency. And China will gain in purchasing power. And if this country starts to go the way of protectionism so will they. I don¡¯t anticipate that revaluation is going to make much of a difference here. The Fortune 500 isn¡¯t a particularly ¡°patriotic¡± bunch. They are an international force and will go where the growth prospects are best. Dubai is still waiting for them to move in. Maybe they won¡¯t have to wait too long?
Feb 09, 201012:46pm EST--
