Google, NSA to team up in cyberattack probe
2010-02-04 16:55:00.0
(Reuters) - Internet search firm Google is finalizing a deal that would let the National Security Agency help it investigate a corporate espionage attack that may have originated in China, the Washington Post reported on Thursday.
The aim of the investigation is to better defend Google, the world's largest Internet search company, and its users from future attacks, the Post said, citing anonymous sources with knowledge of the arrangement.
The sources said Google's alliance with the NSA -- the intelligence agency is the world's most powerful electronic surveillance organization -- would be aimed at letting them share critical information without violating Google's policies or laws that protect the privacy of online communications.
"NSA is not able to comment on specific relationships we may or may not have with U.S. companies," the agency said in a statement.
As a general matter, "NSA works with a broad range of commercial partners and research associates" on security solutions for the Defense Department and other customers and on "cutting-edge technologies that will secure the information systems of tomorrow," the statement said.
Under the arrangement, the NSA would not be viewing user searches or e-mail accounts, the Washington Post said. Google also would not be sharing proprietary data with the NSA, the newspaper's sources said.
China responded several days later with a defense of its state control of the Internet. A top official said online pornography, fraud and rumors were a menace and that Internet media must help "guide public opinion" in China.
Google approached the NSA in the aftermath of the attacks, but reaching an agreement has taken weeks because of the sensitive nature of information-sharing between the two sides, the Post quoted its sources as saying.
The focus of the cooperative venture would not be to determine who was behind the attacks, the newspaper added, citing its sources. That would be nearly impossible.
Instead the aim is to build a better defense of Google's networks, or what technicians call "information assurances," the newspaper quoted the sources as saying.
(Writing by David Alexander, reporting by Tabassum Zakaria; Editing by Paul Simao)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is a dangerous precedent. NSA, CIA, etc are no more trustworthy than the Chinese. Going down this path will have grave implications for internet users, if it hasn¡¯t already. More than likely, this is an announcement of previously secret cooperation.
Feb 04, 20102:25pm EST--
Feb 04, 20105:18pm EST--
I have, back in ¡®05 and ¡®06, been in touch with FBI Cyber regarding the number of hits (ping) and hack attempts from China which I detected with my over the counter security software. Back in those days I would get a couple of hundred hits weekly, seeking servers or access from the EU, Russia, Korea and Mexico. However, in the same time period I would get as many as a thousand from China. Chinese ¡°HACKER CLUBS¡± are all over their country, most started at Universities. The PRC is pretty tough on anyone who tries to hack or steal from them, but they don¡¯t care if their people use their computers to collect personal information, small business information and commit corporate espionage anywhere else in the world. They hold a couple of trillion dollars worth of the Feds paper and are most likely providing black ops funds via corporate fronts to Chinese citizens who acquire what may be useful information. ANY KIND OF INFORMATION. They tend to stay away from government and classified sites. They are collecting information on anybody and any small to medium size company they can, hopefully to sell or get some perc, like a new computer or cell phone as payment for their efforts. Phishing scams are mostly for info only purposes and not to go to the extremes of actual identity theft or cleaning out bank accounts. That will come later. There are some really dedicated Chinese citizens who do this on behalf of misguided beliefs in patriotism to the PRC and DO MALICIOUS DAMAGE. FBI and NSA need to put a stop to this. They used to pirate all of our software and the Chinese government didn¡¯t crackdown on that for many years. Not until they obtained the technology they wished to obtain. Now they are collecting personal, small and medium size business information in companies without hi tech IT Security staffs. We need to be allowed to upgrade our common over the counter encryption and build a firewall between the US and China selectively. This will require FBI and NSA coop with the software developers so the software engineers can develop over the counter secuity software available and legal for use which allows the individual and/or business to select which countries they want their traffic read by and which countries are authorized to ping for data or server availability. This would keep conttol in the hands of the people and not the NSA. The NSA should monitor international traffic from point of origin to destination but not read it without Federal Courts authorization. If we can select the regions and/or countries which we as individuals want to access or grant ping authorization to that would solve the problem. It requires higher levels of encryption which the FBI and NSA can crack but not folks on the blocked list.
Feb 04, 20105:51pm EST--
