Japan tells G7 Tokyo focusing on China
2010-02-06 06:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese Finance Minister Naoto Kan told his Group of Seven counterparts on Friday that Tokyo was focusing on China's economy as it was showing signs of a bubble.
He also said that the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors spent much time discussing Greece's financial problems at a working dinner on Friday which kicked off a two-day G7 gathering in the Arctic town of Iqaluit, Canada.
"I said Japan's focus was on China's economy as there were some signs of a bubble," Kan told reporters after the dinner, adding that there were no objections when he explained Tokyo's view that stable Chinese growth was necessary.
He did not say whether there was any specific talk on the Chinese yuan. Beijing has continued to shrug off pressure from its major trading partners to let the yuan appreciate, repeating its line that stability is in everybody's best interests.
The G7 finance leaders also discussed Greece's financial woes, with much time spent on how much role the International Monetary Fund and the European Union should each play in seeking a solution to the problem, Kan said.
Kan also said France circulated its own proposal on G7 reform as a basis for debate, but that no conclusion was reached at the working dinner.
The finance leaders of the G7, which comprises Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States, officially started their meeting with the working dinner. They are unlikely to issue a joint communique when talks finish on Saturday.
Kan, who took over as finance minister last month, had earlier said he would closely watch any G7 debate on the yuan as it could affect Japan's economy, which is heavily reliant on exports to fast-growing Asian nations like China.
Canada has said the G7 may discuss the need for a more flexible yuan, among other topics, at the meeting.
But the G7 has little leverage with China, which sits at the larger G20 table of industrial and emerging powers. The G20 has been overtaking the G7 as the prime forum for global economic matters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°But the G7 has little leverage with China, which sits at the larger G20 table of industrial and emerging powers.¡± This is a very wrong idea. China is a 4 trillion dollar economy. The US is a 14 trillion dollar economy. The EU is a 15 trillion dollar economy. Germany and Japan are huge exporters. Too many people are being blinded by China¡¯s ¡°miracle¡± growth, which isn¡¯t such a miracle at all. It is growing due to exports to the G7 nations and investments from the G7 nations. Without our money, they will not grow. The US and the EU alone have enough leverage to deal with China; they just have to have the will to use it. Cutting China off from trade will reduce some of that Chinese arrogance that we are seeing these days.
Feb 06, 20107:46pm EST--
Feb 06, 20109:49pm EST--
¡°Totally agree with the above comments. The China econonmy is not big enough at this time to worry about.¡± This is probably the lousiest comment I have ever read. Shortsightedness does not even begin to describe it. To make it concrete, I¡¯ll give you some examples. The fastest growing market for GM is China. China just finalized a AU$60 billion coal export deal. This is just the tip of the iceberg. Are you telling me that you want to tell GM and other companies that they should stop exporting to China just because China is not big enough to worry about? If you know any economics, your conclusion should be the opposite. Precisely because China is not big enough, and still growing fast, you want to trade more with China. Does that make China more prosperous? Sure. But, that is the beauty of world trade. It makes everybody prosperous. I am not saying free trade is perfect. It has shortcomings. But, it sure is better than no trade. So, please stop inflaming hatred and start thinking for a global win-win situation.
Feb 07, 201012:13am EST--
