China: Big powers should talk with Iran, not punish
2010-02-05 15:04:00.0
China: Big powers should talk with Iran, not punish | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China: Big powers should talk with Iran, not punish
Wed, Feb 3 2010
Wed, Feb 3 2010
Tue, Feb 2 2010
Fri, Feb 5 2010
Tue, Feb 2 2010
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad speaks during a ceremony to introduce the domestically produced Simorq propulsion system, for rockets to carry satellites into space, during a ceremony in Tehran February 3, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Ebrahim Noroozi/IIPA.ir
Fri  EST
The U.S. State Department said senior officials from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, China and Russia held a conference call on the issue.
"They discussed both tracks, both the pressure track and the (negotiating track)," State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told reporters, referring to the twin policy of diplomacy and sanctions which the five permanent U.N. Security Council members and Germany have deployed with Iran.
Western members of the group have been discussing a possible fourth round of U.N. sanctions in response to Iran's refusal to freeze uranium enrichment work as demanded by five Security Council resolutions.
Moscow has indicated it is ready to support new punitive steps but China, which like Russia has close commercial ties to Iran, is resisting. As a permanent Security Council member, China can use its veto to block any new sanctions resolution.
This week, Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said his country was ready to send its low-enriched uranium to Russia and France for further purification into fuel for a reactor that makes medical isotopes. Tehran had earlier annoyed Russia and the Western powers by rejecting such an offer.
Ahmadinejad's surprising remarks came after details of U.S. and French documents outlining possible new U.N. sanctions against Iran were leaked. Possible targets include Iran's central bank, Revolutionary Guard Corps and energy sector.
Referring to Ahmadinejad's remarks, a Chinese diplomat at the United Nations said the six powers should "take that offer and see if the Iranians really mean to want to have a breakthrough in the negotiations."
"This is an open, public ... offer from the highest authorities," the envoy said on condition of anonymity.
Like China, Russia reluctantly supported three rounds of U.N. sanctions against Iran after working hard to dilute the measures during closed-door negotiations on the resolutions.
"We confirmed that if we do not see a constructive answer from Iran, we will have to discuss this in the U.N. Security Council," Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov told reporters at a news conference with his German counterpart, Guido Westerwelle, in Berlin.
"For the past two years Iran has repeatedly bluffed and played tricks," Westerwelle said. "It has played for time and of course we in the international community cannot accept a nuclear-armed Iran."
Crowley said the six officials discussed Ahmadinejad's comments but added that Iran's representative at the International Atomic Energy Agency, the U.N. nuclear watchdog, had not signaled any formal shift in position.
Beijing, which appeared to snub the others by sending a low-level representative to a meeting in New York last month, had its "assistant secretary for arms control," take part in the call. Crowley said this was an appropriate representation.
In Munich, Germany, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg voiced doubts about whether Tehran was ready to accept the IAEA fuel exchange proposal.
"We are waiting for a simple yes from Iran (to the fuel offer)," he said. "We haven't been able to move forward."
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, at the same security conference in Munich, said diplomacy remains the best way to resolve the standoff.
"We believe Iran has not totally shut the door on the IAEA proposal on nuclear fuel supply," he said.
A day earlier, Yang said even discussing new sanctions now, let alone imposing them, could be harmful.
"To talk about sanctions at the moment will complicate the situation and might stand in the way of finding a diplomatic solution," he said.
(Additional reporting by Arshad Mohammed in Washington, Michael Nienaber in Berlin, William Maclean and David Graham in Munich; editing by Alan Elsner )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China wants to continue to punish the US for trade issues, currency revaluation pressures, and Taiwan arms sales. It is time the US starting warning American companies that their businesses in China are very tenuous at best, and we start a policy of buying US made products. The Chinese are showing that like a bully kid, you get a little clout and you think you can abuse the rest of the world. The hell with the Chinese.
Feb 05, 20105:32pm EST--
China must really be cozy with Iran these days. Just shows you what kind of friends China likes. Birds of a feather, flock together.
Feb 05, 20105:49pm EST--
Don¡¯t worry China, we¡¯ll keep sending you our money by way of Walmart as we get poorer and poorer and poorer. Long-live free-trade.
Feb 05, 20106:36pm EST--
