China First Heavy makes weak Shanghai debut
2010-02-08 21:14:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Feb 3 2010
Mon, Feb 8 2010
Sun, Feb 7 2010
Fri, Feb 5 2010
Wed, Feb 3 2010
Mon  EST
) dipped 2 percent on its first day of trade in Shanghai after raising $1.67 billion in China's biggest IPO this year, continuing a string of weak market debuts as investors remained wary over a fattening pipeline of new listings.
China's largest heavy equipment maker, which supplies steel mills and nuclear power plants, on Tuesday debuted at 5.48 yuan on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, down 4 percent from its IPO price of 5.7 yuan. After half an hour of trade, it was down 2 percent at 5.58 yuan.
Analysts had expected the shares to make a flat or slightly firmer debut after the company showed a bit of moderation in setting its IPO price, but weak sentiment prevailed.
"Its valuation is reasonable, but given the Wall Street loss overnight and the upcoming (Lunar New Year) holiday, the shares are expected to be narrowly range-bound around the IPO price today," said Zhou Lin, senior analyst at Huatai Securities.
First Heavy had set its IPO price just below the top of its 5.0 to 5.8 yuan indicative range, breaking with standard practice of pricing at the top of the range for the first time since mainland IPOs were resumed last June.
The show of moderation followed highly unusual debut-day drops by Shanghai's two latest major new listings in recent weeks, XD Electric (
), while regulators admonished companies to set more reasonable IPO prices.
Mainland investors have begun to balk at newly minted shares as the market weakens, depressed in part by stepped-up IPO approvals from authorities who see increased share supplies as a means of keeping the market cool and averting an asset price bubble.
is down more than 10 percent since the start of the year, pressured by official credit tightening as well as new share supplies.
Mid-sized brokerage Huatai Securities Co will soon overtake First Heavy as the mainland's biggest IPO of the year, after saying on Sunday it would raise as much as 17.26 billion yuan ($2.53 billion) in a Shanghai offering as brokerages gear up to take advantage of reforms such as margin trade and stock index futures.
The IPO price valued First Heavy's shares at 41 times its 2008 earnings, in line with 42 times for rival China Erzhong Heavy Industries, which dropped below its IPO price in its market debut last week but has since rebounded.
Analysts expect First Heavy to get a boost from China's ambitious investment plans in the nuclear power sector.
The state-owned company, based in northeastern China's Heilongjiang province, makes equipment for steel mills, power producers and refiners such as Baosteel Group (
Its profit more than doubled to 1 billion yuan in 2008 and Guotai Junan Securities forecast that it may jump 52 percent in 2010, despite largely flat earnings last year.
