Timeline: The obstacle course for U.S.-China ties in 2010
2010-02-04 14:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Relations between China and the United States will be tested this year by a range of issues, including currency rates, trade, Internet censorship, human rights, the Dalai Lama and arms sales to Taiwan.
Leaders will meet on a number of occasions, both at the bilateral level and at summits. Here is a timeline of significant dates this year:
January 21 - U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton delivers speech calling for Internet freedoms, names China as a country that has stepped censorship of the web.
Mid-February - The Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled leader, is scheduled visit the United States, giving talks in California and Florida from February 21 to 24. He is due to be in Dharamsala, his base in northern India, to lecture on February 28. He thus has openings around those dates when it would be possible to meet President Barack Obama, an event sure to draw angry criticism from China, which deems the Dalai Lama a separatist threat.
February 28 - Obama administration free to proceed with the weapons sales to Taiwan unless Congress passes legislation barring or modifying a proposed sale, something it has never done. Delivery of the weapons may take years.
March 5 - China opens annual parliamentary session, the National People's Congress. Usually at a news conference a day before the Congress opens, China announces its official defense budget for the year. The Communist Party-controlled parliament usually meets for about 10 days. At the end, Premier Wen Jiabao will give a high-profile news conference, giving him a chance to comment on U.S. ties and Taiwan.
April 12-13 - President Obama hosts an international nuclear security summit in Washington, D.C.. Chinese President Hu Jintao would be his nation's most fitting representative at the meeting, but Beijing has yet to say whether he will go.
May 12-23 - Dalai Lama scheduled to visit the United States, giving talks in Indiana, Iowa and New York City, opening another opportunity for him to meet President Obama.
May 15-25 - U.S. Secretary of Commerce, Gary Locke, leads trade mission to Hong Kong, China and Indonesia, promoting deals with American companies in clean energy.
Mid-year onwards - Senior officials from the United States and China will at some time gather in Beijing for Strategic and Economic Dialogue, an annual meeting to discuss key economic, foreign policy and security concerns.
Neither government has publicly confirmed a date for the meeting. During last year's dialogue in July, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner led the U.S. delegation. China's delegation was led by State Councillor Dai Bingguo and Vice Premier Wang Qishan.
June 26-27 - Meeting of G20 leaders of major rich and developing economies scheduled in Toronto, Canada, giving Presidents Hu and Obama an opportunity to meet.
Later in the year - The two countries are preparing for their Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, a regular meeting that focuses on economic ties. No date has been set for this year's meeting. Last year's was held in late October in the east Chinese city of Hangzhou.
November 2 - Mid-term elections for U.S. Congress. These elections are likely to be a test of the popularity of the policies of the Obama administration. With economic concerns uppermost in many voters' minds, trade and currency tensions with China may become a electoral issue.
November - South Korea scheduled to host second summit for the year of the G20 group of major rich and developing economies, giving Hu and Obama another chance to meet. The summit is likely to take place immediately before or after the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, to be held in Yokohama, Japan, on November 13-14, a separate opportunity for the two leaders to meet.
November-December - When President Obama visited China in November 2009, Chinese President Hu accepted his invitation to visit the United States in 2010. No date has been set for Hu's trip, but it appears unlikely before the U.S. Congress mid-term elections.
For all its coolness toward Washington now, China would regard that visit as a big diplomatic trophy, and that may help to ease tensions beforehand.
December - Local elections for mayors and magistrates across Taiwan, the self-ruled island that China says belongs to it. No firm date has been set for the elections, which will cover about 60 percent of the island's electorate.
The vote will pit the ruling Nationalist Party (KMT) and against the opposition Democratic Progressive Party, and Beijing's policies toward Taiwan could be a major issue.
(Reporting by Chris Buckley in Beijing; Jim Wolf, Doug Palmer and Paul Eckert in Washington; Ralph Jennings in Taipei; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
