China's Huatai Sec braves market with $2.4 billion IPO
2010-02-01 23:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Mid-sized Chinese brokerage Huatai Securities will launch a Shanghai IPO this week that could raise 16.5 billion yuan ($2.4 billion) in China's largest offering this year, braving a mainland market straining under heavy new share offerings and tightening liquidity.
China's brokerages are gearing up to take advantage of financial reforms, including the imminent launch of margin trade and short selling, that will boost their business, improve liquidity and nudge Shanghai toward its goal of becoming a global financial center within a decade.
But the IPO comes as the market is sagging under the weight of heavy share supplies, fed by authorities who have approved a steady stream of new share issues to keep the market cool and avert asset price bubbles.
"This is not a perfect time for IPOs," said Wei Tao, analyst at China Securities Co Ltd. "But for a brokerage it is better to raise money sooner than later, because otherwise it would lag further behind its rivals."
Huatai, which owns a fund venture with American International Group Inc (
), said in a prospectus it would issue up to 785 million yuan-denominated A shares, or 14 percent of its expanded capital, to secure funds for expansion.
is down more than 9 percent this year, also due to authorities tightening loose liquidity conditions that prevailed as they battled the financial crisis.
Investors have grown wary of new listings and the fattening pipeline of IPOs that has built up since authorities resumed approvals of new offerings last June, following a nine-month hiatus imposed due to the financial crisis.
Last week, China XD Electric Co (
), the mainland's first major listing of the year, also became its first in more than five years to end its debut below its IPO price, despite a relatively modest offer price and bright business prospects.
) followed on Tuesday, dropping below its IPO price on its debut, boding ill for China First Heavy Industries (
) launched mainland IPOs last year and Guosen Securities, Galaxy Securities Co and Western Securities Co are other mid-sized brokerages seen lining up to follow suit.
"The company needs to be realistic about its pricing as investor enthusiasm toward IPOs is waning, so it's unlikely to fetch high valuations," said Sun Jian, analyst at Shenyin & Wanguo Securities Co.
China's securities regulator warned over the weekend that institutions should show restraint in IPO prices.
Shenyin's Sun said a 21 yuan per share IPO price would be appropriate, yielding a fundraising total of up to 16.5 billion yuan, while China Securities' Wei gave a preliminary price estimate for the IPO of 18-21 yuan per share.
At 21 yuan per share, Huatai would be priced at nearly 26 times its 2009 earnings, compared with a multiple of about 30 for recent mainland IPOs.
Huatai Securities said it needed funds to replenish capital for itself and three subsidiaries. It gave no target for how much it would raise in the IPO, which started book-building on Tuesday and will take subscriptions from investors on February 8 and 9.
The brokerage holds a 49 percent stake in AIG-Huatai Fund Management Co and a stake in China Southern Fund Management Co. ($1=6.827 Yuan) (Additional reporting by Lu Jianxin; Editing by Valerie Lee)
