China warns U.S. that arms sales harm cooperation
2010-01-29 18:08:00.0
(Reuters) - China warned the United States on Saturday that its announcement of arms sales to Taiwan would seriously damage cooperation between the two global powers, and voiced swift and sharp anger at the Obama administration.
The comments were made by Chinese Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei, who said his government was "strongly indignant" about the proposed arms sales to Taiwan, which China considers a breakaway province.
The Obama administration notified the U.S. Congress on Friday of its first proposed arms sales to Taiwan, a potential $6.4 billion package including Black Hawk helicopters, Patriot "Advanced Capability-3" anti-missile missiles, and command-and-control technology.
Beijing quickly responded with a warning that the arms sale could jeopardize important bonds of cooperation with Washington, which has looked to China for support in surmounting the financial crisis, dealing with Iran and North Korea, and seeking international agreement on fighting climate change.
Vice Minister He said the arms sales were "crude interference in China's domestic affairs and seriously harm China's national security," in remarks published on the Foreign Ministry website (
He did not spell out how Beijing might retaliate against Washington, but suggested his government's anger would be felt in a number of areas.
"The United States' announcement of the planned weapons sales to Taiwan will have a seriously negative impact on many important areas of exchanges and cooperation between the two countries," he said. A copy of his remarks was delivered to the U.S. ambassador to China.
He urged the United States to halt the planned sales, saying that otherwise "This will lead to repercussions that neither side wishes to see."
Taiwan has been governed separately from China since 1949, when Nationalist forces, defeated in the civil war, fled to the island to escape the victorious Communists. Ever since, Beijing has demanded that Taiwan accept unification, threatening it could resort to force.
