HSBC happy with BoCom as China investment vehicle: CEO
2010-01-31 21:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Sun, Jan 31 2010
Sun  EST
) as its primary investment vehicle in China, HSBC's chief executive said on Monday.
Speaking in an interview on CNBC, HSBC chief executive Michael Geoghegan made his comments after Britain's Sunday Telegraph reported that the British lender was considering a bid for a major Chinese bank to reinforce its presence in the country as other foreign lenders retrenched.
The Telegraph said HSBC, Europe's biggest bank, wanted to buy a majority stake in one of China's big three lenders - ICBC (
), Bank of China (
), or China Construction Bank (
HSBC owns just under 20 percent of Bank of Communications, China's fifth-largest lender.
Asked about his interest in one of China's top three lenders, Geoghegan declined to directly comment on the issue, but reiterated that Bank of Communications was HSBC's primary China investment.
"We are happy with our investment in Bank of Communications. That's what I am saying. It's our principle investment in China," Geoghegan, who relocated to Hong Kong last week from London, told CNBC in an interview.
Even if it wanted to buy control of one of the big three banks, it would have to wait until China relaxed the 20 percent stake limit, Geoghegan said, adding that there were no discussions with Chinese regulators on allowing investments above 20 percent.
"We are not talking to Beijing about an increase at the current time over the 20 percent, as you know it's a regulatory top limit you can have and it's up to the Chinese authority to change that as they wish," he said. "If they change it I suspect they will change it for the whole banking industry, but we are not asking them to change that for the current time."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
(air jordan, air max, shox tn, rift, puma, dunk sb, adidas) nike jordan shoes 1-24 $32
lv, coach, chane bag $35
COOGI(jeans, tshirts, hoody, jacket) $30
christian audigier(jeans, tshirts, hoody) $13
edhardy(shoes, tshirts, jeans, caps, watche, handbag) $25
Armani(jeans, tshirts,) $24
AF(jeans, coat, hoody, sweater, tshirts)Abercrombie & Fitch $31 Ed hardy/lacoste/polo/ca/A&F Tshirt :$12 Our website wholesale for many kinds of fashion clothing, such as nike,jordan,prama,****, we also sell jeans,shirts,bags,hat and many kinds of tiffany. All the products are free shipping, and the the price is enticement , and also can accept the paypal payment.we can ship within 24 hours after your payment. accept the paypal
CA POLO EDHARDY GUCCI T-SHIRT $15;
TRUE RELIGION EVISU G-STAR COOGI JEAN $36;
AIR MAX NIKE SHOX JORDAN JORDAN FUNSHION JORDAN RING SHOES $35;
coach chanel gucci LV handbags $32;
edhardy New Era POLO cap $15;
coach okely prada nike DG Sunglass $17; Everything is here http://www.bccloth.com friends, please enjoy viewing bar Thanks
Jan 31, 201010:28pm EST--
4) OEM orders are welcomed. Reliable online sites for buying shoes,if you are interested in any of our products,pls feel free to let me know ,
Feb 01, 20101:54am EST--
