Scenarios: How could China hit back at U.S.?
2010-01-30 04:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China warned on Saturday that Washington's announcement of arms sales to Taiwan would seriously damage cooperation between the two global powers.
The most likely and immediate consequence will be that China again freezes military ties with the United States, which had been thawing since 2009, as the Obama administration sought to expand contacts between the Pentagon and the People's Liberation Army.
Those contacts, especially any high-level military visits, are likely to be on hold for months to come.
China has the world's biggest pile of foreign currency reserves, much of it held in U.S. treasury debt. China held $798.9 billion in U.S. Treasuries at end-October, displacing Japan in September 2008 as the largest foreign holder.
But China has shown no sign of trying to use that stake to punish the United States. Doing so, or even hinting that it could, would alarm global financial markets and push down the value of the dollar, thus dragging down the value of China's dollar-denominated assets.
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China has the power to veto any resolution, and it has never been a supporter of strong sanctions against Iran, a major oil supplier. Now Beijing could drag its feet even more.
China could also slow, downgrade or postpone talks with the United States spanning issues such as human rights and trade.
Both sides are due to hold a high-level "strategic dialogue" on political and economic issues later this year. So far preparations have been moving forward with no hint, at least yet, of those talks being stymied.
The Obama administration is preparing a global summit on nuclear arms issues for April. China could also use that event to voice its anger. So far Beijing has not publicly said which of its leaders, if any, will attend that summit.
Internet search giant Google Inc's threat last month to quit China over hacking has so far been met in Beijing with a fairly low-key response, even as state media has lambasted the United States and the company.
CHINA'S DETENTE WITH TAIWAN
China is unlikely to saber rattle at Taiwan and throw off-track a detente process which has gathered pace since Ma Ying-jeou because the island's president in 2008.
But Beijing could slow down talks on a broad-ranging free trade agreement with Taiwan, seen as key to boosting the island's economic fortunes, hard hit by the global downturn.
The arms sale is also a timely reminder that despite warming cross-Strait ties, political and military suspicions remain deep-rooted.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Any threat by China to dump U.S. treasuries could be matched by a ban of Chinese imports into the U.S. Such a move would send the dollar soaring, causing other nations to eagerly snap up the treasuries from China. Since the U.S. is already the one with the huge trade deficit, the U.S. would come out the winner in any trade war with China.
Jan 30, 20106:45am EST--
China¡¯s economic growth has come at tremendous cost to Europe and North America. They have many times over demonstrated a complete lack of respect for our intellectual property laws, allowing China to make significant technological advances without paying originators for the IP they have utilised. Increasingly sophisticated manufacturing is being undertaken by Chinese enterprises at a large and growing cost to jobs in the West as companies close facilities in the West in favour of building products in China and then shipping them back to Western markets. Artificial valuations of their currency and the fact that Chinese workers are far less well taken care of than their Western counterparts on a like for like basis are key drivers in this, but yet nothing is done.
China¡¯s economic growth has come at tremendous cost to Europe and North America. They have many times over demonstrated a complete lack of respect for our intellectual property laws, allowing China to make significant technological advances without paying originators for the IP they have utilised. Increasingly sophisticated manufacturing is being undertaken by Chinese enterprises at a large and growing cost to jobs in the West as companies close facilities in the West in favour of building products in China and then shipping them back to Western markets. Artificial valuations of their currency and the fact that Chinese workers are far less well taken care of than their Western counterparts on a like for like basis are key drivers in this, but yet nothing is done.
China has been at economic war with the West for a decade or more, its high time that the West woke up to this before we have no industry left and have had all the life sucked out of our econimies to feed China¡¯s growth.
The answer is simple ¨C tarrifs to equalise the currency difference. Tarrifs to equalise the treatment of workers so until such time as they treat their workers in a manner similar to how we must treat ours, they pay a penalty to bring goods into the West. In short, make it so expensive to import manufactured goods from China that Western corporations retrun to manufacturing in Europe and North America. At a stroke restoring our technological lead, boosting our economy through more jobs and more investment, dramatically changing the balance of trade in our favour and stopping China from growing at such a rate that the only way it can be sustained is by everyone losing.
Without such measures, Chinese expansion of consumption will mean that global warming goes into hyperdrive, commodities double and treble in price as finite reserves are stripped for an economy growing at 8% a year in the midst of the worst recesssion in a century.
Jan 30, 20107:33am EST--
China should sell weapons to Cuba or Venezuela, and financially support the seperatist in their own country.
Jan 30, 20108:43am EST--
