U.S. firms face too many headaches in China: Locke
2010-01-28 13:43:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. companies face too many obstacles trying to do business in China and could lose interest if Beijing backslides on openness and the rule of law, U.S. Commerce Secretary Gary Locke said on Thursday.
"Recent events, specifically the well-publicized Google incident, have reminded us of the continued challenges faced by foreign and U.S. companies operating in China," Locke said in the prepared text of a speech at the U.S.-China Business Council's annual forecast conference.
"China needs to continue making strides to be more transparent, predictable and committed to the rule of law. If there is backsliding on these issues, it will affect the appetite of U.S. companies to enter the Chinese market and ultimately that will be bad for everyone," Locke said.
Major U.S. business group wrote to Locke, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other administration officials this week to complain about the initiative.
The Chinese plan is a serious concern that puts U.S. companies at a significant disadvantage in bidding on contracts worth an estimated $85 billion annually, Locke said.
"Moreover, we recognize that this issue is just one facet of a broader Chinese approach to industrial policy that is creating headaches for U.S. companies operating in and trying to export to China," he said.
However, Locke began and ended his speech on more positive notes, saying he believed that no country offered greater growth potential for U.S. exports than China.
Locke, a Chinese-American, said he would be leading a trade mission to China and Indonesia in May to promote exports of U.S. clean energy and energy efficiency products.
The United States has big trade imbalance with China, but "keeping Chinese goods from the U.S. market is not the answer to addressing our trade deficit," Locke said.
"Instead, making sure the Chinese market is more open to U.S. companies is the most productive solution," he said.
(Reporting by Paul Eckert and Doug Palmer; Editing by Alan Elsner)
