Sino-Forest to acquire trees in China's Guizhou
2010-01-28 11:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Sino-Forest Corp TRE.TO, a China-based commercial forest plantations operator, said it signed its sixth long-term deal to acquire pine and Chinese fir trees in China's Guizhou Province.
The deal, signed with Guizhou Sen Li Industry Co, will give Sino-Forest access to 10.5 million to 16.5 million cubic metres of plantation wood fiber, spread over 150,000 hectares with an average yield of 70 to 110 cubic metres per hectare.
"The fiber acquisition will take place over a three-year period with a price not to exceed RMB300 ($43.95) per cubic meter," Sino-Forest said in a statement.
The company, which owns and manages plantation forests in China, recently raised about $815 million through note and equity offerings and has completed two acquisitions, including that of Mandra Forestry, which owns plantations in Anhui province.
"They already have decent size presence in Guangxi, which is south of Guizhou. They have same sort of forestry team there, so you don't need to double up management costs on Guizhou," RBC Capital Markets analyst Paul Quinn told Reuters.
The analyst, who rates the stock at "outperform," raised his price target to C$27 from C$25, earlier in the day.
Sino-Forest has been seeing an opportunity in China's plans to commercially manage its vast state-owned tree farms.
The company said the new agreement expands its base of wood fiber and plantation operations in southern China and especially Guizhou's adjoining Sichuan province and Chongqing Municipality.
"Chongqing is a vibrant and economically developing area, and infrastructure in Sichuan is under redevelopment after a massive earthquake. Accordingly, we believe that wood fiber will be a commodity in great demand in these provinces," the company said.
Sino-Forest shares, which have gained about 40 percent in the last six months, were up 31 cents, or about 2 percent, at C$18.46 in late morning trade Thursday on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
