U.S. groups say alarmed by China's business tactics
2010-01-26 20:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Business groups told Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other top U.S. officials on Tuesday they were "increasingly alarmed" by China's moves to keep out foreign high-tech companies and urged a firm response by the United States, an influential newsletter reported.
"For several years, the Chinese government has been implementing indigenous innovation policies aimed at carving out markets for national champions and increasing the locally owned and developed intellectual property of innovative products," the business groups said, according to Washington-based newsletter, The Nelson Report.
"We are increasingly alarmed by the means China is using to achieve these goals," the groups said.
They urged the Obama administration to make the issue a top priority and work with the U.S. business community and like-minded foreign governments to develop a "strong, fully coordinated response to the Chinese government."
Two weeks ago, the world's biggest search engine provider, Google Inc., threatened to shut its Chinese Google.cn portal and to pull out from China, citing problems of censorship and a hacking attack from within the country.
The Obama administration has backed Google's criticism, and Clinton urged China last week to drop Internet censorship and investigate the hacking, which some experts say could have been organized by Beijing.
The 19 U.S. business groups did not mention the Google case in their letter to Clinton, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, Attorney General Eric Holder, Commerce Secretary Gary Locke and Trade Representative Ron Kirk.
The regulation requires any product listed in the catalog to contain intellectual property developed and owned in China, making it "nearly impossible" for American companies to qualify unless they are prepared to establish Chinese brands and transfer their research and development of new products to China," the groups said.
"This directive targets some of our most innovative and competitive manufacturing and service industries, including computers, software, telecommunications and green technology. Once this system is in place, it is expected to be expanded to other industries," the groups said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Anthony Boadle)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
I have been saying this since 2002. The Chinese are a rising power; a rising neo-mercantilist, economic imperialist power. It is about time businesses and governments are starting to realize this.
Jan 26, 201010:02pm EST--
It isn¡¯t very hard to get around this policy¡¯s limitation. The US tried a similar protectionist policy in the past by establishing quotas on Japanese car imports. Japanese auto makers simply created American corporations (e.g. American Honda Motor Co. is based in Torrance, California) to serve the North-American market, effectively circumventing the import quota. In a similar fashion, companies wishing to qualify for the ¡°indigenous innovation¡± programs will simply need to establish an R&D corporation based in China. They will not need to physically move their R&D facilities to Asia as the Chinese subsidiary will be able to out-source operations. Furthermore, there is no limitation on exporting the technology developed by the Chinese subsidiary. So even if an R&D department is created in China, where labor costs are significantly low, the return on investment for the multinational company will be significantly higher than a department operating in a high-income country.
Jan 27, 20102:03pm EST--
