U.S.-China anti-tax evasion deal seen as crucial, but elusive
2013-03-13 14:59:00.0
(Reuters) - The success of a broad U.S. crackdown on offshore tax dodging will be determined in part by China's cooperation, but talks with Chinese officials are making little headway, former U.S. Treasury Department officials and tax professionals said.
FATCA requires foreign financial institutions to tell the United States about Americans' offshore financial holdings.
One obstacle in the Chinese talks is likely that China wants, in return, more tax information than U.S. officials are willing to share about Chinese citizens who have assets in the United States, accountants and tax lawyers said.
China - the world's second-largest economy - is seen by some tax experts as an important participant if the U.S. Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act, or FATCA, is to work effectively, especially in Asia.
Without China, FATCA won't be airtight, said John Harrington, a partner with law firm SNR Denton. He previously served as Treasury's international tax counsel.
China's State Administration of Taxation did not respond to questions. In November, a senior official at China's central bank criticized FATCA as overreaching. <ID:L4N0982UZ>
FATCA requires non-U.S. banks, investment funds and other financial institutions to tell the U.S. Internal Revenue Service about accounts held by Americans with more than $50,000. Financial firms that do not comply with FATCA, which takes effect in January 2014, could effectively be frozen out of U.S. markets.
Treasury has negotiated FATCA deals, known as intergovernmental agreements (IGAs), with five countries: the UK, Denmark, Mexico, Ireland and, most recently, Switzerland. Negotiations with dozens more countries are under way.
Talks with China have been hush-hush, but are occurring. "We have engaged with China on FATCA and will continue to do so," a Treasury spokeswoman said, declining to comment further.
HONG KONG'S ROLE
China is seen as a critical part of the FATCA puzzle not only due to the country's own global economic prominence, but also because of its sway over Hong Kong, a major money center.
The Hong Kong Association of Banks said in a statement: "FATCA is an issue highly relevant to Hong Kong ... We have been and will closely follow relevant developments, in discussion with the Hong Kong Government."
It was unclear whether Hong Kong may be able to negotiate an IGA on its own with the United States. Hong Kong became part of China in 1997, but retained its own currency and local government.
"The Chinese could attempt to use Hong Kong as negotiating leverage for their own IGA," said Richard Harvey, a tax professor at Villanova University.
Treasury started implementing FATCA last year, largely via the vehicle of IGAs, bilateral agreements that spell out how a country and its financial institutions can comply with FATCA, and what, if anything, they get in return from the Americans.
Foreign countries have pushed, with limited success, for reciprocal information sharing, but generally IGAs have not allowed an equal two-way sharing of taxpayer information.
With IGA negotiations in mind, the Obama administration is considering asking Congress for the power to require more disclosure by U.S. banks of information about foreign clients' accounts to those clients' home governments. <ID:L1N0B4EME>
The Chinese are thought to be seeking more information about their citizens' U.S. accounts than previous IGAs have allowed.
Treasury negotiators "will have to look at whether they can go further than they have" to meet Chinese demands, said Philip West, who served as Treasury's international tax counsel and is now a partner at law firm Steptoe & Johnson LLP.
Like the United States, China taxes citizens on worldwide income. So China should be interested in getting tax information about its citizens' U.S. investments, tax experts said.
But inking an IGA will require the Chinese to swallow some national pride, said Alan Granwell, a former Treasury tax official now with law firm DLA Piper. FATCA "effects their sovereignty ... It's much more than just a tax issue there."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
My partners and I never play games with the tax man¡¯s money. We pay our taxes in China and in the US completely. The richest man in China has $7 billion and 11 years left of a 14 year prison term for cheating on some taxes and swindling some investors on his way to the top. His $7 billion will be waiting for him when he gets out. He didn¡¯t kill anyone, and he paid complete restitution and penalties, so he didn¡¯t receive a death sentence.
Mar 13, 20134:27pm EDT--
Thanks for the article. The US and China are in a powerplay and China may not acquiese to the US¡¯ unilateral demands. The article contains an error:
Thanks for the article. The US and China are in a powerplay and China may not acquiese to the US¡¯ unilateral demands. The article contains an error:
¡°Like the United States, China taxes citizens on worldwide income. So China should be interested in getting tax information about its citizens¡¯ U.S. investments, tax experts said.¡± This should read: ¡°Unlike the United States, which taxes its CITIZENS on worldwide income, China taxes RESIDENTS of China on worldwide income.¡± The US could offer to China information on RESIDENTS of China who have bank and brokerage accounts in the US. However, China has NO interest in the income of its CITIZENS residing in the US, since it uses residence-based taxation, like all countries in the world except the US and Eritrea. Reuters should fix this error.
Mar 13, 20136:46pm EDT--
It is interesting to note that the UK and Switzerland are treating these agreements with the US government as Treaties, requiring approval by their parliaments, etc., while the US government presents them as Inter-Governmental Agreements (IGAs). Treaties require US Senate confirmation but IGAs, which are a lower form of agreement, do not. The Obama administration is illegally bypassing the US Senate and not following constitutional requirements. Let¡¯s hope that the US Senate wakes up to the Obama administration¡¯s illegal actions and puts a stop to labelling treaties as IGAs.
Mar 14, 20133:05am EDT--
