China warns U.S. Taiwan arms sales threaten cooperation
2010-01-29 20:02:00.0
(Reuters) - China warned on Saturday that the United States' announcement of arms sales to Taiwan would seriously damage cooperation between the two global powers, voicing swift and sharp anger at the Obama administration.
The comments were made by Chinese Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei, who said his government was "strongly indignant" about the proposed arms sales to Taiwan, which China considers a breakaway province.
The Obama administration notified the U.S. Congress on Friday of its first proposed arms sales to Taiwan, a potential $6.4 billion package including Black Hawk helicopters, Patriot "Advanced Capability-3" anti-missile missiles, and command-and-control technology.
Beijing quickly responded with a warning the arms sale could jeopardize important bonds of cooperation with Washington, which has looked to China for support in surmounting the financial crisis, dealing with Iran and North Korea, and seeking international agreement on fighting climate change.
Arms sales to Taiwan join trade imbalances, currency values, Internet freedoms, human rights, and Tibet where differences are straining ties between the world's biggest and third-biggest economies.
In a move that would further damage links, Obama may also meet exiled Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama, who China says is linked to Tibet separatist activity.
Friday's arms package is the second U.S. announcement this month of weapons sales to Taiwan. After Washington cleared an earlier sale of Patriots, China tested emerging military technology aimed at destroying missiles in mid-air.
Vice Minister He said the arms sales were "crude interference in China's domestic affairs and seriously harm China's national security" in remarks published on the website of the Chinese Foreign Ministry (www.mfa.gov.cn).
He did not spell out what reprisals Beijing may mete out against Washington. But he suggested his government's anger would be felt in a number of areas.
"The United States' announcement of the planned weapons sales to Taiwan will have a seriously negative impact on many important areas of exchanges and cooperation between the two countries," said He in the remarks, which were delivered to the U.S. ambassador to China.
"This will lead to repercussions that neither side wishes to see," said He. He urged the U.S. to halt the planned sales.
Among those which could come quickly, China is likely to retaliate by curtailing fledgling military-to-military ties with the United States.
China, the biggest holder of U.S. treasury debt, has shown no signs it would use economic leverage in retaliation.
Taiwan has been effectively separated from China since 1949, when Nationalist forces fled to the island, escaping victorious Communist forces. Since then, Beijing has demanded Taiwan accept unification, threatening it could resort to force.
Washington, under a 1979 act of congress, is legally obliged to help Taiwan defend itself but wants the island and Beijing to peacefully settle disputes that have put them on the brink of war at times over the past 60 years.
Taiwan needs U.S. arms as the two sides have not discussed "military trust" despite a thaw in ties since 2008 under the island's China-friendly President Ma Ying-jeou, ruling Nationalist Party (KMT) spokesman Lee Chien-jung said.
Taiwan says China aims 1,000 to 1,500 short-range and mid-range missiles at the island, 160 kilometers (miles) from China at its nearest point. Island officials have also asked the United States for F-16 fighter jets.
"Both sides have agreed to pursue peace, but on the way there are some issues that we both know about, and arms is one of them," Lee said.
"At present, talks are all about trade and economics, and military trust is an item we need to discuss. But until then we've got to build up defense."
U.S. officials have said Taiwan, which lags China in the balance of military power, needs updated weapons to give it more clout when negotiating with Beijing.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
American arms deals with Taiwan are the small island nation¡¯s only bargaining chip with the mainland. If America stops or cancels these deals it will be a serious blow to our credibility and stance in the Pacific. For more about this see: http://www.philosoguy.com/160/the-importance-of-american-arms-deals-with-taiwan/
Jan 31, 20101:19pm EST--
