China lashes back at U.S. over Internet criticism
2010-01-22 03:10:00.0
(Reuters) - China hit back hard against U.S. criticism of Beijing's controls over the Internet, saying on Friday that Washington's push against online censorship could harm relations between the two big powers.
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's speech against Internet censorship on Thursday raised contention with Beijing over cyber policy, which flared after Google Inc last week warned it could pull out of China over hacking and restrictions.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Ma Zhaoxu said the U.S. criticisms could hurt ties between the two nations -- the world's biggest and third biggest economies -- already frayed over trade imbalances, currency values and U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan.
"The U.S. has criticized China's policies to administer the Internet and insinuated that China restricts Internet freedom," said Ma, in a statement carried on the Foreign Ministry website www.mfa.gov.cn.
"We urge the United States to respect the facts and cease using so-called Internet freedom to make groundless accusations against China," Ma said without mentioning Clinton by name.
But the spokesman also indicated that his government did not want to see the dispute overwhelm cooperation with the Obama administration, which has sought Beijing's backing on economic policy and diplomatic standoffs, such as Iran and North Korea.
Ma said each side should "appropriately handle rifts and sensitive issues, protecting the healthy and stable development of China-U.S. relations".
Clinton's speech criticized the cyber policies of China and Iran, among others, and demanded Beijing investigate complaints by Google Inc, the world's biggest search engine operator, about hacking and censorship.
"A new information curtain is descending across much of the world," said Clinton, calling growing Internet curbs the present-day equivalent of the Berlin Wall that contravene international commitments to free expression.
Facebook, Twitter and YouTube are blocked in China, which uses a filtering "firewall" to prevent Internet users from seeing overseas web sites with content anathema to the Communist Party.
Ties between China and the United States have been put to the test in recent months over trade, currency, climate change and arms sales to Taiwan.
This month, China denounced the U.S. sale of Patriot air defense missiles, capable of intercepting Chinese missiles, to Taiwan, which Beijing claims as its own.
Beijing has warned that more U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan could badly bruise relations with Washington, and has urged President Barack Obama not to meet the Dalai Lama, the exiled Buddhist leader of Tibet who Beijing denounces as a separatist.
"I think over the short haul (the Google issue) is going to go away because other problems that the U.S. and China face are rather numerous," said Niu Jun, an international studies expert at Peking University.
"I think economic and trade issues are still more important. Both sides will find a positive solution through talks. But this is not necessarily just a simple commercial issue. I don't know what the solution will be. But it won't take a long time."
Among other issues, Beijing accuses Washington of protectionism in anti-dumping cases against Chinese exports like tires and steel, while Washington says Beijing stokes global economic imbalances and the U.S. trade deficit by undervaluing its currency. (Additional reporting by Lucy Hornby and Yu Le; Editing by Jeremy Laurence)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
What do you want them to do? Medias are all biased. Look at the last paragraph in the topic:
What do you want them to do? Medias are all biased. Look at the last paragraph in the topic:
¡®Among other issues, Beijing ACCUSES Washington of protectionism¡­while Washington SAYS Beijing stokes global economic imbalances¡­¡¯
Why doesnt the reporter use SAY for Beijing and ACCUSE for Washington? I just really want to point this thing(which never gets old but keeps meddling people¡¯s mind) Tired to comment on someone who cheats sues someone who cheats and sues someone who cheats and sues¡­ This whole thing never ends.
Jan 22, 20101:40am EST--
China¡­needs to protect its people from the evils of the west. Cencorship will be the thing of the past before too long. Once the people have had a taste of the internet, they will find a way to the information they seek. The Chinese Government cannot compete with the internet, they have nothing to offer. The UNITED STATES should should support Google. This is one of OUR exports to China. I support Clinton¡¯s call for action. This is support of U S of A business. Why are the Chinese blocking access to their growing economy when we give them free access to ours? The tires and steel restictions should be just a ¡°shot across the bow¡±. We, as a nation, should demand that we have equal access the the same markets we offer access to. That should apply equally to all of ur trading partners.
Jan 22, 20102:43am EST--
The whole google thing is a joke. for example, google claims it was hacked, and just imply chinese government should be responsible for the hack¡­ This is odd enough, because google gave no evidence at all.
The whole google thing is a joke. for example, google claims it was hacked, and just imply chinese government should be responsible for the hack¡­ This is odd enough, because google gave no evidence at all.
A day earlier than google¡¯s anouncement, the largest search engin in china, Baidu was hacked for almost 8 hours, dose it mean that baidu should accuse government??? To google: if you got hacked or something, deal with it, not finding lame excuses.
Jan 22, 20105:18am EST--
