Oil falls below $78 on equities, China loans
2010-01-20 15:28:00.0
Oil falls below $78 on equities, China loans | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Oil falls below $78 on equities, China loans
Wed, Jan 20 2010
Tue, Jan 19 2010
Tue, Jan 19 2010
Tue, Jan 19 2010
Tue, Jan 19 2010
Mon, Jan 4 2010
An employee fills a car with petrol at a gas station in Jammu July 1, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Mukesh Gupta
Wed  EST
U.S. crude for February delivery, which expired on Wednesday, fell $1.40 to settle at $77.62 a barrel. March crude fell $1.58 to settle at $77.74. In London, Brent crude for March delivery lost $1.31 to settle at $76.32 a barrel.
New U.S. housing starts unexpectedly fell in December, while U.S. producer prices rose 0.2 percent last month.
"The petroleum markets continue to take much of their guidance from the financial markets, with both the retreat in the equity markets and the firmer U.S. dollar prompting short-term traders to sell petroleum," said Tim Evans, energy analyst at Citi Futures Perspective in New York.
Book squaring on front-month February crude ahead of expiry was contributing to the day's volatility, Evans added.
The euro fell to fresh five-month lows against the dollar on Wednesday as markets worried about Greece's public finances. Over the past year, oil prices have frequently weakened as the dollar firmed, at times signaling a flight to safer havens by investors.
"We're starting to see the commodity trade come off, mostly on the stronger dollar," said market analyst Michael Hewson at CMC Markets in London.
Chinese banking authorities instructed some major banks to stop new lending for the rest of January, after loan growth surged in the first few weeks of the year, official media and banking sources said on Wednesday.
"China's plans to tighten credit markets continue to cause concern, meaning that the release of (Chinese) GDP and other economic data tomorrow will have to be very bullish to offset this," said David Wech, head of energy studies at JBC Energy in Vienna.
China's December economic indicators were to be published late on Wednesday. Analysts say Chinese industrial production probably grew at its fastest pace in almost four years, jumping by 20 percent in the year to December, compared with a reading of 19.2 percent in November.
U.S. crude inventories likely rose for a third straight week as imports increased and refinery utilization fell with the start of the maintenance season, an updated Reuters poll of analysts showed.
U.S. crude stockpiles were expected to have gained 2.4 million barrels on average in the week ended January 15, a survey of sixteen analysts showed.
Distillate stocks were projected down 100,000 barrels, while gasoline stocks probably rose 1.7 million barrels.
The country's refinery utilization was forecast to have fallen 0.4 percentage point to below 81 percent of capacity.
Some U.S. refineries have begun their first-quarter maintenance, with the goal of retooling for gasoline production ahead of the summer driving season.
(Additional reporting by Gene Ramos in New York, Chris Baldwin in London and Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore; editing by Jim Marshall and Walter Bagley)
