FTSE falls as China outlook, U.S. bank results weigh
2010-01-20 00:51:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares recorded a three-week closing low on Wednesday as disappointing results from top U.S. banks and more signs of fiscal tightening in China hurt banking and commodity stocks.
index closed down 92.34 points, or 1.7 percent, at 5,420.80 -- the lowest closing level since December 31, 2009. It posted its biggest one-day fall in a month. The index is up 57 percent from its six-year trough hit in March 2009.
), Barclays (
), Standard Chartered (
), Royal Bank of Scotland (
"Poor earnings have increased the nervousness among investors that the toxic loan crisis could continue to impact bank earnings in 2010," said Joshua Raymond, market strategist at City Index.
"The speculation from China that they have made another move to cool excessive growth is a deep concern for the heavyweight miners and energy firms," he added.
Miners were hit after sources in China said authorities had instructed major banks to stop lending for the rest of January after they went on a lending spree earlier in the month, sending stocks in the region sharply lower.
A 2.4 to 4.2 percent fall in key base metals prices also hurt mining shares, while energy shares tracked a 2 percent drop in crude oil prices.
), Xstrata XTA.L, Lonmin (
), Anglo American (
), Kazakhmys (
Among energy shares, Tullow Oil (
), Cairn Energy (
), BG Group (
), Royal Dutch Shell (
"Considering all the news is quite bad, 100 points off the FTSE is not exactly disastrous stuff. Equities are the one area that will take a hit but the returns are still good," said Simon Denham, managing director at Capital Spreads.
IMPERIAL TOBACCO DOWN, SHIRE IN DEMAND
Among individual fallers, Imperial Tobacco (
) was the top blue-chip loser, down 3.4 percent, after the stock went ex-dividend on Wednesday, taking 2.05 points off the FTSE 100 index.
) topped a truncated list of FTSE risers, gaining 2.6 percent, boosted by an upgrade to 'overweight' from 'neutral' by JP Morgan.
Earlier in the session, pharmaceutical shares got a boost after a Republican win in the U.S. Senate race in Massachusetts robbed Democrats of the crucial 60th Senate vote needed to pass healthcare reform.
However, AstraZeneca (
Some other defensive stocks fared better, with Scottish & Southern Energy (
), United Utilities (
Cable & Wireless CW.L was a strong performer, gaining 1.4 percent after Citigroup upgraded its rating for the telecoms carrier to "buy" from "hold."
