China's XD Electric eyes up to $1.5 bln in IPO
2010-01-17 19:39:00.0
China's XD Electric eyes up to $1.5 bln in IPO | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
China's XD Electric eyes up to $1.5 bln in IPO
Sun  EST
), the nation's largest electricity transmission and distribution equipment maker, plans to raise as much as 10.27 billion yuan ($1.5 billion) in the country's first major initial public offering this year.
XD Electric, which is selling up to 1.3 billion shares in its Shanghai IPO, said it had fixed the price range for the share offer at 7.10 to 7.90 yuan. That compares with the 7.4 yuan-9.6 yuan range forecast by its underwriter, China International Capital Corp (CICC).
The pricing will give XD Electric a maximum price earnings (PE) ratio of 34.17 times its 2008 net profit per share on a fully diluted basis, it said in a statement to the Shanghai Stock Exchange published in official newspapers on Monday.
That would give XD Electric's offer a relatively low valuation, as China's lackluster stock market has recently weakened IPO share demand and less feverish debuts of new listings have forced companies to think twice before setting very expensive IPO prices.
Chinese firms typically set the PE of their IPOs at very high levels, often around 50 times their historical earnings, because new listings have traditionally attracted huge speculative interest in China's nascent stock market.
) -- were weak, as the IPO pipeline has filled up and high valuations started raising eyebrows.
XD Electric, based in China's northern city of Xi'an, has previously said it needed 7.72 billion yuan in IPO proceeds for expansion and technical upgrading. It appointed CICC as the IPO's lead underwriter.
The stock regulator has been adding huge new share supplies to help the government's campaign to clamp down on excessive asset prices since early December. Dozens of other firms, including China First Heavy Industries Co and Huatai Securities, have won regulatory approval and are now on the waiting list for an IPO.
(Additional reporting by Samuel Shen; Editing by Ken Wills)
