Japan says U.S. ties firm, not leaning to China
2010-01-14 03:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's foreign minister on Thursday shrugged off suggestions Tokyo was cozying up to China at the expense of its alliance with the United States and vowed to settle a feud over a U.S. airbase by May.
U.S.-Japan ties have been frayed by the dispute over the U.S. Marines' Futenma airbase on the southern island of Okinawa since Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama took office in September pledging to steer a diplomatic course less dependent on Washington and to improve ties with China.
Concerns that Hatoyama is mismanaging the U.S. alliance -- which marks its 50th anniversary next week -- have also eroded the government's popularity ratings, which have sunk to around 50 percent ahead of a mid-year election that his Democratic Party needs to win to pass bills smoothly and avoid policy paralysis.
"From the United States, there is a view that Japan is cozying up to China and distancing itself from the United States. It's as if three people were competing over which two are lovers," said Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada.
"I think that is an unproductive way of looking at it. It's not a question of choosing one over the other," he told Reuters in an interview.
"China, especially its economy, is very important for both Japan and the United States, but it has a different political system, so fundamentally it is not an ally," he said.
"I do not think that because of the Futenma issue we have lost the people's confidence. We have to reach a conclusion and that conclusion must be one that is persuasive to the public. That is why we are taking time," said Okada, a former leader of Hatoyama's Democratic Party.
Washington wants Tokyo to stick to a 2006 deal to relocate Futenma's facilities to a less crowded part of Okinawa as a prerequisite for shifting up to 8,000 Marines to the U.S. territory of Guam, part of a broader realignment of U.S. forces.
But Hatoyama said ahead of the August election that swept his party to power that it would be better if the base were moved off Okinawa. His tiny coalition partner, the Social Democratic Party, is insisting he stick to that stance.
The ruling Democratic Party has a huge majority in parliament's lower house, but needs the backing of the Social Democrats and another small coalition partner to get bills through the upper house, which can delay legislation.
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton urged Japan at talks with Okada in Hawaii on Tuesday to implement the 2006 plan, but the two vowed not to let the row derail the security alliance in the face of growing Chinese power.
They also kicked off discussions about the future of the alliance, long seen by many as vital to security in a region home to an unpredictable North Korea and a rising China.
Okada said arriving at a common understanding of China's role in the region would be one key task for those talks, which could be wrapped up when U.S. President Barack Obama visits Japan for an Asia-Pacific summit in November.
He added the alliance was unthinkable without stationing U.S. troops in Japan, despite suggestions by some Japanese experts that the U.S. military presence is outdated.
"The framework of the security treaty is that the United States has the responsibility to protect Japan while Japan hosts the (U.S.) bases, including for the sake of the Asia-Pacific region, and without the permanent stationing of U.S. troops, it would be truly one-sided ... so that is unthinkable," Okada said.
"But efforts to reduce the volume of the bases or rectify the concentration in Okinawa will be sought in future," he said.
Okinawa, some 1,600 km (1,000 miles) south of Tokyo, is reluctant host to about half the 47,000 U.S. military personnel in Japan and many residents resent what they see as an unfair burden for maintaining the U.S.-Japan security alliance.
