Nomura eyes Asia buys, organic growth in Europe
2010-01-14 10:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nomura Holdings Inc (
) is ready to look at acquisitions to expand its business in Asia but plans to focus on organic growth in Europe, the bank's country head for Germany told Reuters.
"In Asia, if there is a chance (for an acquisition) we are able to do it. In Japan, it's certainly not necessary as we are the market leader," Koichi Katakawa said in an interview on Wednesday.
) are bidding for a stake in China's SYWG BNP Paribas Asset Management Co, seeking a foothold in the country's $400 billion mutual funds market.
Japan's largest brokerage is striving to become a top five global investment bank after purchasing Lehman Brothers' LEHMQ.PK European and Asian operations.
"But it (2010) won't be a glorious year for the industry. We all have to control our expenses."
Investment banking business was gradually recovering, particularly in Asia, he said.
"Chinese and Japanese firms are starting to buy big companies and they need banking advice," Katakawa said.
"We are lucky that our home is in Asia, because the growth will be there," he said.
"In Europe, we are counting on organic growth. We are only buying very selectively," Katakawa said.
Nomura last month bought London-based corporate finance advisory firm Tricorn Partners, strengthening its foothold in the lucrative corporate broking business.
The Japanese brokerage has done 124 deals in the Europe, Middle East Africa region as an advisor since April 2009, of which 24 were above 1 billion pounds ($1.63 billion).
"We expect to exceed this number in 2010," Katakawa said.
"The pipeline is full in Europe and Germany and we hope to be the advisor for some big names, too, this year."
Katakawa's team in Germany includes 32 investment bankers and while he said he was constantly looking for new talent, he did not plan to hire aggressively.
Katakawa's colleague and former co-head for Germany, Patrick Schmitz-Morkramer, this month was appointed joint head of investment banking for Asia, ex-Japan.
Schmitz-Morkramer's successor in Germany is due to be announced by the end of the month, reaffirming Nomura's strategy of having two heads at its main continental offices Frankfurt, Paris and Milan.
"Our balance sheet is totally healthy. We don't need any more capital," Katakawa said.
"With a Tier 1 ratio of 17.3 percent, we are really confident of meeting the new capital requirements," he added, referring to tighter global rules expected to come into force in the future that will force banks to hold more cash against risks.
