U.S. to send formal message to China on Google case
2010-01-15 11:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
A cleaner looks out from the lobby of Google China's headquarters in Beijing, January 15, 2010. Credit: Reuters/Alfred Jin
Fri  EST
"We will be issuing a formal demarche to the Chinese government in Beijing on this issue in the coming days, probably early next week," U.S. State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told reporters.
"It will express our concern for this incident and request information from China as to an explanation of how it happened and what they plan to do about it," the spokesman added.
A demarche is a formal communication -- typically delivered in person by a diplomat based oversees to a foreign government -- that sets out his or her country's views, for example to protest against a policy or action.
The senior Washington-based U.S. diplomat for China met with a Chinese diplomat on Thursday to seek an explanation about the cyber attacks and censorship, the State Department said on Thursday.
In its statement, Google said that in mid-December it detected a sophisticated and targeted attack on its corporate infrastructure originating from China that led to the theft of intellectual property from the company.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Google and China are bringing up a 21st century battle of democracy and freedom verse Communism and restricted personal freedom. When we started using cloud computing systems we saw the HUGE area of security problems being created in cross country internet usage. Thrown in that the entire world is ¡°outsourcing¡± computer stuff to Southeast Asian countries, and you have a plan for these socio-technology issues going to ahead. We study search demand/supply trends from around the world to find profitable niches and products. A niche, or hot predictions, is not just a demand side issue, but a supply/demand curve. If you predict IPHONE apps will take off, and there are already 100,000 aps, then you aren¡¯t going to hit that one. If you see that demand for cell phone radiation shields is going nuts and there are only two suppliers, then you can be pretty sure that it will be a good year for those 2 supplies. The software at www.TheInternetTimeMachine.com studies both the demand (search volume) and supply (think ¡°results¡± in Google). The Google Phone is generating much more buzz right now then say the Apple Tablet.
Google and China are bringing up a 21st century battle of democracy and freedom verse Communism and restricted personal freedom. When we started using cloud computing systems we saw the HUGE area of security problems being created in cross country internet usage. Thrown in that the entire world is ¡°outsourcing¡± computer stuff to Southeast Asian countries, and you have a plan for these socio-technology issues going to ahead. We study search demand/supply trends from around the world to find profitable niches and products. A niche, or hot predictions, is not just a demand side issue, but a supply/demand curve. If you predict IPHONE apps will take off, and there are already 100,000 aps, then you aren¡¯t going to hit that one. If you see that demand for cell phone radiation shields is going nuts and there are only two suppliers, then you can be pretty sure that it will be a good year for those 2 supplies. The software at www.TheInternetTimeMachine.com studies both the demand (search volume) and supply (think ¡°results¡± in Google). The Google Phone is generating much more buzz right now then say the Apple Tablet.
Cheers,
Jan 15, 201012:47pm EST--
It¡¯s all about business again. You will understand Google better in its China case. Why Google Is Quitting China
It¡¯s all about business again. You will understand Google better in its China case. Why Google Is Quitting China
It¡¯s easy to give up if you¡¯ve already lost the battle. And Google is doing just that in China. Eric Schmidt¡¯s move to quit offering a censored Google.cn search engine to the Chinese market has been read by idealists as the right thing to do. But it is first a business decision. read this
http://www.forbes.com/2010/01/15/baidu-china-search-intelligent-technology-google.html?boxes=Homepagelighttop
Jan 15, 20109:07pm EST--
I like Google, but I think Google quit China is not simple reason and related with USA Goverment. So it will impact my image to Google.
Jan 16, 20109:35pm EST--
