Instant View: Google may pull out of China over censorship
2010-01-12 18:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Google Inc said it is no longer willing to continue censoring Internet search results in China, and that it may have to shut down the google.cn website and its offices in the country.
Google said on Tuesday that it had detected "highly sophisticated" cyber-attacks in mid-December on the Gmail accounts of Chinese human rights activists, and that at least 20 other large companies from a wide range of businesses have also been similarly targeted.
U.S. Secretary of State Hilary Clinton will announce a technology policy next week to help citizens in other countries gain access to an uncensored Internet, Clinton's senior advisor for innovation Alec Ross told Reuters separately.
Shares of Google fell 1.9 percent to $579.50 in after-hours trading. Shares of Chinese Internet search company Baidu Inc, Google's main competitor in China, rose 5 percent to $406.00.
SANDEEP AGGARWAL, ANALYST, COLLINS STEWART
"Google has billions of records of people doing search and email, and in fact stores that information for longer duration than other companies."
"China is in our view one of the most attractive consumer Internet markets. We think it is generating $200 million in annual revenue from China. But this kind of attack they (Google) cannot afford to have as a global player. That's why I think they're evaluating whether they should basically withdraw from the country."
"What makes Google the largest search engine and one of the leading Internet companies is that they care about users' privacy and if that privacy comes under challenge it may impact their global business."
TIM GHRISKEY, CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER, SOLARIS ASSET MANAGEMENT, WHICH MANAGES ABOUT $2 BILLION
"Clearly not good news for Google and clearly not good news for consumers. You've got to think that eventually Google figures out a way to deal with this. If they do have to shut down their Chinese operations, that they would be able to reinstate them. Hopefully soon. I can't imagine that this would be permanent."
"China is a great growth engine for every business. It is a great opportunity for Google as well. You've got to think that there is some way the industry can figure out how to deal with hackers. This has been a problem on and off for lots of other companies. and a major frustration for users."
TRIP CHOWDHRY, ANALYST, GLOBAL EQUITIES RESEARCH
"If they walk, they will eventually be invited back into China, because the Chinese people will request that. Openness always wins, but it will take some time."
(Reporting by Jim Finkle in Boston, compiled by Tiffany Wu)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Good for Google! I¡¯m glad there are some companies that value human rights more than the almighty dollar!
Jan 12, 20106:40pm EST--
it¡¯s time for foreign businesses to re-consider that they are dealing with the devil. Be ready to sell your integrity if you want to earn money there¡­
Jan 12, 20107:09pm EST--
I am just commenting on the last line about the chinese people. Please remember that China is not a democracy and the chinese government could be quite stubborn, as they see this matter as an ¡°internal affiar¡± issue and there is nothing google can do about it. Threatening to walk is not going to work on China. After all¡­ there is still Baidu and if that fails there is yahoo and the list goes on¡­ just delete all customers search record as soon as possible. It is China we are talking about, they bought so much of our debt, they own us, almost. Well, at least thats what most people feel anyway.
Jan 12, 20107:49pm EST--
