Law firm suing China says hit by Google-style cyber-attacks
2010-01-13 21:29:00.0
(Reuters) - A law firm representing a U.S. software maker that is suing China for code theft said it has been targeted by Chinese hackers, a day after Google Inc. threatened to withdraw from the country following similar attacks.
Gipson Hoffman & Pancione, which is representing Cybersitter in a $2.2 billion piracy suit filed against China and seven major computer manufacturers, said in a statement that its attorneys were sent customized Trojan emails aimed at retrieving data from the company's computers and servers.
It said the specific source of the attacks had not been determined, but they appeared to have been initiated in China.
Cybersitter has accused the makers of China's controversial Green Dam Internet filtering software of illegally copying over 3,000 lines of code from its own filtering program.
It said PC makers including Sony Corp, Lenovo Group, Toshiba Corp, Acer and Asustek had continued to distribute the software even after becoming aware that the code had been stolen.
China announced in the middle of last year that all PCs sold in the country would be forced to carry the Green Dam software, but by July, after protests by human rights groups and lobbying by PC makers, it had abandoned the plan.
Adobe Systems, which makes the popular Acrobat, Flash and Photoshop software, said on Wednesday that its network systems had also been targeted.
(Reporting by David Stanway, Editing by Chris Lewis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Jan 13, 201010:16pm EST--
todnwth: I don¡¯t think we need drastic retaliation. But, I think companies should start thinking about the long term future of their companies. So far, Companies have been flooding into China thinking that it will be the next huge economy. They are doing it to make a quick buck. Now, we see the arrest of an Australian company executive. We see hacking and censorship at google. Facebook is blocked. Foreign companies are often discriminated against in China in favor of Chinese domestic companies. I think companies should start looking for other, more friendly markets, and then export to China if you have to.
Jan 13, 201011:32pm EST--
Or better yet, buy the Chinese companies out and then begin dissemination of correct information.
Jan 13, 201011:39pm EST--
