China Goldwind ready for $1.5 billion IPO: sources
2010-01-19 01:41:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Jan 18 2010
Tue, Jan 19 2010
Mon, Jan 18 2010
Thu, Jan 14 2010
Thu, Jan 14 2010
Tue  EST
) has chosen China International Capital Corp (CICC) as lead underwriter for a Hong Kong initial public share offering aimed at raising $1.5 billion in the first half of 2010, sources close to the plan said on Tuesday.
), the world's fifth-largest wind power generator, could herald a wave of public offerings from Asia's renewable energy sector.
Longyuan shares have traded 33 percent above the offering price since listing in December last year. Longyuan raised $2.2 billion, making it the largest wind power IPO in 2009.
Xinjiang Goldwind's $1.5 billion IPO looms largest in the pipeline for 2010.
"There are definitely more renewable energy IPOs in the making, given that this is what Beijing is seriously looking to grow," said one of the sources.
Goldwind, already listed in Shenzhen, the smaller of Mainland China's two stock exchanges, said in October last year that it planned to float shares in Hong Kong, with an eye toward expansion, but did not give financial details.
Goldwind was seeking approval from the Chinese securities regulator in Beijing for a Hong Kong IPO, said the sources, who declined to be identified as they were not authorized to speak to the media.
CICC, partly owned by U.S. investment banking giant Morgan Stanley (
), declined to comment.
Other global investment banks, including UBS UBS.VX (
), were pitching to Goldwind in the hope that it would hire at least one more sponsor, said the sources.
), one of China's 10 biggest brokerages, which helped Goldwind list in Shenzhen, was also expected to be appointed to handle part of the company's H-share offering, another of the sources said.
Goldwind planned to issue no more than 15 percent of its enlarged equity capital in the Hong Kong offering, the sources said, with a 15 percent over-allotment option in case of strong demand.
Based on Monday's close of 28.53 yuan for Goldwind's Shenzhen-listed shares, its Hong Kong offering could raise up to 7.93 billion yuan ($1.2 billion).
The first source added that CICC bankers had suggested that Goldwind should wait "for a while" until its Shenzhen-listed share price rose to a more attractive level, which would benefit pricing for the Hong Kong IPO.
(Additional reporting by Leonora Walet; Editing by Chris Lewis)
