Oil falls 3 percent on China, weather, inventories
2010-01-12 17:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil fell by more than 3 percent on Tuesday from near a 15-month high after China raised bank reserve requirements to keep the economy from growing too fast, and as cold weather that had been supporting U.S. fuel demand began to subside.
Further pressure on crude came from data from the American Petroleum Institute released late in the day, which showed builds in U.S. crude, gasoline and distillate inventories.
U.S. crude for February delivery fell $1.73 to settle at $80.79 a barrel, before the API data pushed it below $80 a barrel in post-settlement activity. In London, Brent crude fell $1.67 to settle at $79.30.
Surging Chinese oil demand had helped push oil prices to a 15-month high near $84 a barrel on Monday. China's oil imports rose to a record of more than 5 million barrels per day in December.
China, the world's No. 2 oil consumer, raised the proportion of deposits that banks must hold in reserve by 0.5 percentage point in a move to stem inflation threats. Slower economic expansion in China could cut the pace of fuel demand growth.
"China may be trying to limit its growth rate," said Gene McGillian of Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut.
"Asian oil demand has been growing fast, but we haven't really seen demand growth kick in in the United States or Europe."
A weather pattern change during the next several days will bring an end to the very cold weather across the central and eastern United States, DTN Meteorlogix said Tuesday.
Data from the API showed U.S. crude oil inventories rose by 1.2 million barrels last week, in line with analyst expectations. Distillate supplies -- including heating oil -- showed a surprise 3.6 million barrel build despite cold weather, against forecasts for a 1.8 million barrel draw.
Gasoline stockpiles rose by 6.8 million barrels, well over analysts forecasts for a 1.2 million-barrel rise. The builds sent crude down to below $80 a barrel in late post-settlement trade -- off more than 3 percent on the day.
The EIA cut a previous forecast for world oil demand growth in 2010 by 20,000 barrels a day, although it still predicts demand growth of 1.08 million barrels a day versus last year. [ID:nN12149884] The economic crisis has clipped demand and swelled inventories in the United States and other developed economies.
Deutsche Bank said in a research note that it expects fundamentals of oil supply, demand and inventories -- which remain well above five-year averages -- to assert heavier influence on prices in 2010, tempering any price rallies.
"In our view, this would mean that rallies in the oil price above $80 a barrel will only become sustainable in 2011," Deutsche said in a 2010 commodities outlook.
Oil prices have risen from just below $75 on December 22, when the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries decided to leave its output policy unchanged. It meets next in March.
The oil price is "fantastic" and oil demand is rising, Kuwait's oil minister, Sheikh Ahmad al-Abdullah al-Sabah, told reporters on Tuesday. "Next meeting will be the same... no change of course," he said.
(Additional reporting by Alex Lawler in London, Alejandro Barbajosa in Singapore, and Gene Ramos in New York; Editing by David Gregorio)
