China's power woes give little impetus to oil prices
2010-01-12 08:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China's winter power supply crunch, the fourth in six years, is unlikely to trigger major oil imports like those seen five years ago.
In 2004, during the country's worst power shortage in decades, hundreds of small firms and factories in booming eastern and southern province export hubs were behind a surge in China's diesel imports as they snapped up stand-alone generators.
This time, it's the economically less developed central provinces that have been worst hit as a bitter cold snap sent residential power consumption surging, and unlike five years ago there is a surplus of generating capacity.
With power shortages much less severe than in previous supply crunches, the most that analysts expect is a slight dip in the country's burgeoning diesel exports.
This is assuming the weather doesn't worsen ahead of the Chinese New Year in mid-February, which would further strain already perilously low stockpiles of coal, the fuel for almost four-fifths of China's electricity supply.
Similar to the 2008 summer crisis, the moderate brownouts this time hit mostly industry -- steel mills, aluminum smelters, cement plants -- but instead of scrambling for costly alternative supply they chose to cut production or advance maintenance.
"To make the best use of time, we arranged equipment maintenance," said an official with Hubei Xiangyun, a chemical firm in Hubei province whose power supplies have been halved. "We believe power supply will improve after the Lunar New Year."
Some 10 gigawatts (GW) of power shortages have been reported during peak hours, well below the 30-40 GW deficits seen in previous shortages and just a fraction of installed capacity that rose 10 percent during 2009 to hit 874 GW.
Also, worries about the weather have eased after China's National Meteorological Administration forecast a marginally warmer January for major Chinese cities after a colder than usual December.
The drastic change in China's oil trade balance in the last 13 months or so -- from a hungry buyer in much of 2008 to a consistent exporter -- means incremental oil use spurred by the power shortages may just translate into a small cut in exports that have risen eight-fold in the first 11 months of 2009.
Preliminary customs data on Sunday showed total refined fuel exports rose 83 percent on year in December to 3.67 million tonnes, which traders have attributed in part to overseas shipments of diesel that may have hit a year high.
Refined fuel stocks held by China's oil duopoly rose for the second month in a row in December, as record crude throughput outpaced recovering demand and robust exports.
Oil bulls looking for fresh leads to extend global oil's more than doubling in 2009 will have to look past this winter's power crunch to fundamentals like the transportation sector.
"We did see sharp increases in our diesel sales recently, but doubt it has much to do with the power cuts," said a fuel marketing official with top refiner Sinopec Corp (
) from central Hubei province, one of the regions under power rationing.
"It's more of a story by itself, as the transportation sector is rebounding and also there is some speculative stockbuild betting on another fuel price hike as crude nears
With Chinese domestic diesel prices hovering at record highs of 6,200 to 6,800 yuan per tonne and likely to rise further to track global crude markets, industries hit by power cuts are more likely to cut production than turn to diesel-fired generators.
The one factor that could still worsen the power shortages is supply of coal, which fuels nearly 80 percent of power output in the world's second largest electricity producer after the United States.
Zhou Xizhou, analyst at Cambridge Energy Research Associates, pointed to the disconnect between China's increasingly market-based coal prices and state-set power tariffs as the root cause for the frequent coal supply disruptions behind the recent power cutbacks.
"It is the power sector value chain distortion that is the root cause of all this as there's no capacity shortage. There are a variety of other external factors that could contribute to the situation, such as bad winter weather," Zhou said.
"But unless the government addresses the root cause of the price distortions, this kind of power supply issue will keep coming up year after year."
After a turnaround to profit last year from hefty losses in 2008, China's thermal power firms are on the verge of a small loss in the first quarter this year as term coal prices for 2010 are expected to rise 8-10 percent, according to a research report by Huatai United Securities.
"Power price hikes are always eaten away by increases in coal prices," said an official with one of China's five major power generating groups who declined to be named, citing the sensitivity of the issue.
Coal stocks at main coal-fired power firms across the country stayed thin at 19.9 million tonnes as of January 10, enough only for 8 days of consumption and the lowest since July 2008, according to data compiled by Zhongneng Power Industry Fuel Co, an affiliate of the State Grid Corporation of China.
(Additional reporting by Beijing newsroom, Rujun Shen in Shanghai and Polly Yam in Hong Kong; Editing by Michael Urquhart)
