European shares slip on China move, Alcoa results
2010-01-12 00:36:00.0
(Reuters) - European equities retreated from a 15-month high to finish lower on Tuesday as a disappointing start of the earnings season in the United States and China's surprise move to raise bank reserve requirements hurt sentiment.
index of top European shares closed 0.9 percent lower at 1,053.93 points after rising to its highest in more than 15 months in the previous session. The index rose 26 percent in 2009 and has surged 63 percent since hitting a record low in March last year.
Commodity shares were among the top decliners, with BHP Billiton (
), Antofagasta (
), Rio Tinto (
), Xstrata XTA.L and ENRC (
) down 1.8 to 3.3 percent, on concerns that Chinese monetary tightening could take some of the fizz out of the global economic recovery.
The world's third-largest economy took its strongest step toward tightening monetary policy, surprising investors with a rise in banks' required reserves by 50 basis points, making China one of the largest economies to start rolling back the emergency policies used to combat the crisis fallout.
China helped pull the global economy out of recession last year, with its double-digit growth giving a lift to Asia and countries that have been able to feed its voracious appetite for commodities from iron ore to metals and crude oil.
"If you have a high growth and low interest rate scenario, it's almost an open invitation for an asset bubble. It's a wise thing that China is trying to deal with that before it becomes impossible to manage," said Luc Van Hecka, chief economist at KBC Securities.
Hecka said European shares also came under pressure following Alcoa Inc's (
"If expectations are very high, then there is a probability that you will get some disappointments along the way. But it's too early to say something about earnings," Hecka said.
Banks lost ground, with Standard Chartered (
), Societe Generale (
), Credit Agricole (
), UBS (
), Commerzbank (
), National Bank of Greece (
) fell 6.5 percent. Its shareholders approved joining Ireland's "bad bank" scheme which it said would help its efforts to avoid falling fully into state ownership.
In macro-economic news, Britain's economy probably emerged from its longest recession on record at the end of last year, figures indicated, though big question marks remain over how strong or sustained the recovery will be.
Encouraging Christmas sales reports from the British Retail Consortium and Britain's biggest retailer Tesco (
) suggested consumer confidence was surprisingly strong and house prices continued to grow in December, albeit at a slower pace. Tesco shares rose 0.8 percent.
"On the plus side, Tesco had excellent results," said David Buik, partner at BGC Partners. "I do believe the only sector worth supporting in retail is the supermarkets.."
Among individual movers, Cadbury CBRY.L shares fell 0.5 percent. The British confectioner made its final case for the defense against Kraft Foods' KFT.N 10.5 billion-pound ($17 billion) takeover bid on Tuesday, but a raised offer was still expected to win over shareholders in the company.
Analysts said Cadbury's announcement of robust 2009 results and the promise of further growth was positive for its valuation but Kraft only needed to make a slightly improved offer over the next seven days of the bid timetable to succeed.
) fell 3.1 percent on what traders said was market talk of a rights issue after one of the truck firm's shareholders announced a bond issue to raise cash. The world's number two truck maker said it would not comment on rumors.
Across Europe, Britain's FTSE 100 index
, Germany's DAX
and France's CAC 40
(Additional reporting by Harpreet Bhal; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
