Baidu to launch online video site for premium content
2010-01-06 00:46:00.0
(Reuters) - China's top search engine Baidu Inc said it plans to start a new online video channel that will provide copyrighted content to Chinese Internet users.
The company said it will form a new independent company for the purpose, which will derive its revenue from advertising and work with content providers to offer licensed video content.
Investors cheered the move as Baidu's shares rose 3.5 percent to an intra-day high of $420 on Nasdaq, before losing some of those gains to trade up about 1 percent.
Baidu said the content would include movies, TV series, sporting events and animation.
On Tuesday, Reuters quoted a source familiar with the situation as saying that Baidu is teaming up with Providence Equity Partners, an investor in U.S. video-viewing site Hulu, to set up an online video channel.
Hulu, a website jointly owned by NBC Universal, News Corp and Walt Disney Co, allows viewers to stream TV shows over the net for free in the United States.
Baidu's move marks the company's latest foray into China's fragmented but potentially highly lucrative online video market -- worth 162 million yuan ($23.73 million) in the third quarter, according to data from research firm Analysys International.
Baidu is also an investor in PPLive, a Chinese website that streams licensed movies and video for free.
It was not clear if the new video channel would include online user-generated content, which is fraught with higher regulatory and licensing risks.
S&P Equity Research, which is expecting Baidu to be a minority investor in the start-up, said it does not see the venture turning profitable anytime soon.
Yu Gong, a former chief operating officer of China Mobile's 12580 business, was named chief executive of the new company, Baidu said in its statement.
(Reporting by Supantha Mukherjee and Shrutika Verma in Bangalore; Editing by Anthony Kurian and Saumyadeb Chakrabarty)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Baidu, is a growing corporation in China, it¡¯s instrumental for listing, the battle for popularity in Search Engine systems, forms a restriction of popular key phrase, so to in the popular increased presure on google, Baidu, is combining networks to system, a justified search requirements.
Baidu, is a growing corporation in China, it¡¯s instrumental for listing, the battle for popularity in Search Engine systems, forms a restriction of popular key phrase, so to in the popular increased presure on google, Baidu, is combining networks to system, a justified search requirements.
Jan 06, 201011:55am EST--
Baidu is is going in the right direction. Easy video access is the key. Quality and content of the video will help ensure success. Creativity will be key. Darrell Ellens, Vancouver
Jan 07, 201011:24am EST--
