China's AgBank to list this year, denies $22 billion IPO
2010-01-04 23:30:00.0
(Reuters) - Agricultural Bank of China , China's third-biggest bank by assets, said on Tuesday that it plans to list this year, but denied a report it was planning a $22 billion initial public offering as early as April.
The China Daily, China's main English-language newspaper, reported on Tuesday the size and potential timeframe for the highly anticipated IPO, adding that AgBank had failed to forge strategic partnerships with any domestic or foreign financial institutions.
"This (report) is not true," AgBank vice-president Pan Gongsheng told Reuters via phone. "We are undecided about a detailed timetable, and the size and method of the IPO."
"We are hoping and trying to list by the end of this year," said Pan, who used to be board secretary for Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (
) and was instrumental in ICBC's $22 billion IPO in 2006 in Hong Kong and Shanghai.
The other listed top state banks, China Construction Bank (
), raised more than $15 billion and $13 billion, respectively, in combined initial public offerings in Hong Kong and Shanghai.
AgBank, China's only big state lender that has yet to float shares, had forged strategic partnerships with the country's state pension fund, Pan said.
"We haven't decided whether or not to introduce a foreign strategic investor," Pan said.
A Citic Securities banker directly involved in AgBank's IPO confirmed that the timing and fundraising targets for the offering had not been determined. The banker declined to be identified because of the sensitivity of the matter.
Analysts said AgBank's IPO was unlikely to take place very soon, since many expected other Chinese banks to raise funds in the first half of the year to replenish their capital bases, following a lending binge in the first half of 2009.
"The ideal timing would be the second half of the year, because a lot of banks will need to refinance in the first half," said Jin Lin, an analyst with Orient Securities.
AgBank's restructuring is being widely watched as it would largely complete a decade-long overhaul of China's banking system that has seen the government spend tens of billions of dollars to clean up balance sheets once saddled with bad debt linked to government-directed lending.
Central Huijin, the domestic investment arm of China's sovereign wealth fund, owns half of AgBank following a $19 billion capital injection in 2008. The Finance Ministry owns the other half.
(Reporting by Xie Heng, Simon Rabinovitch, Wang Lan and Michael Wei in Beijing; Samuel Shen in Shanghai; and Don Durfee in Hong Kong; Editing by Doug Young and Chris Lewis)
