Another bumpy year ahead for U.S.-China trade
2010-01-07 14:42:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Nov 13 2009
Fri, Nov 6 2009
Tue, Oct 27 2009
Thu  EST
But concern about damaging the fragile U.S. economic recovery or alienating the largest foreign holder of U.S. debt is likely to limit any action by President Barack Obama or the U.S. Congress to force China to raise the value of its currency, the biggest irritant in the trade relationship.
"I'd be surprised if there is major restrictive legislation," said Ed Gresser, director of the trade and global markets project at the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist Democratic group. Democrats control Congress.
Instead, most of the tension is likely to come from U.S. companies filing new import injury cases against China at the Commerce Department or the U.S. government filing new trade complaints against Beijing at the World Trade Organization.
U.S. steel producers, other industry groups and union workers have filed dozens of cases in recent years accusing Chinese competitors of receiving government subsidies and selling goods in the United States at unfairly low prices.
With a few exceptions, the International Trade Commission (ITC) has approved substantial tariffs under anti-dumping and countervailing duty orders renewable every five years.
Roger Schagrin, a lawyer involved in some of the biggest cases against China, said he sees fertile ground for "a lot more dumping and subsidy cases" in 2010.
"Name the product, China has created massive overcapacity. They're going to export it. It's not going to be consumed in China. ... That creates a natural conflict," Schagrin said.
In 2009, the trade action that received the most attention was Obama's decision, in response to a complaint from union workers, to slap a 35 percent tariff on Chinese-made tires.
Despite predictions that Obama would face a flood of similar cases, no new petitions have been filed yet.
'SENSITIZED TO THE CONTROVERSY'
"The fact that President Obama used that discretion once, doesn't necessarily mean that he will use it in every case. ... I think the administration is sensitized to the controversy it caused," said Walter Spak, a lawyer at White & Case, which successfully defended Chinese paper companies at the ITC.
But rising Chinese exports to the United States as the nation climbs out of recession open the door for more Section 421 and other injury cases, while Chinese companies have shown willingness to bring their own complaints against U.S. firms.
But as dramatic as some individual cases can be, they still cover only a tiny volume of trade and so it is an exaggeration to call such actions a trade war, Spak said.
Chinese exports to the United States peaked at $34 billion a month in October 2008, just as the full extent of the global financial crisis was being realized in the United States.
By February 2009, they had fallen to less than $19 billion. But since then, they have risen more or less steadily to $29.5 billion in October 2009, the most recent data.
Annual Chinese exports to the United States could approach $300 billion in 2009 when final statistics are in, down from $338 billion in 2008. That's a much smaller drop than for many other countries that export products into the United States.
"The robust growth of China's economy is going to overwhelm any routine trade barriers put into place," said Daniel Griswold of the Cato Institute think tank.
Although Obama angered China with his tires decision, he pleased Beijing by refusing to formally label it as a currency manipulator in a semi-annual U.S. Treasury Department report.
Obama is unlikely to change that stance even though the United States would be justified in challenging China's currency actions as a violation of trade rules, Schagrin said.
Meanwhile, there have been threats in the U.S. Congress for years to pass legislation aimed at China based on the belief that Beijing gives its companies an unfair trade advantage by maintaining an artificially cheap currency.
The AFL-CIO, the largest U.S. labor organization, could try to prod Obama into action on the currency issue, said Thea Lee, deputy chief of staff for the 11.5-million-member AFL-CIO.
The labor group is considering filing a petition asking Obama to formally investigate whether China's currency policy is an unfair trade practice and a second one asking for a probe of China's internal labor practices, Lee said.
"The imbalanced China trade relationship remains a top priority for us," Lee said by e-mail.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Our enormous trade deficit is rightly of growing concern to Americans. Since leading the global drive toward trade liberalization by signing the Global Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1947, America has been transformed from the wealthiest nation on earth 每 its preeminent industrial power 每 into a skid row bum, literally begging the rest of the world for cash to keep us afloat. It＊s a disgusting spectacle. Our cumulative trade deficit since 1976, financed by a sell-off of American assets, exceeds $9.5 trillion. What will happen when those assets are depleted? Today＊s recession is the answer. Why? The American work force is the most productive on earth. Our product quality, though it may have fallen short at one time, is now on a par with the Japanese. Our workers have labored tirelessly to improve our competitiveness. Yet our deficit continues to grow. Our median wages and net worth have declined for decades. Our debt has soared. Clearly, there is something amiss with ※free trade.§ The concept of free trade is rooted in Ricardo＊s principle of comparative advantage. In 1817 Ricardo hypothesized that every nation benefits when it trades what it makes best for products made best by other nations. On the surface, it seems to make sense. But is it possible that this theory is flawed in some way? Is there something that Ricardo didn＊t consider? As population density rises beyond some optimum level, per capita consumption begins to decline. This occurs because, as people are forced to crowd together and conserve space, it becomes ever more impractical to own many products. Falling per capita consumption, in the face of rising productivity (per capita output, which always rises), inevitably yields rising unemployment and poverty. This has huge ramifications for U.S. trade policy because these effects of an excessive population density 每 rising unemployment and poverty 每 are actually imported when we attempt to engage in free trade in manufactured goods with a nation that is much more densely populated. Our economies combine. The work of manufacturing is spread evenly across the combined labor force. But, while the more densely populated nation gets free access to a healthy market, all we get in return is access to a market emaciated by over-crowding and low per capita consumption. The result is an automatic, irreversible trade deficit and loss of jobs, tantamount to economic suicide. One need look no further than the U.S.＊s trade data for proof of this effect. Using 2006 data, an in-depth analysis reveals that, of our top twenty per capita trade deficits in manufactured goods (the trade deficit divided by the population of the country in question), eighteen are with nations much more densely populated than our own. Even more revealing, if the nations of the world are divided equally around the median population density, the U.S. had a trade surplus in manufactured goods of $17 billion with the half of nations below the median population density. With the half above the median, we had a $480 billion deficit! Our trade deficit with China is getting all of the attention these days. But, when expressed in per capita terms, our deficit with China in manufactured goods is rather unremarkable 每 nineteenth on the list. Our per capita deficit with other nations such as Japan, Germany, Mexico, Korea and others (all much more densely populated than the U.S.) is worse. My point is not that our deficit with China isn＊t a problem, but rather that it＊s exactly what we should have expected when we suddenly applied a trade policy that was a proven failure around the world to a country with one fifth of the world＊s population. Ricardo＊s principle of comparative advantage is overly simplistic and flawed because it does not take into consideration this population density effect and what happens when two nations grossly disparate in population density attempt to trade freely in manufactured goods. While free trade in natural resources and free trade in manufactured goods between nations of roughly equal population density is indeed beneficial, just as Ricardo predicts, it＊s a sure-fire loser when attempting to trade freely in manufactured goods with a nation with an excessive population density.
Jan 07, 20103:02pm EST--
The continued decline of the US is likely to not be reversed as long as we as citizens accept this plutocracy in lieu of the traditional American ideal. Several generations ago, there was enough left of the nation＊s adherence to the constitution to remain viable. Now, politicians giggle to themselves as we complain of our ever diminishing prosperity and security. They have one thing right,,, we don＊t like it but we haven＊t the wherewithal to do anything about it. Want to know how the story ends? Just read history! The class war is over,,,WE LOST!
Jan 08, 20107:03am EST--
