China again denounces U.S. arms sale to Taiwan
2010-01-08 23:32:00.0
(Reuters) - China on Saturday again denounced U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, saying they were an intrusion in Chinese internal affairs that risked undermining its relations with the United States.
The latest condemnation by the Chinese Foreign Ministry was directed at a $1.1 billion order received by Raytheon Co for ground-system hardware to support Taiwan's Patriot air defense capability.
China on Thursday denounced the U.S. decision to clear the sale of Patriot missiles by Lockheed Martin to Taiwan, which Beijing sees as a renegade province.
The Chinese Defense Ministry also expressed its anger, saying late on Friday on its website (www.mod.gov.cn) that it reserved "the right to take further actions". This warning followed comments earlier this week by a Chinese military official who proposed sanctioning U.S. firms that sell arms to Taiwan.
The Patriot hardware, some of the best in its class, could shoot down Chinese short-range and mid-range missiles, defense analysts say. The sale rounds out a $6.5 billion arms package approved under then U.S. President George W. Bush in late 2008.
China has claimed sovereignty over self-ruled Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong's Communists won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists fled to the island. Beijing has vowed to bring Taiwan under its rule, by force if necessary.
The United States switched diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing in 1979, recognizing "one China". But it remains Taiwan's biggest ally and is obligated by the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act to help in the island's defense.
(Reporting by Simon Rabinovitch; Editing by Nick Macfie)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The US wants China¡¯s cooperation on Iran, but doesn¡¯t respect China¡¯s concerns reguarding Taiwan. In my opinion, China¡¯s concern reguarding Taiwan is more legitimate than America¡¯s concern reguarding Iran. America better pray that China doesn¡¯t retaliate by selling US Treasaries, a prospect so frightening that no main stream US media outlet will even mention that as a retaliation option.
Jan 09, 20103:31pm EST--
China doesn¡¯t respect Taiwan¡¯s concerns regarding Taiwan, either. China provides anti-riot vehicles to Tehran and routes nuclear weaponry components through Taiwan to Iran. The US sells missile defense systems to Taiwan. Both sides are doing something the other side doesn¡¯t like; however, Taiwan is not likely to use nuclear weapons to secure clout in that region. Both concerns are legitimate from the point of view of those who hold them, but in reality, which of those situations is more dangerous on a regional and/or global level? It¡¯s clear that China values money and control of Taiwan would expand its economic base (a la Macau). Really, if China were seriously considering selling US Treasuries (which has been mentioned by mainstream news outlets in the past), 1) the US would not be crippled to the extent that you might wish 2) China probably wouldn¡¯t have purchased them in the first place ¡ª there¡¯s more money to be made by holding on to them.
Jan 09, 20106:15pm EST--
