Chinese President Xi raised by elite, steeled by turmoil
2013-03-14 12:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Four years ago in Mexico, China's new president provided a rare glimpse of a leader who was born into a revolutionary aristocracy and came of age in the tumult of Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution.
On Thursday, Xi Jinping sported the dark suit and cautious public mask that is the uniform of the party leadership as he took his place as the head of state after delegates to China's rubber stamp parliament voted him in almost unanimously at the cavernous Great Hall of the People.
But in Mexico, Xi dropped his guard in a steely defense of his country against criticism from abroad.
"In the midst of international financial turmoil, China was still able to solve the problem of feeding its 1.3 billion people, and that was already our greatest contribution to humankind," he said in comments that drew applause from Chinese Internet users.
"Some foreigners with full bellies and nothing better to do engage in finger-pointing at us," he went on. "First, China does not export revolution; second, it does not export famine and poverty; and third, it does not mess around with you. So what else is there to say?"
Xi assumed the role of Communist Party and military chief from Hu Jintao in November at a key party congress, and has now completed his rise to the top, replacing incumbent Hu Jintao.
'PRINCELING'
Xi has crafted a low-key, sometimes bluff political style. He has complained of officials' speeches and writings being clogged with party jargon and demanded more plain speaking.
Since November, he has waged a campaign against corruption and excess, responding to widespread public anger that party members are both above the law and wasteful.
"The style in which you work is no small matter, and if we don't redress unhealthy tendencies and allow them to develop, it will be like putting up a wall between our party and the people, and we will lose our roots, our lifeblood and our strength," Xi told a meeting of the party's top anti-graft body in January.
Xi, 59, is the son of reformist former vice premier and parliament vice-chairman Xi Zhongxun, making him a "princeling" - one of the privileged sons and daughters of China's incumbent, retired or late leaders.
He grew up among the party elite and then watched his father purged from power before the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, when Xi himself spent years in the poverty-stricken countryside before scrambling to university.
Considered a cautious reformer, having spent time in top positions in the coastal Fujian and Zhejiang provinces, both at the forefront of China's economic reforms, Xi had long been marked out as the likely successor to Hu.
Married to a famous singer and briefly in charge of Shanghai, China's richest and most glamorous city, Xi unsettled Chinese people and the foreign business community alike when he vanished from public without explanation for about two weeks in September, prompting feverish rumors of serious illness and a troubled succession.
Sources said Xi hurt his back while swimming and that he had been obeying doctors' orders to get bed rest and undergo physiotherapy.
Xi went to work in the poor northwest Chinese countryside as a "sent-down youth" during the chaos of the Cultural Revolution, and became a rural commune official.
He studied chemical engineering at Tsinghua University in Beijing, an elite school where Hu also studied. Xi later gained a degree in Marxist theory from Tsinghua and a doctorate in law.
Xi shot to fame in the early 1980s as party boss of a rural county in Hebei province, which surrounds Beijing. He had rare access to then national party chief Hu Yaobang in the leadership compound, Zhongnanhai, west of the Forbidden City.
A native of the remote, inland province of Shaanxi, home of the terracotta warriors, Xi was promoted to governor of the southeastern province of Fujian in August 1999 after a string of provincial officials were caught up in a graft dragnet.
In March 2007, the tall and portly Xi secured the top job in China's commercial capital, Shanghai, when his predecessor, Chen Liangyu, was caught up in another huge corruption case. Seven months later, Xi was promoted to the party's Standing Committee - the ruling inner-circle.
Xi is married to Peng Liyuan, a renowned singer who was once arguably more popular in China than her husband, until the party began ordering her to keep a low profile as her husband moved up the ranks.
(Additional reporting by Sui-Lee Wee; Editing by Ian Geoghegan)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Ever wonder just what was the Cultural Revolution anyway? Read the following from the only Soviet era defector to correctly predict the future behaviors of the USSR/East Bloc, predictions based on the methodology he helped assist research for while in the Kremlin (1958-1960). A methodology that included Mao¡¯s participation in formulating: ¡°Soviet denunciation of the Cultural Revolution as anti-Marxist and
Ever wonder just what was the Cultural Revolution anyway? Read the following from the only Soviet era defector to correctly predict the future behaviors of the USSR/East Bloc, predictions based on the methodology he helped assist research for while in the Kremlin (1958-1960). A methodology that included Mao¡¯s participation in formulating: ¡°Soviet denunciation of the Cultural Revolution as anti-Marxist and
to rally the party and the masses behind them, during their most
vulnerable period, by hoisting the flag of Chinese nationalism. In this
they were repeating Stalin¡¯s exploitation of ¡°capitalist encirclement of the Soviet Union¡± in the 1920s and 1930s to rally the Russian people to the Soviet regime. The difference in the Chinese case was that, deliberately deceiving their own population and the outside world, the Chinese included the Soviet Union among the ¡°imperialist powers¡± attempting to encircle China. In so doing, they served their own interests in strengthening and stabilizing their
regimes; at the same time, they served the strategic interests of longrange bloc policy. Turmoil there undoubtedly was during the Cultural Revolution, but
in the light of the new methodology, the facts are capable of a new
significant part¡ªof the wider process of the communist reconstruction of Chinese society. It followed, as the next logical step, the
ideological superstructure. For this reason, Mao called it ¡°the great
proletarian cultural revolution.¡± Apart from causing widespread economic dislocation, the creation
mainly in the cities, whereas the real Chinese masses were in the
rigid, bureaucratic inertia was unacceptable. The decision was
situation from getting out of hand. The appearance of ¡°political
departments,¡± detachments of Red Guards, and ¡°revolutionary
committees¡± was not spontaneous; it was instigated by the Central
being, it was possible to abolish large parts of the existing party
alternative organization, drawn largely from the younger generation, set about its task of increasing its ties with, and
influence over, the masses in order to fire them with revolutionary
schools on the Central Committee¡¯s instructions. The revolution, being
ideological, was naturally directed by the Central Committee¡¯s
ideologists, led by Chen Po-ta and Mao himself. By April 1969
to be damped down by the Ninth Party Congress. Although the turmoil died away, many of the processes begun
new organs of power and the attack by the ¡°leftists¡± on the ¡°rightists,¡± then the essence of the following three years was the reabsorption of
the older, reeducated party officials into the new organs of power and
the attack on leftists, initially begun with the support of the army,
signs of detente with the West began to appear. In the next three years, from 1973 to 1976, under the alleged guidance of the ¡°Gang of Four,¡± the process of reeducation continued. But now it was a more specific process of ideological and political preparation of the reconstructed party, government apparatus, and mass organizations for the new situation entailed by a shift to activist, detente diplomacy. With the death of Mao and the return of the ¡°pragmatists¡± to power, full-scale, activist detente diplomacy was launched on Soviet lines with the aim of using economic, financial, and technological help from the noncommunist world to accelerate China¡¯s economic and military
policy. She sought to align herself especially with conservatives in the advanced countries and Islamic regimes in the Third World, in order
As in other communist countries, the process of communist
new, and the revival of old, techniques. In China¡¯s case the aims were
to revitalize the communist party, to broaden its political base, to
commit the younger generation to ideological objectives, to reeducate
the older generation of party members, to control and neutralize
internal opposition, to revitalize the state apparatus and armed
services, and to prepare China as a whole for its part in the
The techniques of political activism, provocation, disinformation, and
political prophylaxis, which have been described in detail in the case
of the Soviet Union, have all been used effectively in China. The
alleged struggles for power in China between leftists and rightists,
dogmatists and pragmatists, are as unreal as the struggles between
tendencies to ¡°putschism¡± in the army. It gives the party ideologists
that used by Stalin at the end of the NEP period. Stalin¡¯s shifts from
dictatorship and the factionalism was real; the Chinese leadership used
activists in the Soviet Union during Stalin¡¯s collectivization of agriculture in the 1930s. The technique of using wall posters by the
opposition in 1956-57. The Cultural Revolution and the whole process of Chinese communist reconstruction have followed Lenin¡¯s precepts on overcoming ¡°infantile disorder¡± and isolation of the party from the masses. The
West as the long-range policy unfolded. Despite the alleged destruction of the party in the Cultural Revolution, in fact it strengthened itself. The Chinese trade union, youth, and women¡¯s organizations have resumed their activities.
mass organizations, the Chinese, like other communist states after
1960, were enabled to introduce NEP-style measures, including some
of the appurtenances of democracy, such as wall posters; trials; the
release of market forces; and the relaxation of controls over religion,
intellectual life, working conditions in factories, and property
ownership. ¡°Dissidents¡± began to appear, on the Soviet pattern.
paid to the overseas Chinese, whose relatives in China are said to
number 12 million.¡± ¡ª ¡°New Lies for Old¡±, by KGB defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn (1984).
Mar 14, 20131:30am EDT--
