Nufarm faces tough choice as Sinochem cuts offer
2009-12-22 08:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Sinochem, China's biggest agricultural company, cut its offer for Nufarm Ltd (
) by 7.7 percent to $2.3 billion on Tuesday, as the financial outlook for the Australian agrochemicals maker has worsened since talks between the two companies first began.
State-owned Sinochem is showing that it's willing to risk losing the deal even if it threatens, for now, its plans to expand beyond its home turf.
The revised offer values Nufarm at A$12 a share, down from A$13, and comes after Sinochem failed to meet a deadline for a binding agreement.
With its initial offer for Nufarm in September, Sinochem hoped to gain from the Australian company's global distribution network that includes Asia, South America and Europe. But a series of profit downgrades at Melbourne-based Nufarm has cast a cloud over the company's finances.
If Nufarm rejects the offer and walks away, it would be the second time since 2007 that it failed to strike a deal with a Chinese company. Two years ago, Nufarm was approached by China National Chemical Corp, which led a A$3 billion approach with U.S. private equity, but no formal offer emerged.
Trading in Nufarm shares, 11 percent-owned by Managing Director Doug Rathbone, was halted to help the firm consider the lower offer and seek clarification on the terms.
"My feeling is he would probably take the A$12 offer. I think he (Rathbone) is more likely to accept because this is the second takeover offer," said Tom Elliott, a fund manager with MM&E Capital, which does not own Nufarm shares.
"He's clearly a seller and has indicated as much. As a result, he probably would have no choice but to accept the offer on the table."
) for Felix Resources Ltd, and Baosteel's purchase of a 15 percent stake in iron ore explorer Aquila Resources Ltd (
So far this year, Chinese companies have invested about $5 billion in Australian companies. China is Australia's biggest export market, with two-way trade worth $53 billion last year.
Chairman Kerry Hoggard said Nufarm was disappointed Sinochem had not been able to proceed with an acquisition on the basis of what was previously agreed, adding Nufarm's board would not back a proposal that undervalues the business.
"The business already had several profit downgrades over the past 12 months and I guess during the period of due diligence, things have gone slightly worse than better," Elliott noted.
Nufarm shares never traded above Sinochem's initial offer price, reflecting the market's concerns about the deal, which is also subject to regulatory approvals.
It also showed that few expected rival bidders to trump Sinochem's offer, though some analysts think farm chemicals makers MA Industries MAIN.TA and United Phosphorous (
In the short term, Nufarm shares could slide to as low as A$8.50 each if the deal falls apart, analysts say. And the firm's credit rating could also be under threat, pushing up its funding costs. Nufarm last traded at A$10.56.
Standard & Poor's said on November 24 it may lower its rating on Nufarm should the deal with Sinochem be scrapped, though it maintained its BBB- on the company.
"Rathbone has been working pretty hard to get a buyer and the two Chinese companies are probably his best chances," Elliott added.
Earlier this month, Nufarm said it would not accept anything less than A$13 a share.
"We're disappointed they've reduced it, but we will wait and see what the company recommends," said Ross Barker, managing director of Nufarm shareholder Australian Foundation Investment Co. "We like our investment in Nufarm and we are not very keen sellers."
Nufarm is being advised by UBS, while Royal Bank of Scotland is advising Sinochem.
(Additional reporting by Victoria Thieberger in MELBOURNE, and Sui-lee Wee in HONG KONG)
