China welcomes U.S. climate cash offer
2009-12-17 13:51:00.0
(Reuters) - China said on Thursday a U.S. pledge to mobilize $100 billion a year in climate funds was a "good step," and signaled Beijing was seeking compromise with Washington on its demand for checks on Chinese emissions curbs.
But Vice Foreign Minister He Yafei, bearing a message from Premier Wen Jiabao, warned that the U.N.-led negotiations in Copenhagen were at a critical stage and could be wrecked if the 193 countries taking part didn't pull together.
The Dec 7-18 summit is officially due to wrap up a new deal to tackle global warming on Friday, but rifts between rich and poor nations over everything from funding to which draft deal should be on the table, have made for agonizingly slow progress.
China's He, who had previously said finance was China's top concern at the talks, said the move was positive.
"I think the financial issue is very important. Whatever initiative these countries will announce is a good step," He told Reuters when asked about the U.S. announcement.
"In terms of mitigation actions (emissions curbs), we can also consider, international exchange, dialogue and cooperation that is not intrusive and does not infringe upon our sovereignty," He said.
Clinton had pointedly warned China it must accept tough requirements for monitoring, reporting and verification, if the United States is to provide the promised aid.
"We are willing to enhance and improve the ways we do national communications, whose purpose of course is to enhance transparency," He said, referring to the regular reports on emissions levels that countries which signed up to the Kyoto Protocol are meant to submit to the United Nations periodically.
Stepping up these could overcome one of China's chief concerns, that checks could infringe on its sovereignty.
He also said that China's target would be binding under domestic law and the country would step up its own checks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
How many times must we hear the word which condemns humanity so certainly to destruction ¡®Sovereignty¡¯? Sovereignty the right without accountability to any entity, divine or otherwise, for the heinous crimes perpetrated by an elite against fellow humanity and nature itself. What boundaries can we define for the air we breathe, the oceans we fish, the land we plough and the ideas which shape our destinies? How can we restrict in anyway the passage of effects from one so called human sovereign habitat to another? We cannot ¨C for the lines in the sands do not create immutable voids. We know this to be true yet we persist in sovereignties acceptance even though we have enough destruction of humanity and nature to prove its worthlessness as a tool for a better future. There are no boundaries, no walls, and no impediments of any sort which can restrict the effects of the action of one human being upon another or upon the environment within which we humans have the good fortune to exist. The notion that somehow we are capable of preserving ourselves by being separate from the common cause of humanity to promote our own selfish advantage is an approach we must now cast aside. The idea that enabling my independence first at the expense of others is a rational means of sharing scarce resources of our planet and assuring common security is clearly disproven. It is only by seeking to enable the independence of others first that we will be able to realise a common human need for providing for our families and the successful future of the planet earth.
Dec 18, 20094:42am EST--
