Iran may face new U.N. sanctions
2009-12-10 17:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States, Britain and France warned Iran on Thursday that it may face new sanctions over its nuclear program, but Russia and China hinted that they were not convinced more punitive steps were needed.
The exchange of views during a U.N. Security Council debate on Iran showed how the Western powers' desire to ratchet up the pressure on an increasingly defiant Tehran over its atomic ambitions might face tough resistance from Moscow and Beijing.
"If it continues to refuse the slightest confidence measures, to refuse dialogue, transparency ... we must draw all of the necessary conclusions and that means that we must move on to a new resolution involving sanctions," French U.N. Ambassador Gerard Araud told the council.
"There is no longer any reason to wait," he said.
"We make a last call to the Islamic Republic of Iran to respond to our offer of negotiation," Araud said. "If Iran doesn't do it on the short term, France will propose a new resolution of sanctions."
U.N. diplomats have said that senior officials from the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China -- the six powers spearheading efforts to persuade Iran to halt enrichment -- might meet as early as next week to discuss Tehran, which the West suspects is pursuing nuclear weapons.
Iran rejects the allegations, along with U.N. demands that it suspend a program it says is intended solely for the peaceful generation of electricity. But Western officials say recent revelations about a previously hidden uranium enrichment plant in Iran have made Tehran's denials less credible.
Russia's Foreign Ministry spokesman Andrei Nesterenko suggested that Moscow was not ready to begin drafting a fourth U.N. sanctions resolution to punish Tehran for refusing to suspend its uranium enrichment program.
"This language of sanctions, it is not our language. It has already been said many times," Nesterenko told reporters in Moscow, stressing that Moscow's position had not changed.
"Should Iran continue to fail to meet its obligations, the international community will have to consider further actions," U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice told the council.
Asked how long the United States would wait, Rice told reporters, "The time is short."
In New York, Russia's U.N. Ambassador Vitaly Churkin and Chinese Ambassador Zhang Yesui both called for restraint and patience. Referring to the U.N. nuclear watchdog agency in Vienna, Zhang said Beijing hoped Iran would "strengthen dialogue and cooperation with the IAEA."
British Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant told reporters that the six powers would base a decision on whether to press for a new round of U.N. sanctions on an assessment of Tehran's nuclear program and its response to their offer of economic and political incentives in exchange for an enrichment suspension.
(Additional reporting by Patrick Worsnip at the United Nations and Conor Sweeney in Moscow, editing by Howard Goller)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Dec 10, 20091:58pm EST--
Wow, Iran is shaking in their shoes. Eventually, Iran will be dictating terms. After their first nuclear detonation, they will be blackmailing us.
Dec 10, 20091:58pm EST--
Almost 200,000 U.S. and NATO forces currently pincering Iran from the East and West will not tolerate an Iranian nuclear test.
Dec 10, 20092:03pm EST--
