China urged to revalue currency
2009-12-11 18:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid urged Chinese President Hu Jintao to address his country's huge trade imbalance with the United States through a "significant revaluation" of China's currency.
"I know China is committed to moving to a free floating currency eventually. But China's currency policy has been causing major distortions in the world economy for too many years already, and is continuing to do so now," Reid, a Democrat, said in a December 9 letter released on Friday.
"In the mean time, I hope you would consider a significant revaluation to bring the value of the RMB in line with economic fundamentals, and after that, to return to a more robust version of the 'managed float' that your government previously maintained," Reid said.
The letter follows President Barack Obama's November trip to China, where he also raised concerns about China's currency practices.
They see the huge U.S. trade deficit with China, which totaled $268 billion in 2008 and $188 billion in the first 10 months of 2009, as evidence of that.
Reid stopped short of threatening U.S. legislative action, but warned that "the one-way nature of the imbalances in our economic relationship is a major factor causing Americans to question the efficacy of our trade policy."
Meanwhile, the U.S. Trade Representative's office is expected next week to release its annual report on how well Beijing is meeting its trade obligations under the World Trade Organization, which China joined eight years ago.
Reid told Hu that China's de facto currency peg puts pressure on other Asian countries to follow suit, exacerbating the problem for the United States and other countries.
"Finally, your currency policy is not in the long-term interest of China: it creates inflationary pressure, promotes over-investment, and feeds asset bubbles within China. In short, it is one of the most serious economic problems in the world today," Reid said.
The Senate leader and close ally of Obama also expressed concern about rampant piracy in China of U.S. intellectual property ranging from music, movies and software to auto parts, clean energy products and pharmaceuticals.
This has "led many in the United States to believe that there may be a Chinese policy to undermine American competitiveness in sectors where we are strong, while simultaneously benefiting from open access to the U.S. market," Reid said.
(Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Xavier Briand)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
¡°Finally, your currency policy is not in the long-term interest of China: it creates inflationary pressure, promotes over-investment, and feeds asset bubbles within China. In short, it is one of the most serious economic problems in the world today,¡± Reid said Is this guy for real?
Dec 11, 20096:09pm EST--
Currency valuations have almost nothing to do with the trade deficit. China boosted the value of the yuan by 20% two years ago and, instead of falling, our trade deficit with China rose further. The dollar has fallen by over 300% vs. the yen since the 1970s and, instead of falling, our trade deficit with Japan exploded. More recently, in the past year, the dollar has fallen dramatically vs. the yen and the euro. Yet, prices for products from those regions remain unaffected. (In fact, Japanese auto companies have actually cut prices this year.) The real driving force behind global trade imbalances in disparities in population density. An excessive population density drives down per capita consumption, making nations like China, Japan, Germany, Korea and many others utterly dependent on exports to sustain their excess labor capacity. These nations will never allow something so trivial as currency valuations to erode their U.S. market share. They¡¯ll simply cut prices, subsidize their manufacturers, or do whatever is required. By the time the U.S. complains and wins a case at the World Trade Organization (a process that takes years), these nations will simply shift to a different tactic. It¡¯s been the same thing for decades. When expressed in per capita terms, our trade deficit in manufactured goods with China barely ranks in the top 20. The per capita trade deficit with other nations like Japan, Germany, Korea and others, all much more densely populated than the U.S., is much worse. Of our top 20 per capita trade deficits in manufactured goods, 18 are with nations at least twice as densely populated as the U.S. Our trade deficit with China is exactly what we should have expected when we chose to engage in free trade with such a vast and densely populated nation. The only way to restore a balance of trade in such cases is through the use of tariffs to assure that the price for imports provides sufficient profit potential for domestic producers. All of this jaw-boning on currency valuation is a complete waste of time. Pete Murphy
Currency valuations have almost nothing to do with the trade deficit. China boosted the value of the yuan by 20% two years ago and, instead of falling, our trade deficit with China rose further. The dollar has fallen by over 300% vs. the yen since the 1970s and, instead of falling, our trade deficit with Japan exploded. More recently, in the past year, the dollar has fallen dramatically vs. the yen and the euro. Yet, prices for products from those regions remain unaffected. (In fact, Japanese auto companies have actually cut prices this year.) The real driving force behind global trade imbalances in disparities in population density. An excessive population density drives down per capita consumption, making nations like China, Japan, Germany, Korea and many others utterly dependent on exports to sustain their excess labor capacity. These nations will never allow something so trivial as currency valuations to erode their U.S. market share. They¡¯ll simply cut prices, subsidize their manufacturers, or do whatever is required. By the time the U.S. complains and wins a case at the World Trade Organization (a process that takes years), these nations will simply shift to a different tactic. It¡¯s been the same thing for decades. When expressed in per capita terms, our trade deficit in manufactured goods with China barely ranks in the top 20. The per capita trade deficit with other nations like Japan, Germany, Korea and others, all much more densely populated than the U.S., is much worse. Of our top 20 per capita trade deficits in manufactured goods, 18 are with nations at least twice as densely populated as the U.S. Our trade deficit with China is exactly what we should have expected when we chose to engage in free trade with such a vast and densely populated nation. The only way to restore a balance of trade in such cases is through the use of tariffs to assure that the price for imports provides sufficient profit potential for domestic producers. All of this jaw-boning on currency valuation is a complete waste of time. Pete Murphy
Author, ¡°Five Short Blasts¡±
Dec 11, 20099:25pm EST--
Oh, yes Harry, be sure to tell China how to run their government, you are doing so well with America¡¯s.
Dec 12, 20094:43am EST--
