China's BAIC buys Saab assets; Spyker still in talks
2009-12-14 05:18:00.0
(Reuters) - Beijing Automotive Industry Holding Co (BAIC) said on Monday it had acquired some assets of General Motors' Saab unit as part of a push to develop its own-brand cars.
BAIC, China's fifth-largest automaker, will buy the intellectual property for Saab's 9-5 and 9-3 sedans and some equipment to make them for an undisclosed sum, leaving the fate of the Swedish-based automaker up in the air.
"This is quite separate from the discussion to sell Saab as a whole, and those negotiations are taking place," a Saab spokeswoman in Sweden said, declining to name potential bidders.
"What this deal announced today does is that it partly helps the financing of the 'new' Saab...The deal with Beijing in no way compromises the sale of Saab to a new owner."
"BAIC is one of the few major Chinese auto groups that still does not have its own car brand. Even though the Saab platform is old, it's still important for BAIC as it can finally get hold of something it can use later on for its own cars," said John Zeng, an analyst with IHS Global Insight.
Most Chinese automakers are either churning out foreign brand cars in tie-ups with global heavyweights such as Volkswagen AG, Toyota Motor or focused on the lower end, making cars as cheap as 30,000 yuan ($4,394).
But as wealth grows in what has now become the world's biggest auto market, many Chinese carmakers are looking to boost their profile.
"The deal is an important milestone in BAIC's cooperation with Saab," BAIC said in a statement.
BAIC will get support from Saab as it uses the acquired technologies to manufacture its own-brand models, it added.
Spyker CEO Victor Muller told Reuters on Sunday the Dutch sports-car maker was still in talks to buy Saab, after the Wall Street Journal initially reported BAIC's deal to buy the 9-5 and 9-3 assets.
He said a deal with BAIC would be "good news" for the Dutch company, because it involved assets that he described as equipment for old Saab models.
BAIC, a Daimler AG and Hyundai Motor, hopes to use acquired technologies to shore up its own-brand models, which it has been working on for years.
The deal will put BAIC on par with domestic rivals, such as SAIC Motor Corp, Dongfeng Motor Group, which have already rolled out cars developed based on acquired technologies or on their own.
Shortly after it dropped out of a race for GM's Opel brand, BAIC agreed in September to take a minority stake in Koenigsegg, a tiny luxury car maker, which struck a deal earlier this year to buy the loss-making Saab unit from its Detroit owner.
Last month, BAIC issued a state immediately after Koenigsegg's abrupt pull-out from the talks saying it was reviewing its options while reaffirming its commitment to become more global.
Geely, the Chinese car maker picked as the preferred bidder for Ford Motor's Volvo unit, is seeking at least $1 billion in loans from Chinese banks to finance its bid, sources said earlier this month.
"Money shouldn't be a major problem, the big challenge for BAIC and many other Chinese automakers is to come up with new models based on the acquired technologies," said Zeng.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Spyker, now that is more funny than Koenigsegg! What is GM thinking with these supercar makers? What happened to the legitimate bidders? Spyker has never made money. Spyker has never made an acquisition of this scale. Spyker has never managed a manufacturing company of this scale. Spyker has never managed a distribution company of this scale. Spyker can¡¯t turn around its own company,let alone SAAB. This is not Ed Whitacre¡¯s finest hour. Why not sell SAAB to professionals? Shame on GM!
Dec 14, 200912:11pm EST--
