China's e-bikes free to buzz after reprieve
2009-12-16 07:06:00.0
(Reuters) - China backed down from a plan to reclassify large electric bicycles as motorbikes on Wednesday, a move that threatened to put the brakes on a Chinese consumer craze.
It had stirred widespread fears that more than 2,000 e-bike factories would close and millions of users would need to get licenses and insurance for motorbikes.
Increased production of e-bikes has been a driver of demand for lead in China, the world's top consumer and producer of the metal used in batteries. Worries over e-bike production had spurred merchants to sell refined lead stocks to the spot market, traders said.
China's Standardisation Administration said it was rethinking the idea of reclassifing. Earlier this month, it said e-bikes that weighed over 40 kg or that can go faster than 20 km per hour could be classified as electric motorbikes.
"This is good news," said an official at the China Bicycles Association. He added the industry body had lobbied the Standardisation Administration to relax the standards for e-bikes following the release of the previous document.
The association was drafting standards of e-bikes and will submit them to the government, he said, without providing a timeframe for the submission and details of the proposed standards.
Top of the range e-bikes in China are designed to go as fast as 30 kph. The bikes usually carry 4 lead batteries, which weigh 16-28 kg.
) To see the circular, click: (
State-backed research group Antaike estimated the production of e-bikes accounted for 26 percent of China's refined lead consumption at 2.9 million tonnes in 2008, just behind the car sector, which accounted for 28.5 percent.
The 2008 estimate suggests production of e-bikes used 754,000 tonnes of refined lead last year.
China, the world's top refined lead consumer and producer, is expected to consume 3.37 million tonnes of refined lead this year, Antaike estimated.
Chinese refined lead prices have risen 51 percent this year to 15,900 yuan per tonne on Tuesday, behind a 130-percent rise in LME lead, which stood at $2,335 per tonne on the same day.
Prices may rise further following the suspension of the e-bikes standards because that could encourage factories to resume production and limit merchants' selling of lead stocks.
Falling concentrate supplies and looming holidays are also expected to cause production of refined lead to fall at least 20 percent in January and February from November, smelter officials and analysts said.
(Additional reporting by Huang Yan in Beijing, editing by Lucy Hornby and William Hardy)
