Shenzhen Air appointment fuels Air China bid talk
2009-12-03 03:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Dec 3 2009
Thu, Nov 19 2009
Thu, Nov 19 2009
Wed, Nov 18 2009
Fri, Nov 13 2009
Thu  EST
) vice president has been named in a senior role at Shenzhen Airlines, sources said on Tuesday, increasing speculation that the world's most valuable airline would take over the Shenzhen-based carrier.
Fan Cheng, who is also a vice president of Shenzhen Airlines, was appointed party secretary of the country's fifth-largest air carrier on December 1, two sources with direct knowledge of the matter told Reuters.
"It suggests that Air China will lead Shenzhen Airlines and it will have a synergy effect on both airlines," Alfred Chan, chief dealer at Cheer Pearl Investment.
Shares of Air China shrugged off a weak opening and rose to a 19-month high of HK$6.23, before closing at HK$6.21, up 0.8 percent for the day and up 11 percent over three days.
Privately-owned Shenzhen Airlines said earlier this week Li Zeyuan, a senior adviser who effectively controls the airline, was under police investigation, although the airline continued to operate normally.
Shenzhen Airlines chairman Li Mo, son of Li Zeyuan, has handed over the operation of the company to Li Kun, president of Shenzhen Airlines, a source said.
If combines with Shenzhen Airlines, the country's flag carrier will overtake its domestic rivals China Southern (
) and Shanghai Airlines 600591.SS, which together have 30 percent of China's civil aviation market.
"If Air China takes control of Shenzhen Airlines, the company will be able to gain a foothold in south China where it's relatively weak compared with competitors such as China Southern Airlines," Jim Wong, regional head of transport research at Nomura said.
(Reporting by Joanne Chiu and Donny Kwok; Writing by Alison Leung; Editing by Jacqueline Wong and Lincoln Feast)
