Chinatrust asked to think about stake buy of AIG unit
2009-11-26 12:38:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Wed, Nov 25 2009
Tue, Nov 24 2009
Fri, Nov 20 2009
Thu, Nov 19 2009
Thu, Nov 19 2009
Thu  EST
) think carefully about its plan to buy a stake in AIG's (
Concerns are mounting that Chinatrust, Taiwan's top credit card issuer, could be controlled by China Strategic after Chinatrust agreed to buy a 30 percent of Nan Shan stake from China Strategic.
Under the proposed deal, China Strategic would take a 9.95 percent stake of Chinatrust via a private placement.
Chinatrust has said it could raise its stake in Nan Shan, which China Strategic and Primus Financial agreed ion October to pay AIG $2.15 billion for, while China Strategic can buy more Chinatrust shares in the next three years, upon regulatory approval.
"I don't think Chinatrust has thought about this carefully," said Sean Chen, chairman of the Financial Supervisory Commission.
"Chinatrust thought that buying the Nan Shan stake could bring in a golden hen for them. But at the same time, Chinatrust might be losing its control to China Strategic," Chen told reporters on the sidelines of a legislative session.
"This is a very serious issue," the chairman said.
Taiwan regulators have said they were concerned China Strategic and Primus Financial are backed by China-sourced funds, complicating the approval process behind the deal.
Trade ties between Taiwan and China, former political rivals for decades, have eased since President Ma Ying-jeou took office last year. But Taiwan is still reluctant to fully open its markets to Chinese investors.
Taiwan officials could potentially strike down the acquisition, dealing a major blow to American International Group Inc (AIG), once the world's largest insurer and now 80 percent owned by the U.S. government after a multi-billion-dollar bailout.
At 12:15 a.m., Chinatrust shares fell 1.7 percent in Taipei trading, while China Strategic rose 3.6 percent in Hong Kong trading.
