Investors welcome new China, U.S. climate goals
2009-11-26 10:03:00.0
Investors welcome new China, U.S. climate goals | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Investors welcome new China, U.S. climate goals
Thu, Nov 26 2009
Thu, Nov 26 2009
Thu, Nov 26 2009
Wed, Nov 25 2009
Wed, Nov 25 2009
The sun sets over New York City as seen from Arthur Ashe Stadium in Flushing Meadows, New York, August 27, 2007. Credit: Reuters/Mike Segar
Thu  EST
Traders in a $126 billion carbon market want tight climate targets to boost demand for emissions permits, and energy companies want to know the full future costs -- including from carbon -- of burning fossil fuels as they plan new power plants.
In jockeying ahead of that conference, the United States on Wednesday made its first offer since 1997 to cut carbon emissions and China vowed to slow carbon emissions from industry, helping drive momentum toward a global deal.
Energy analysts welcomed the U.S. and Chinese offers, although the U.S. target was widely expected and far below European Union ambition compared with a U.N. 1990 baseline.
"It increases the chances of getting a better, collaborative agreement in Copenhagen, which would in turn create a larger low-carbon marketplace," said James Cameron, vice-chairman of Climate Change Capital, an environmental investment group with $1.5 billion assets under management.
The U.S. and China moves provided a "very positive" further boost to what would be a record year for clean energy investment in 2010, consultants New Energy Finance predicted.
"I would not be surprised to see a $200 billion year," said New Energy Finance head Michael Liebreich. Investment would reach $160-$200 billion in 2010, compared with expected funding this year of about $125 billion, down from last year's record of $155 billion, Liebreich told Reuters.
The U.S. target, to cut greenhouse gases by 17 percent from 2005 levels by 2020, added momentum but was widely expected.
"All the U.S. said was what's already passed in the House (of Representatives). I don't see it as a particularly significant development," said Deutsche Bank's Mark Lewis.
"It's much more important to see how they are going to reduce emissions," said Michael McNamara at Jefferies Bank.
"The legislation has reflected incredible degrees of partisan politics," said Murray Ward, from the Global Climate Change Consultancy, referring to votes both in Australia and New Zealand which passed emissions trading scheme (ETS) legislation on Wednesday.
The Australian delay worried carbon traders, cheered by the passage of New Zealand legislation but still waiting the first major economy to follow a European Union cap and trade scheme launched in 2005.
"The Australian delay is potentially a major setback," said one carbon trader. "It is one of the biggest countries in terms of emitters so they should really move."
British utilities increasingly question the effectiveness of emissions trading in Europe, saying carbon prices are insufficient to make new nuclear power plants and coal with expensive carbon capture technology economic.
"Obviously a good strong agreement in Copenhagen will be a great legacy, but let's be realistic, that may not happen and it may be necessary that we have other mechanisms, if you like a Plan B," said Paul Golby, chief executive of the UK arm of German utility E.ON AG.
"Utilities need secure funding in order to develop these large scale projects, and quite frankly at the moment the carbon price is too low and too uncertain to support investment without further help."
