China, Taiwan politics clog AIG's Nan Shan deal
2009-11-19 03:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Taiwan is raising concerns that the buyers of AIG's (
) Nan Shan Life insurance unit, China Strategic (
) and Primus Financial, are backed by China-sourced funds, complicating the approval process behind the $2.15 billion deal, an official said on Thursday.
At worst, Taiwan officials could strike down the acquisition announced in October, dealing a major blow to American International Group Inc (AIG), once the world's largest insurer and now 80 percent owned by the U.S. government after receiving $180 billion in aid.
Trade ties between Taiwan and China, former political rivals for decades, have eased since President Ma Ying-jeou took office last year. But Taiwan is still reluctant to fully open its markets to Chinese investors.
Taiwan and China signed a financial services pact this week, but it did not cover allowing banks on both sides to invest in each other. Such stake investments are widely expected to be discussed in a free trade pact early next year.
Lu Ting-chieh, the Financial Supervisory Commission chief secretary, said the commission was worried the Hong Kong-based consortium was funded by money from mainland Chinese investors and would not be rushed into approving the deal.
"We will not make a decision in the short term," he told Reuters by phone. "There are many questions that need to be answered."
Concerns about the deal grew after Taiwan's Chinatrust Financial (
), which lost out in the Nan Shan auction to the consortium, said late on Tuesday it would buy a 30 percent Nan Shan stake from China Strategic for $660 million.
In exchange, China Strategic would take a 9.95 percent stake of Chinatrust, Taiwan's top credit card issuer, for T$20.8 billion via a private placement.
That deal only added to the speculation of who exactly was behind China Strategic, and by extension, who was backing Primus.
Local media reports on Thursday highlighted the political issues flaming up and cast doubt on the Nan Shan deal approval, prompting China Strategic to issue a statement.
"The proposed transactions remain subject to further negotiations. It remains the intention of the company to have control of Nan Shan, either directly or indirectly," China Strategic said. Discussions were ongoing and Taiwan had yet to either approve or reject the deal, it added.
When the Nan Shan deal was first announced, China Strategic was a $111 million holding company known more for making and trading battery products.
Primus was founded by Citigroup's former top investment banker in Asia, Robert Morse. Morse told Reuters in April that he planned to raise more capital beyond the $1 billion the firm had in place from a single unnamed investor.
Shares of China Strategic soared more than 80 percent on November 10 after it disclosed key financing details and new hires, but the announcements have not dispelled questions about the Nan Shan deal.
Taiwan's Investment Commission has not started to review China Strategic's application of the deal, a source said, adding the commission has asked China Strategic, which plans to own 80 percent of Nan Shan when the deal is complete, to provide more information.
(Writing by Michael Flaherty; Editing by Ken Wills and Lincoln Feast)
