Zhao, Shen leading China charge for elusive gold
2009-11-18 01:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Zhao Hongbo and Shen Xue have returned to the ice with a vengeance with their eyes set firmly on winning China's first Olympic figure skating gold medal in Vancouver early next year.
The married couple, bronze medalists in the pairs event at the 2006 Winter Games, retired after winning their third world title in 2007 but the lure of breaking China's eight-Games drought on Canadian ice next February proved too great.
"We love skating, so that's why we came back," Zhao, 36, told local media this week. "It's like a dream now. We are dreaming of Olympic gold for sure."
They grabbed the best score of the season to win at Skate America last weekend for a second Grand Prix triumph since their comeback and look the strongest of the trio of Chinese pairs who finished second, third and fourth in Turin four years ago.
"The two victories after our comeback have boosted our confidence," said Zhao, who with 31-year-old Shen has been to three previous Olympics. "I still think we have some space to improve."
They will not have it all their own way, though, as compatriots and 2006 world champions Tong Jian and Pang Qing have also been in impressive form this season.
"The return of Shen and Zhao has given us extra motivation as well as extra pressure," Tong, fourth with Pang in Turin, told the China Daily.
"Now the gap is narrowing among the world's top pairs. We just want to show our best at the Games.
Boosted by victories in their two Grand Prix events so far this year, 30-year-old Tong and 29-year-old Jian are confident in their new skating programs will be a hit at the February 12-28 Vancouver Games.
"The biggest goal for us at the Vancouver Winter Olympics is to strive for a medal," said Tong.
Zhang Hao and Zhang Dan, silver medalists in Turin and still ranked second in the world, have not had such good results this season but are confident of turning their form around in time for their third Winter Games.
"We are struggling but I hope we can achieve a good result at the Games," Zhang Hao told the paper.
