China reaps Olympic dividend but lady Tiger to come first
2009-11-18 03:12:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Tue, Nov 17 2009
Tue, Nov 17 2009
Sat, Nov 14 2009
Tue, Nov 10 2009
Mon, Nov 9 2009
Wed  EST
With the Soviet-inspired system almost single-mindedly dedicated to Olympic success, the Copenhagen vote was always going to have far more impact in China than other countries.
"The state-supported system has proved a huge success over the past 60 years," deputy sports minister Cui Dalin told local media at a women's tournament in Xiamen last week.
"First, we want Chinese to get to the 2016 Games and then we will aim for good results at following Olympics," Cui told the China Daily.
"If we want to have a bright future, we have to start the work at the grassroots level. We will set up more golf tournaments for young people and also send some of the youngsters abroad."
Cui was also at the launch of the $7 million WGC-HSBC Champions the previous week, where Tiger Woods said he thought the Olympic vote key to China becoming a power in the game.
China Golf Association (CGA) boss Zhang Xiaoning, also in Shanghai, agreed.
"It will increase the popularity of golf in China and it will become a more popular game for everyone, instead of a game for the privileged few," he told reporters.
"No matter what, the government's policy will change the perspective in China."
The sports ministry is already working on ways to change the perception of golf, starting with an attempt to reduce the tax paid by the country's 500 golf courses, presumably so the often exorbitant green fees can be reduced.
"Golf is widely seen as game for entertainment and thus the business tax rate is 22 per cent for golf clubs," Cui said.
"Adding the land-use tax, a golf club has to pay almost a 30 percent tax rate. That will not boost golf's popularity here."
Even before the Olympic announcement, the CGA was already looking for help in developing golf in China from the established heartlands of the game.
The U.S. PGA and European Tours, with an eye on a huge potential market, have been courting China and both wheeled out their top officials in Shanghai.
But however rich the tournaments the tours co-sanction in China, and however big the foreign names they attract, the ultimate goal for Zhang is to produce his own Tiger Woods.
China's top current men's player is 31-year-old Liang Wenchong, who was Asian Tour champion in 2007 and is now ranked 46th in the world.
As was the case in tennis, however, Zhang thinks that China's best chance of finding a talent to take on and beat the best in the world will come in the women's game.
There, 20-year-old Beijinger Feng Shanshan has impressed in her first two years on the LPGA Tour, while Zhang Na is a consistent performer on the lucrative Japanese Tour.
"I am sure we will see that day very soon but we are very likely to see a lady Chinese 'Tiger' in the future faster than a male Chinese 'Tiger'," he said.
