China-U.S. discord on currencies clouds Obama visit
2009-11-15 06:16:00.0
(Reuters) - The United States and China sparred over exchange rates at a meeting of Asia Pacific leaders on Sunday, pointing to tricky talks ahead for President Barack Obama when he flies to China to address economic tensions.
"China has pledged to keep monetary policy moderately loose, and their concern is still the economic recovery," said currency strategist Enrico Tanu Widjaja at OCBC Bank in Singapore. "They will probably let the yuan strengthen when they start tightening policy."
Obama pledged on Saturday to deepen dialogue with China rather than seek to contain the rising power, which is set to overtake Japan next year as the world's second-largest economy.
"With regards to trade, this is a difficult time for the U.S.-China relationship," said Derek Scissors, trade economist at the conservative Heritage Foundation in Washington.
An earlier draft pledged APEC's 21 members to maintain "market-oriented exchange rates that reflect underlying economic fundamentals." That statement had been agreed at a meeting of APEC finance ministers on Thursday, including China, although it made no reference to the yuan.
A U.S. official sought to play down talk of discord over the removal of the reference to currencies, and said the actual discussions took place among aides, not leaders.
He also signaled Obama was prepared to discuss the yuan when he gets to China. In an interview with Reuters last week, Obama said he planned to raise the issue on his trip.
Washington says an undervalued yuan is contributing to imbalances between the United States and the world's third-biggest economy. China is pushing for U.S. recognition as a market economy and concessions on trade cases that would make it harder for Washington to take action against Chinese products.
China's central bank said last week it would consider major currencies in guiding the yuan, suggesting a departure from an unofficial peg.
However, Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Chen Jian on Sunday played down talk of a shift in policy as well as expectations of a rise in the yuan's exchange rate.
By Friday dollar/yuan volatilities were implying the strongest expectations the Chinese currency would appreciate since June, and the market for offshore non-deliverable forwards pointed to a 3.6 percent rise in 12 months.
"We cannot follow the same policies that led to such imbalanced growth. If we do, we will continue to drift from crisis to crisis, a failed path that has already had devastating consequences for our citizens, our businesses, and our governments," Obama said.
Obama's strategy calls for America to save more, spend less, reform its financial system and cut its deficits and borrowing. Washington also wants key exporters such as China to boost domestic demand.
Those negotiations have largely stalled, but a U.S. official said Obama had backed a two-step plan by the Danish prime minister to aim for an operational agreement and to leave legally binding details until later.
(Additional reporting by Neil Chatterjee, Caren Bohan and Lucy Hornby and the Beijing bureau and Paul Eckert in Washington; Writing by Dean Yates, Editing by John Chalmers and Bill Tarrant)
