China "studying" plan to delay final climate deal
2009-11-16 06:21:00.0
(Reuters) - China's foreign ministry said on Monday that Beijing was "studying" a Danish proposal to delay a legally binding climate pact until 2010 and aim instead for a political deal at talks in Copenhagen next month.
Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen flew to Singapore at the weekend to pitch his plan to a gathering of Asia Pacific leaders, including U.S. President Barack Obama, in a last-ditch bid to dispel a growing sense of gloom about the December talks. [ID:nnSP284703]
Obama threw his weight behind the plan before flying off for his first presidential visit to China, where he has highlighted climate change as a key part of his agenda. But his hosts are more circumspect about downgrading their aspirations.
"China has noted the idea raised by the parties concerned of a 'political agreement' and is now studying this," China's foreign ministry said in a statement faxed to Reuters in response to a question about Beijing's stance on the proposal.
Climate negotiations have become mired in disagreements between rich and poor nations over who should be obliged to cut emissions, by how much, and who should pay for it.
These disputes have been compounded by the slow progress of U.S. domestic climate change legislation through the Houses of Congress, which may limit Obama's room to make firm commitments in the Danish talks.
Together they account for 40 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions, so their support is vital to forging any agreement that will realistically tackle warming.
If the world does settle for a preliminary deal, China is keen to tie down points that have been agreed in principle on issues including technology transfer and funding.
"China believes that no matter what form of document is agreed in Copenhagen ... (it should) consolidate and expand the consensus and progress already made in negotiations concerning mitigation, adaptation, funding, technology transfers and other aspects," the foreign ministry added.
China also wants to ensure subsequent negotiations also respect the Kyoto Protocol, the current international agreement on climate change, especially the principle that all nations have common but differentiated responsibilities to tackle climate change, the statement added. (Reporting by Emma Graham-Harrison; Editing by Sugita Katyal)
