GE and China's AVIC to form avionics joint venture
2009-11-14 23:15:00.0
GE and China's AVIC to form avionics joint venture | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
GE and China's AVIC to form avionics joint venture
Fri, Nov 13 2009
A model of the 150-seat C919 passenger plane is displayed at the Asian Aerospace Expo in Hong Kong September 8, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Bobby Yip
Sat  EST
) and Aviation Industry Corp, a Chinese state-owned aircraft maker, agreed on Sunday to form an avionics joint venture that will have China's booming commercial aircraft market as one of its main targets.
The initial focus of the venture would be to develop equipment for China's planned C919 passenger jet, which will have at least 150 seats, said executives of GE, the world's biggest maker of jet engines.
"Our first priority will be to compete for the COMAC C919," Lorraine Bolsinger, president and chief executive of GE's Aviation Systems business, told reporters.
The partners said they aimed to set up the 50-50 venture by mid-2010, subject to regulatory approval.
Part of the JV, which will have its headquarters in China, will involve the creation of a technology center in Shanghai, where GE already carries out research and development.
Beijing merged its two state aircraft makers, AVIC I and AVIC II, in 2008 to pool resources for the jet project as it moves to wean itself from reliance on Boeing Co (
"The Chinese civil aviation industry will likely, over the coming decades, be one of the biggest, if not the biggest, in the world," Jeff Immelt, GE's chief executive officer, said at a signing ceremony in Beijing.
As well as targeting the domestic market, the GE-AVIC venture said it would aim to sell into the global market, including the United States, where it will create 200 jobs.
(Reporting by Michael Wei and Alan Wheatley; Editing by Alex Richardson)
