Wall Street closes higher in late-day rally
2013-03-04 16:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Stocks closed higher on Monday as investors staged a late-day rebound, extending a recent trend of buying on dips and pushing major indexes near all-time highs despite concerns about growth and China's housing market.
The Dow closed within 40 points of its all-time closing high, recovering from early losses on plans to tighten curbs on China's housing market, as well as a slowdown in the growth of that country's services sector.
Any slowdown in the world's second-largest economy could affect U.S. growth, especially commodities and materials, which have a lot of exposure to China. Industrial and material shares were among the weakest of the day, with Caterpillar Inc (
) shares touched a lifetime intraday high of $822.84. The dominant Internet search company's stock was up 1.9 percent at $821.50 at the close.
The S&P 500 has jumped about 7 percent so far in 2013 as investors continue to view equities as more attractively valued than other asset classes, allowing stocks to resist calls for a pullback even with few obvious catalysts to drive shares definitively higher.
"There are a lot of worries out there, but also a lot of positive momentum. Stocks remain the only game in town if you want yield," said Randy Bateman, chief investment officer of Huntington Asset Management in Columbus, Ohio, who helps oversee $14.5 billion.
"So many people think we're overextended that a pullback could happen at any time, but there are also so many people reentering the market on dips that I wouldn't be surprised to see a new high on the Dow sometime this month."
rose 38.16 points, or 0.27 percent, to 14,127.82 at the close. The Standard & Poor's 500 Index
gained 7.00 points, or 0.46 percent, to 1,525.20. The Nasdaq Composite Index
added 12.29 points, or 0.39 percent, to end at 3,182.03.
) and Macy's Inc (
). Target climbed 3.6 percent to $66.44 while Macy's rose 2.1 percent to $41.54. The S&P retail index .SPXRT jumped 1.5 percent.
), which is struggling to compete against its rivals. J.C. Penney's stock fell 5.4 percent to $16.74.
Investors will also keep an eye on Europe, with Italy possibly inching toward another election within months after center-left leader Pier Luigi Bersani issued an ultimatum to anti-establishment 5-Star Movement boss Beppe Grillo to support a new government or return to the polls.
Janet Yellen, the Federal Reserve's influential vice chairwoman, provided some support for the market when she said the central bank's aggressive monetary stimulus is warranted, given how far below its full potential the economy is operating.
) shares rose 3.5 percent to $68.84 after the company said it will exit its retail, energy marketing, and energy trading businesses. Hess also boosted its dividend by 150 percent and announced a stock-buyback program.
) offered to buy the company for $563 million, although Ferro rejected the bid.
About 6.01 billion shares changed hands on the New York Stock Exchange, the Nasdaq and NYSE MKT, below the daily average so far this year of about 6.48 billion shares.
Roughly 53 percent of stocks traded on the New York Stock Exchange closed higher, while 51 percent of Nasdaq-listed shares ended in positive territory.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Although many people have changed their minds from their past wrong pessimistic attitude to the hope that the job market improvement or the job market virtual improvement will support the stock market and help DOW get its historical high, I believe things are not so easy to be so straightforward. The unemployment rate will be 7.7, considering they seem have already got the figure from the labor department or the labor depart has satisfied the needs of the figure. to So in the next few days, media will produce more delicious contents or whatever helpful they will think out like ¡°investors are underinvesting¡­¡± and the stock market will seem have a anti-gravity force to push it upward, but please remember this adjustment cannot be so simple. Stock market can forget the bad things for a few days, but afterwards, it will be reminded that its job has not finished yet. Generally, DOW may be artificially pushed to a new high, but I believe the adjustment is far from over. Nevertheless, I think DOW has enough reason to break the history after so many years. S&P will also get a new high. Their focus may already move to S&P, instead of staying on DOW. Only the DOW is the first one needs to be overcome. It isn¡¯t hard to think after DOW, S&P is the next.
Mar 04, 201310:57am EST--
Investors aren¡¯t buying the dips. High frequency trading algorithms are programmed to buy the dips on the basis of infinite Federal Reserve stimulus. Asset prices can¡¯t really go down in the long term under such inflationary pressure.
Mar 04, 20133:27pm EST--
Jameson4Lunch: That`s how it is!
Mar 04, 20136:31pm EST--
