Analysis: From builders to managers: educating China's leadership
2013-03-01 00:57:00.0
(Reuters) - Sun Zhengcai earned his PhD from China Agricultural University in 1997, experimenting with different fertilizers for crop rotation in northern China, according to his doctoral thesis.
For the world's biggest grain grower and consumer, this type of research is crucial for improving yields. But it was an unlikely qualification for political leadership in China where engineers have traditionally held many of the top posts.
Sun represents one of the more far reaching changes in Chinese politics. Highly educated leaders in a broad range of disciplines are rising to the top of the ruling Communist Party, according to data from Connected China, a Reuters database application that tracks the connections and careers of China's leaders.
Sun, 49, who joined the Politburo at November's Communist Party Congress, is one of five PhD holders in a body in which all 25 members have at least a junior college education.
Some education experts explain the rise of this more highly educated leadership class as a product of the increasing complexity of China's economy and society.
It also reflects an evolution in the Party. A generation of revolutionary soldiers gave way to technocratic engineers who guided the following period of industrialization. The engineers are now handing over to leaders better qualified to run the world's second-biggest economy.
"As the society matures, it is always beneficial to have a leadership with diverse backgrounds," said Gong Peng, a Professor at Tsinghua University's Center for Earth System Science. "They bring different thinking and skills to the administration."
It also shows that education is not necessarily the only path to power: loyalties forged during political posts in the provinces, and family ties to former leaders also matter a great deal.
The other PhD holders in the current Politburo are party leader and incoming President Xi Jinping, who studied China's rural markets at Tsinghua University. Li Keqiang, expected to become Premier after the National People's Congress in March, has a PhD in economics from Peking University. Liu Yandong studied China's political development at Jilin University, and fellow Politburo member Li Yuanchao explored socialist art and culture in his thesis at the Central Party School.
The current Politburo also features nine members with masters degrees and three with other higher degrees. That stands in stark contrast with members of the 14th Politburo formed in 1992. Only Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao, who became China's top leadership duo a decade later, had graduate degrees in that group.
The change in the breadth of education has also been dramatic. Ten years ago, 15 of the 20 college-educated members of the Politburo were trained in engineering or the physical sciences. At the very top of China's hierarchy, engineers were even more heavily represented.
In the nine-member Politburo Standing Committee appointed in 2002, eight members of the party's top decision-making body were engineers and one was a geologist. Of these, four were engineering graduates of Tsinghua.
The current Politburo has only four engineers. They are outnumbered by colleagues with training in economics, finance and business management. It also shows a sharp increase in members educated in law, humanities and social sciences. The seven-member Standing Committee has only two engineers; Xi Jinping, who has an undergraduate degree in chemical engineering and Yu Zhengsheng who worked in missile guidance.
For some Chinese educators, the presence of fewer engineers at the top is a welcome development after decades in which technocratic leaders, often Soviet trained, dominated decision-making in Beijing.
"Engineers who do not learn about management may not be good managers and eventually good administrators," says Tsinghua's Gong. "I think it will improve the governing quality in China."
In the early 1980s, then paramount leader Deng Xiaoping directed the party to foster a generation of better educated cadres who could accelerate China's market reforms.
China's subsequent rise as a major trading nation and growing military power is also increasing pressure on the party to select better educated and more worldly leaders, political analysts and education experts say.
"Because the country is changing and the world is changing, it requires a more sophisticated understanding of the issues," says Yu Maochun, an expert on Chinese politics and a professor at the Annapolis, Maryland-based United States Naval Academy.
Some experts question whether academic qualifications are as important as loyalty and family ties in a political system where many senior leaders, including Xi Jinping, are "princelings", children of senior party veterans.
In 1992, only nine of 23 Politburo members served as a provincial or municipal-level party chief. In the current Politburo, 19 of the 25 have held or currently hold a provincial post at this level, including Sun Zhengcai who is party secretary in Chongqing.
Many of the engineers who held top posts, including President Hu Jintao, spent long periods working in unrelated fields.
"They are not really engineers in the Western sense," says Yu. "They are really political hacks. Their career paths were not devoted to science but concentrated on the political system."
Despite the increasing diversity of education at the upper levels of the party, one feature of China's leadership remains virtually unchanged since the revolutionary period - the domination of men.
Only two women are in the current Politburo, Liu Yandong and Sun Chunlan, and none are in the Politburo Standing Committee.
(Reporting by Irene Jay Liu and David Lague; Editing by Bill Tarrant)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Maochun Yu wrote, ¡°They are not really engineers in the Western sense. They are really political hacks. Their career paths were not devoted to science but concentrated on the political system.¡± He proves that he is a complete idiot who is unworthy to teach at Annapolis. He seems to be a political hack who wants to make others into political hacks. President Hu Jintao has a degree in hydraulic engineering, and, in 2001, he designed a massive, continental irrigation system to move water from the south and east coasts of China where it was not needed to the northern and western provinces where it was needed. Typhoons are natural desalination plants that drop water on the south and east coasts, so Hu¡¯s plan built pipelines, tunnels, canals, pumping stations, lakes, and reservoirs to move and store the water. Added to land reclamation, China will be able to feed between 3 and 4 billion people by 2020 to 2025. In 2011, China reached its grain production target for 2020, 9 years early; early figures for 2012, show China¡¯s grain production rose 12.5% above 2011 levels. In 2011 and 2012, China sold grain to the US after fires, heat, and droughts, added to ethanol and biofuel mandates and livestock feed, forced the US to import food from China. As the US, Mexico, Africa, the Middle East, India, and Australia become polluted deserts, China will gain enormous influence with every country that wants to eat courtesy of President Hu Jintao who has a degree in hydraulic engineering, the science of moving water from one location to another. President-elect Xi Jinping has a degree in chemical engineering, and he designed a $1.7 trillion, 5 year plan ($340 billion per year), 22 point plan to address China¡¯s pollution that was presented at the 2011 Climate Change Conference in Durban. China¡¯s leaders have always said that they would address pollution when their economic level would let them do so without causing economic distress for their people. The first results should be noticeable by 2014 and will continue through 2016 when a second 5 year plan should be expected. China¡¯s leaders chose a president with a degree in chemical engineering to deal with pollution that is the presence of unwanted chemicals (pollutants) in the air, water, and ground. In addition, President Hu¡¯s degree and major project will give China considerable international influence because everyone must eat, while President-elect Xi¡¯s degree and major project will reduce pollution to maintain political stability inside China as it gains international influence abroad. The US should not underestimate the power of the technocrats who govern China because all projects must be technically feasible before spending money from the public treasury. China¡¯s technocracy helps explain China¡¯s massive account surplus when most other countries, especially the major powers, have enormous national debts. In addition, technicians prefer to build rather than engage in the destruction of wars for political agendas. How many thousands of tons of bombs, tanks, aircraft, ships, and troops are needed to buy one ounce of political influence? China¡¯s technicians know that the answer is peace, prosperity, and trade. To win a war is competence; to win a war without fighting that war is genius.
Mar 02, 20136:34pm EST--
The authors start with Sun Zhencai who has a Phd in agronomy, and he has risen steadily in the CPC. He is the CPC Secretary for Chongqing, a municipal development zone for central China at a time that China has shifted economic development into central and western provinces. By 2023, when the next presidential change occurs, he will be 60, and if he continues to succeed, he will be a major presidential candidate because China¡¯s irrigation/agricultural policies will give it major influence over much of this world that is reducing its capacity to produce food. The US, Mexico, Africa, the Middle East, India, and Australia are becoming polluted deserts. Sun¡¯s ability to understand the food needs for each nation on earth, in addition to China, could give him enormous advantages in planning China¡¯s global food supply strategy for dominating the hungry world of 2023 to 2033, China¡¯s presidential term after President Xi Jinping. Choosing Phd¡¯s in practical areas as leaders works better than selecting leaders with degrees in the esoteric subjects of democracy, creationism, human rights, divine inspiration, pursuit of happiness, community organizing, and other poorly defined theories, attitudes, and prejudices.
Mar 05, 20134:38pm EST--
