MONEY MARKETS-Aussie swaps up as rate expectations build
2009-11-13 03:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian swaps rose on Friday as investors grew increasing certain the central bank will raise interest rates at its Dec. 1 policy meeting after positive employment data supported the case for monetary tightening.
On Thursday, data showed Australian employment rose 24,500 in October, a second month of surprisingly strong growth.
But the rates market has still not fully priced in a rate increase, preferring to wait for Tuesday's release of the central bank's minutes.
It is still seeing only an 84 percent chance the central bank will tighten by 25 basis points CSRBA=CSAU next month, but that is higher than 68 percent at the start of the week.
"The market is underpriced for a December tightening," said Annette Beacher, senior Strategist at TD Securities.
"Tuesday's the last chance for the RBA to communicate they didn't mean to suggest a pause. We are saying yes for another 25 bps increase in rates," Beacher said.
The central bank has already raised rates by 25 basis points in both October and November, becoming the first in the G20 to tighten since the global credit crisis blew up. If the RBA hikes rates in December, it would be the first time it would have tightened three months in a row.
In Hong Kong, interbank rates continued to decline as repeated central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market injected increased liquidity in the domestic banking system.
One-year Hibor HIHKD1YD= was fixed at 0.63929 percent, down from Thursday's 0.64929 percent. It has fallen 9 basis points this week. Short-dated interbank rates continue to hover around zero.
Money is flowing into Hong Kong ahead of big upcoming IPOs in the territory, including a jumbo $4 billion offering by China's seventh-biggest bank China Minsheng Banking Corp (
Since October, the HKMA has injected more than HK$140 billion in the territory's banking system to defend the currency peg, including Friday's intervention.
As a result, the aggregate balance -- the sum of balances on clearing accounts maintained by banks with the HKMA -- will increase to a record HK$294.368 billion by Nov. 17 when the latest intervention is settled.
In Singapore, 3-month dollars SIUSDD=ABSG are quoted at an average 0.27607 percent, a fresh low. (Reporting by Umesh Desai; Editing by Kim Coghill)
