Nikkei slips 0.4 pct; metals, economic worries weigh
2009-11-13 01:28:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei stock average lost 0.4 percent on Friday, weighed down by selling of smelters after non-ferrous metals prices fell, with concerns about consumer spending and Wall Street's performance leading to broad selling.
), which surged after a brokerage upgrade, kept the fall in check. A brokerage upgrade also boosted Sharp Corp (
), all of which announce results after the close.
"I think a lot of investors want to see what New York stocks will do today after yesterday's slip, since there's a sense that New York may have peaked out," said Yutaka Miura, senior technical analyst at Mizuho Securities.
"This is especially true because this week's gains were made in very thin trade, which means that once it starts heading down, its slide may be slow but it will be steady, putting further pressure on Japanese shares."
The Nikkei lost 0.2 percent on the week for its third straight week of losses, the first such negative stretch since the three weeks end Oct. 2. In thin trade, it lost 34.18 points on the day to close at 9,770.31.
Other analysts said that on top of selling by Japanese institutional investors, foreign investors appear to have shifted their stance slightly on Japanese stocks from neutral to selling.
"Earnings are mostly over and though many were strong, they were mainly factored in and didn't lead to buying, while the forecasts were fairly cautious," said Norihiro Fujito, general manager at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities.
"There's worry about bond issuance and growth here is really lagging. There's a lot of funds going to places like China, India and Indonesia."
EYES ON BANKS, JAL
Market players said that one key level for the Nikkei is 9,500, where a large number of put options have been placed. A put option gives the owner the right to sell.
Should the Nikkei touch this level it could fall rapidly, Fujito said, with the next key level being 9,000.
Banks edged up, with Mizuho Financial Group up 1.7 percent at 179 yen and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group up 0.6 percent at 3,240 yen. But Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group (
), which announces results next week, fell 0.8 percent to 508 yen.
"There's some buying on expectation that the fund-raising situation for these banks will be made clear when they announce earnings, which would remove one bad factor," said Hideyuki Ishiguro, a strategist at Okasan Securities.
"Any kind of concrete statement would help, even one announcing more funding, since that would ease uncertainty."
Bank shares lost ground over the last few months on worries they might have to issue more shares, raising dilution fears -- the same worry that hit shipping shares, a day after Nippon Yusen (
Shares of nonferrous metals smelters, such as Toho Zinc (
), fell after industrial metals prices dropped on Thursday due to a slight rebound in the U.S. dollar and growing concerns about demand weakness after inventories of the metals rose.
Market players said Nippon Suisan surged after Merrill Lynch raised its rating on Japan's second-largest seafood company to "buy" from "underperform", saying that the company's most recent results and full-year downward forecast revision indicated the bottom in earnings had been confirmed.
Sharp Corp rose 3.8 percent to 1,001 yen after Deutsche Securities raised its rating on the electronics maker to "buy" from "hold", citing a brighter outlook for its flat panel, solar cell and LCD TV operations.
Trade was thin, with 1.7 billion shares changing hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section compared with last week's daily average of 1.8 billion.
Declining shares outpaced advancing ones by 896 to 660. (Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Chris Gallagher)
