Flower power Duangdecha blossoms in Hong Kong
2009-11-12 21:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Thailand's Udorn Duangdecha stole the thunder from a quality field to lead the Hong Kong Open with a dazzling eight-under-par first round 62 on Thursday.
Dutchman Robert-Jan Derksen was one behind while holder Lin Wen-tang of Taiwan shared third place on 64 with Frenchman Gregory Bourdy, Briton David Dixon and Thai Thongchai Jaidee at the $2.5 million event co-sanctioned by the European and Asian tours.
Race to Dubai leader Lee Westwood carded a 66, a score matched by fellow Briton Rory McIlroy who is second on Europe's money list.
Asia's first major winner Yang Yong-eun of South Korea and former British Open champion Mark O'Meara also fired four-under-par 66s.
Derksen won a gold bar for a hole-in-one in Hong Kong two years ago and he set the early pace after birdying five of the last six holes, his only blemish a three-putt at the 16th.
However Asian Tour member Duangdecha, dressed in bright 'flower power' trousers, charged into the lead after reeling off 10 birdies at Fanling.
The 39-year-old only missed out on the course record after bogeying his final hole, the par-four ninth.
"They are my lucky pants," the flamboyant Duangdecha told reporters. "I always play in colorful trousers and I have enough in the wardrobe to last me all weekend.
"(A 62) might surprise everyone but I don't think it surprised me too much. It was a shame to finish the round by three-putting the last but I'm delighted with the round."
Hong Kong debutant Westwood and McIlroy are locked in a battle for the $1.5 million bonus on offer for Europe's number one at the season-ending Dubai World Championship.
The Englishman leads Northern Irishman McIlroy by around $80,000 after the 20-year-old climbed to second in the money list by finishing fourth at last week's WGC-Champions Tournament in Shanghai.
"The greens are puzzling," said Westwood who finished tied for eighth in China. "I am at a disadvantage having only played the course once before (in practice).
"I'm happy with 66," he said. "I'm in a good position. It was nice to get off to a good start. It could've been better but I'll take it."
(Reporting by Alastair Himmer in Tokyo, editing by Tony Jimenez)
