RPT-FACTBOX-Trade deals in the Asia Pacific region
2009-11-12 18:40:00.0
(Reuters) - Twenty years after the start of APEC, which brings together 21 Asia Pacific economies accounting for more than half of world economic output, questions remain about the future of Asian economic integration.
Will free trade forays between China, Japan, South Korea and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN, lead to "a line down the middle of the Pacific", separating Asia economically from the rest of world?
Or will Asia pursue an open model of economic integration, consistent with unfulfilled goals set in 1994, which called for free trade among developed APEC economies by 2010 and among the developing members of the group by 2020?
As leaders gather this week in Singapore for the annual APEC summit, here's a sampling of trade deals in the region:
Seven of the 10 members of ASEAN are also members of APEC -- Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. The non-Apec members are Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar.
The grouping, which includes some 580 million people, already has free trade deals with China, South Korea and Japan, has signed pacts with Australia and New Zealand and India and is negotiating with the European Union.
The United States has a free trade pact with one ASEAN member, Singapore, but talks with Malaysia and Thailand on similar deals were never concluded.
Japan's new prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, has called for an "East Asia Community" encompassing Japan, China, South Korea, India, Australia and New Zealand along with ASEAN.
Tokyo already has free trade pacts with ASEAN, Brunei, Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand and has been negotiating potential deals with Australia, the Gulf Cooperation Council, South Korea and Peru.
The country many call the "world's factory" has free trade pacts with ASEAN, Chile, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, Singapore and Thailand, and is negotiating with Australia, Costa Rica, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Iceland and Norway.
It has been studying the possibility of a free trade pact with South Korea, a trilateral free trade pact with South Korea and Japan, and pacts with India, South Africa and the Southern African Customs Union.
Washington has free trade pacts with six countries in the APEC region, including Canada and Mexico as part of NAFTA. The others are with Australia, Singapore, Peru and Chile.
President Barack Obama's administration has been considering whether to negotiate free trade deals with Brunei and New Zealand as part of the proposed Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership agreement, which would join together U.S. free trade deals with Australia, Singapore, Chile and Peru and potentially include other countries such as Vietnam.
The administration of former President George W. Bush launched talks with Thailand and Malaysia on free trade agreements, but did not reach deals.
Seoul, which aims to become a hub for free trade agreements in Northeast Asia, has wrapped up a deal with the European Union that is expected to go into effect next year.
However, U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk has said Obama will not submit the South Korea-U.S. free trade agreement to Congress until Seoul agrees to more concessions to open its markets to U.S. autos and other exports.
South Korea already has free trade deals with ASEAN, Chile and Singapore. It is negotiating with Australia, India, Japan, Canada, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Mexico and Peru.
Although not a member of APEC, Asia's third-largest economy has signed a trade deal with ASEAN that goes into effect in 2010. It also has wrapped up negotiations on a free trade pact with South Korea and is two years into negotiations with the European Union on another deal.
Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Singapore have each stitched together a string of trade pacts in the region and are actively negotiating more. (Reporting by Doug Palmer; editing by Mohammad Zargham and Dean Yates)
