FOREX-Dollar higher after U.S. weekly jobless claims data
2009-11-12 09:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar gained on Thursday with the advance bolstered by a U.S. report showing initial U.S. weekly jobless claims were lower than expected.
The U.S. Labor Department reported that initial state jobless benefit claims fell to 502,000 in the latest week from a revised 514,000 in the prior week. The consensus forecast was for initial claims of 510,000. [ID:nOAT004353] [ID:nN11377609].
With the release of the U.S. data, investors now shift their focus to a meeting of Asia-Pacific nations and other Asian regional issues, including a U.S. state visit to China next week.
"Dollar/yen perked up a little bit on the news which is no real surprise considering that jobless claims continue to fall, which is encouraging," said Omer Esiner, senior market analyst at Travelex Global Business Payments in Washington.
In early New York trade, the dollar was up 0.6 percent at 90.35 yen
The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six major currencies, was at 75.359, up 0.3 percent on the day. It hit a fresh 15-month low of 74.774 on Wednesday.
But the steady pace of dollar selling in recent weeks -- on the view U.S. interest rates would remain low for some time -- remained intact analysts said, adding that Thursday's rally was little more than a consolidation.
Pressure on China and other Asian countries to revalue their currencies "could take away some of the upside pressure on the euro," said Marcus Hettinger, currency strategist at Credit Suisse in Zurich.
In other news, China's central bank, which holds the world's largest foreign exchange reserves stash of more than $2 trillion, on Wednesday said it would consider major currencies in guiding the yuan, suggesting a departure from an effective dollar peg that has been in place for more than a year. [ID:nPEK347415]
Analysts said the move was Beijing's clearest signal yet that it was close to letting the yuan appreciate after an 18-month hiatus that has frustrated many of its peers.
"The message we draw from the shift in the (Chinese central bank's) carefully chosen words is that trend decline in the dollar will no longer be resisted to the same degree," said Westpac in a research note.
"We expect greater movement on dollar/yuan soon, quite possibly ahead of Obama's meetings with top Chinese officials next week and with a European delegation also arriving in China before year-end," they said.
U.S. President Barack Obama visits China next week, and market participants expect currencies to be discussed.
(Additional reporting by Wanfeng Zhou in New York and Matthew Foster-Smith in London) (Reporting by Nick Olivari; Editing by Theodore d'Afflisio)
