UPDATE 5-Peugeot unveils 3.3 bln euro margin boost plan
2009-11-12 00:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Europe's second-biggest carmaker PSA Peugeot Citroen (
) on Thursday raised its full-year outlook and unveiled a plan to lift earnings via productivity improvemenmts, costs cuts and more sales in emerging markets.
), Honda (
), Hyundai (
), Daimler (
"The priority is to get our house in order," Chief Executive Philippe Varin told investors.
PSA shares powered ahead early in the session to a 13-month high but fell back to trade at 23.87 euros, up just 0.4 percent by 1704 GMT.
"We are confident a substantial part of our profitability gap should be closed in the next three years," said Varin, who was appointed CEO in June.
The company said half of the profit boost would come from manufacturing productivity improvements and cost cuts, 30 percent would come from boosting market share in Europe, while the remaining 15 percent would come from stepping up sales in Russia, China and Latin America.
A large part of its planned market share improvement would come from increasing sales to businesses, Varin said.
Varin said the group hoped to achieve its target in a "progressive, linear" fashion and did not rule out making acquisitions.
The company showed off a raft of new models including the iOn -- an electric car for Europe based on partner Mitsubishi's (
The group also unveiled the DS3, DS4 and DS5 models that Citroen hopes will tap into a desire for premium touches on smaller vehicles.
In July, the group forecast cash flow to be negative in the second half and saw a full-year operating loss of 1-2 billion euros ($1.50 billion).
According to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S the average expectation for Peugeot's full-year operating result is a loss of 1.146 billion euros after it posted a first-half loss of 1.33 billion.
The carmaker will boost output in the fourth quarter by 30 percent compared with the same period last year and 17 percent compared with the third quarter, it said.
French carmakers expect strong sales in the final months of 2009 as drivers flock to take advantage of government scrapping schemes before year-end, contributing to uncertainty about 2010, executives told the Reuters auto summit last month. [ID:nL213330]
Japan's Nissan Motor Co Ltd (
) this month raised its forecast for the fiscal year to next March to an operating profit from a loss. Toyota Motor Corp 7203.1 halved its annual loss forecast after a surprise second quarter profit. ($1=.6668 Euro) (Reporting by Marcel Michelson; Editing by David Cowell)
