FOREX-Dollar gains; U.S. weekly jobless claims data helps
2009-11-12 00:07:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar rallied broadly in technical trading after a weekly jobless report triggered strength in the U.S. currency and momentum pushed it further through key levels.
While the dollar's early gains came against the yen after a report showed initial weekly jobless benefit claims lower than expected, dollar strength spilled over against the euro.
With the euro failing to break and hold above $1.5000 after testing that level for several days, the dollar gained rapidly across the board.
The U.S. government said jobless claims fell to 502,000 in the latest week from a revised 514,000 the prior week. The forecast was 510,000. [ID:nOAT004353] [ID:nN11377609].
"Dollar/yen perked up a little bit on the news which is no real surprise considering that jobless claims continue to fall, which is encouraging," said Omer Esiner, senior market analyst at Travelex Global Business Payments in Washington.
Investors bought dollars on bad news as a safe haven, given the U.S. taxpayer will always pay for government borrowings.
Midway through the New York session, the dollar was up 0.7 percent at 90.40 yen
The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six major currencies, was at 75.611, up 0.6 percent on the day. It was the best one-day performance since October 26, after touching a fresh 15-month low of 74.774 on Wednesday.
Dollar strength continued to build as the New York session progressed, though analysts said there was no new fundamental news to drive the momentum.
"It just looks like continuation of the (dollar) strength" after the data, said Sacha Tihanyi, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto.
But the steady pace of dollar selling in recent weeks -- on the view U.S. interest rates would remain low for some time -- remained intact analysts said, adding that Thursday's rally was little more than a consolidation, particularly given events in Asia.
With the release of the U.S. data, investors now shift their focus to a meeting of Asia-Pacific nations and other Asian regional issues, including a U.S. state visit to China next week.
Pressure on China and other Asian countries to revalue their currencies "could take away some of the upside pressure on the euro," said Marcus Hettinger, currency strategist at Credit Suisse in Zurich.
U.S. President Barack Obama visits China next week, and market participants expect currencies to be discussed. (Reporting by Nick Olivari; Editing by Andrew Hay)
