UPDATE 2-AECOM Q4 profit beats Street, shares rise
2009-11-12 13:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Engineering and design firm AECOM Technology Corp (
) posted a better-than-expected quarterly profit, partly driven by lower expenses, and said federally funded projects would drive its growth in the next two years.
AECOM, which competes with companies such as Jacobs Engineering Group (
), has about 70 percent of its projects generated from public works, the company said on a conference call with analysts.
"We view it as a positive signal that U.S. stimulus funds have begun flowing through numerous federal and state agencies and this will be an important part of our growth strategy in 2010 and 2011," Chief Executive John Dionisio said on the call.
The company, which performed 52 percent of its work outside the United States in 2009, said its is focusing on increasing its penetration of high-growth geographies such as India, China, Africa and Latin America, and enhancing its presence in the power and energy market.
General infrastructure markets in countries like Hong Kong, Canada and some portions of the Middle East are stronger and always have been versus the United States and are recovering faster and that gives the company geographical economic strength, Barclays analyst Andy Kaplowitz said.
Government funding also flows more quickly to actual projects in some of these countries, the analyst said.
For 2010, the company forecast earnings in the range of $1.90 to $2.00 a share. Analysts on average were expecting earnings of $2.02 a share, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
AECOM, which provides program and construction management services for projects like highways, bridges and mass transit systems, also said total backlog for the quarter rose 10 percent.
The majority of the growth in its backlog was organic and driven by significant increases in the water business and Asia-Pacific markets, the company said on the call.
For the fourth quarter, income from continuing operations was $54.0 million, or 48 cents a share, compared with $42.7 million, or 40 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenue was almost flat at $1.62 billion, even as the management support segment grew by 18 percent.
Analysts were expecting earnings of 46 cents a share, before special items, on revenue of $1.67 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Shares of the company were 8 percent higher at $27.50 in Thursday afternoon trading. (Reporting by Divya Sharma in Bangalore; Editing by Anil D'Silva)
