GLOBAL MARKETS-Gold at new record on wobbly dollar, stocks weak
2009-11-12 04:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Gold rose above $1,120 an ounce to a fresh record high on Thursday, the U.S. dollar hovered near 15-month lows while shares weakened, particularly in emerging markets.
"What is interesting is that we move from high to high every day (in dollar terms), but in euro terms, we're still far away from the old high," said Michael Kempinski a trader at Commerzbank.
The dollar roses slightly against a basket of major currencies .DXY, but held very close to 15-month lows.
Prospects that U.S. interest rates will remain at negligible levels for some time, have hit the currency. It is down 1.5 percent against the basket this month for a 7.4 percent slide over the year-to-date.
With a light economic data calendar on Thursday, apart from strong Australian jobs numbers that boosted the Aussie dollar to a 15-month high, the broader market was left to consolidate.
"The dollar is lower mainly because interest rates are low, so there's no support there," said Marcus Hettinger, currency strategist at Credit Suisse in Zurich.
. It had touched $1.5049 on trading platform EBS on Wednesday, within sight of the 2009 high of just above $1.5060 hit last month.
World stocks were weaker, with the MSCI all-country world index .MIWD00000PUS down 0.4 percent and the emerging market component .MSCIEF off nearly 1 percent.
Investors remain fairly bullish, however, with signs that at least parts of the world economy are gaining traction.
The Baltic Dry Freight Index .BADI, which can be a proxy for world trade patterns, rose sharply, pushed up by freight of iron ore to China.
"A 10th straight increase for the Baltic Dry and a 15-month high for AUD/USD (Australian/U.S. dollar) do not imply that sentiment is about to turn over," Kenneth Brough, an economist at Lloyds TSB, said in a note.
Euro zone government bonds yields fell as stock weakness boosted demand. (Additional reporting by Jamie McGeever, editing by Mike Peacock)
