China defense spending seen rising as territorial rows deepen
2013-03-01 07:25:00.0
(Reuters) - A series of territorial disputes with its neighbors will ensure China boosts defense spending when it reveals this year's military budget ahead of the annual parliamentary sitting next week, security experts say.
After almost three decades of sharply increased military outlays, an increasingly assertive China now has the firepower to challenge rivals claiming strategically important and resource-rich territory in the East China and South China seas.
The Chinese navy, now second in size only to the U.S. fleet in terms of raw numbers, has become a genuine blue-water force and is conducting almost continuous patrols and exercises in these contested waters.
Over the past six months, China's stand-off with Japan over a series of rocky islands in the East China Sea known as the Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu in China has become more acrimonious.
Beijing is also in dispute with the Philippines and Vietnam, as well as Taiwan, Brunei and Malaysia, over territory in the South China Sea.
To pay for these deployments and new hardware in the pipeline, most analysts expect that this year's budget will continue the long-term trend of double-digit percentage increases in annual spending.
"Estimates are still for steady growth," said Ni Lexiong, a military expert at Shanghai University of Political Science and Law.
"With China's current attitude, it's not going to let itself get bullied by anyone."
Alongside missions to assert sovereignty over disputed territory, the Chinese navy is also deploying naval flotillas to the Gulf of Aden and waters off Somalia as part of its contribution to UN-authorized anti-piracy operations in the Indian Ocean.
These high-tempo operations are a sharp departure for a military that was largely confined to exercises and training within China's land borders and coastal waters until recent years.
But they impose a new burden on a budget that had largely been devoted to the rapid modernization of military hardware including big orders for new warships, submarines, strike aircraft and missiles.
However foreign military analysts say much of China's military spending is not included in the published budget.
The Pentagon last year estimated that Beijing's real outlays for 2012 would be between $120 billion and $180 billion.
China's spending is now second only to the United States although the Pentagon is bracing for a sharp drop in outlays as part of government-wide budget cuts, known as a sequester, starting from March 1.
However, China has its own budget woes as senior political and military officials complain of rampant corruption and waste in its 2.3 billion-strong People's Liberation Army (PLA).
The PLA headquarters has issued new rules to tighten spending across a range of areas including construction, procurement, conferences and receptions in a bid to curb waste and corruption, the official Xinhua news agency reported this week.
The new rules, approved by Xi Jinping, China's Communist party leader and chairman of the Central Military Commission, were also intended to redirect spending toward combat readiness, high-technology weaponry and training, Xinhua said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Mar 01, 20138:52am EST--
The small issue with this article is the 2.3 billion troops in the PLA. China has 1.4 billion people. Did they annex India when I wasn¡¯t looking? A bigger issue is the fraud, waste, and abuse in the US military or in any military. The biggest lies are the US Department of Homeland Security, National Guard, Reserves, CIA, various intelligence agencies, and all other national defense forces not counted by the liars in the US to understate the US defense budget. China should have a 15% gain each year in its defense budget because its economy is growing four times as fast as the US and seven times as fast as the EU. China has beaten India by 2% or more each year for 30 years, and it has beaten Japan and South Korea by more substantial percentages. The point is that the change is happening, and the US and its allies should welcome the new forces that combat piracy, aid in air and sea rescues, and train to become the new merchant marine that Alfred T. Mahan said would be educated by a strong navy. In the same manner, China¡¯s military aviators and vehicle drivers will become the airline pilots, helicopter rescue pilots, and truck, train, and bus drivers for commercial and emergency vehicles. There is no way to stop this change. The only avoidance options are to lock oneself away from civilization or end life before the change comes. I do not recommend either of these. Learn to live and enjoy these people who embrace one world, many systems.
Mar 01, 20136:12pm EST--
Janeallen, I agree China has to open up and change politically. There are changes but the pace is slow compare with economic development. The problem with our leadership is too pragmatic in economy that is very essential after hundred years of chaos, but lack completely public relation skill of the west. I hope by having more social science and management trained leaders instead of engineering background as led by Xi now can turn the tide. Military is still important. The lesson of Song dynasty must not be forgotten. Yet I think defense orientated is enough. Offense approach of the USA in not necessary as it will drain the economy dry.
Mar 01, 201310:33pm EST--
