Japan PM Abe cites Thatcher reflections on Falklands war
2013-02-28 04:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, whose country is embroiled in a row with China over tiny islands, on Thursday quoted former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's reflections on the 1982 Falklands war with Argentina to stress the importance of the rule of law at sea.
"Our national interests have been immutable. They lie in making the seas, which are the foundation of our nation's existence, completely open, free and peaceful," Abe said in a wide-ranging policy speech to parliament in which he also urged Japan to seek to become "No.1" as an economic power.
Abe went on to quote a remark from Thatcher's memoirs, reflecting on the Falklands war, in which she said Britain was defending the fundamental principle that international law should prevail over the use of force.
The war over the remote South Atlantic archipelago began when Argentine troops landed on the Falkland islands on April 2, 1982, and ended 74 days later with their surrender. The conflict killed about 650 Argentine and 255 British troops.
Continuing in his own words, Abe said: "The rule of law at sea. I want to appeal to international society that in modern times changes to the status quo by the use of force will justify nothing."
Tokyo's ties with Beijing chilled sharply after the Japanese government last September bought the rocky islands in the East China Sea, which are controlled by Japan but also claimed by China, from a private owner, sparking violent protests in China.
A flare-up in tensions in the territorial row has raised fears of an unintended military incident near the islands, known as the Senkaku in Japan and the Diaoyu in China.
The United States says the islets fall under a U.S.-Japan security pact, but Washington is keen to avoid a clash in the economically vital region.
Japanese fighter jets scrambled again on Thursday after a Chinese twin-engine turboprop Y-12 aircraft came within about 100 km (62 miles) of what Tokyo considers its airspace over the islands, the defense ministry said. Three Chinese patrol ships briefly entered the disputed waters, the Japan Coast Guard said.
The hawkish Abe, who took office in December after his conservative party's big election win, reiterated in his speech that the islands are Japanese territory, and urged Beijing not to escalate tensions.
He added, however, that Sino-Japanese relations were vital for Japan and said his door was always open to dialogue.
China hit back, saying Beijing did not want to see a maritime incident but accused Japanese leaders of making provocative remarks "from time to time" and playing up the China threat to provoke a military confrontation.
"At the moment, Japan should regulate its own words and deeds, stop issuing erroneous statements, properly handle the Diaoyu islands and other issues, and take practical measures to create conditions for the improvement of bilateral relations," Chinese Defense Ministry spokesman Geng Yansheng told a news conference.
Calling the U.S. alliance the axis of Japan's diplomacy and security policies, Abe said: "It is only logical that, in the open oceans, the United States, which is the world's largest marine state, and Japan, Asia's largest maritime democracy, form a partnership, and to fortify this constantly is necessary."
(Additional reporting by Tetsushi Kajimoto and Kiyoshi Takenaka in Tokyo and Sui-Lee Wee and Michael Martina in Beijing; Editing by Ken Wills)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Great! He is pretty good at addressing the speech, He will feed us with higher pay and lower tax rate. Hopefully, we always have a rising allowance on our account. That¡¯s all.
Feb 28, 20137:09am EST--
Abe¡¯s words are misleading. firstly, Chinese will consider that it is a new beginning of the Japanese imperialism. secondly, Japan¡¯s right-wing politicians will be finally out of control, causing Japan¡¯s re-armming. thirdly, from his words, it is easy to find that Japanese underestimate China¡¯s army, overestimate their military power and the reliability of American¡¯s promises. finally, I have to say, the difference between the Falklands war and the potential Sino-Japanese war is that the whole Japan now is in the attacking range of China¡¯s missile.
Feb 28, 201310:04am EST--
@Pterosaur As I just finished telling my Brazilian friends, ¡°Hong Kong is different¡±, and the reason is that Hong Kong was a ¡®business decision¡¯ not a decision based on 600 years of ¡®colonialism¡¯ which is ¡®still¡¯ promulgated by the House of Windsor today. Please understand; China absolutely wants to overturn the decisions of Western mapmakers, huh? Try making ¡®her majesty¡¯ give up Diego Garcia. My friend, that would be a game-changer LMAO, ¡­and a nuclear flash point, right? There is no corner of the world where the British ¡®maps¡¯ are not contested. India wants their ¡®crown jewels¡¯ returned. Argentina wants their Malvinas Islands, the Kurds just want a home, ¡­and the Palestinians are still ¡®serfs¡¯ because of the Anglo-American Pact with Israel as a permanent Jewish outpost for further imperialism.(see Israel¡¯s activities now in North Africa. Conveniently forgeting their ¡°nuclear proliferation¡± with the former racist South African regimes). Abe now puts the Japanese fully in the embrace of the Empire. ¡°Any¡± attack on Japanese sovereignty will be considered an attack against the ¡®interests¡¯ of Western hegemony. What the hell do you think that shiny new army, AFRICOM is for? Without those African ¡®resources¡¯ Europeans would be paupers. So, there is going to be some -triangulation- between China¡¯s African investments/interests, the Islamic hordes decending for the Middle-East, and Americas ¡®cash crunch¡¯ and propensity to use guns instead of ¡®sense¡¯. Guns being preferable since; http://goo.gl/22xFS Sadly for the African people, just like the Vietnamese, Iraqis, Afghanis, and others through the pantheon of history, ¡­they are just ¡®collateral damages¡¯ on the front-lines of Western Imperialism. So, Mr. Abe(i.e. Japan, Inc), your desperation may lead the Japanese into some unpleasant waters(vestiges of colonialism), yet I am mindful that Japan is an island which has dealt admirably with rough seas before.
Feb 28, 201311:46am EST--
