UPDATE 3-Best Buy int'l head to go, but expansion to go on
2009-11-11 14:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Top U.S. electronics chain Best Buy Co Inc (
) said it was committed to its expansion plans in Europe, amid speculation that it might put its store opening plans in the region on ice as its international chief retires.
On Wednesday, Best Buy said Robert Willett would retire at the end of the year and it did not plan to name a successor.
In an e-mail to Reuters, Best Buy spokeswoman Lisa Svac Hawks said Willett's retirement did not alter the company's plans for Europe and it would open 5 stores in Britain in 2010. The first store is scheduled to start up in spring.
The company -- with stores in the United States, Canada, China and Mexico, and some operations but no Best Buy stores in Europe -- said it is still committed to its global growth strategy, even without an international head.
CEO Brian Dunn is working with Willett, 63, on a smooth transition, the company said.
Best Buy, which went beyond domestic markets with the acquisition of Canada's leading consumer electronics retailer Future Shop in 2001, said it is confident in the abilities of the local leaders and teams in countries where it operates.
Earlier on Wednesday, Anthony Chukumba at FTN Equity Capital Markets wondered whether Willett's retirement signaled a possible change in Best Buy's plans to open stores in Britain.
"Bob was sort of spearheading that effort," Chukumba said by phone, adding that the retailer had delayed the store openings at least once already.
The relationship culminated in a new venture in 2008, when Best Buy bought a 50-percent interest in the European mobile phone retailer's retail and distribution business with an aim of introducing Best Buy stores in select European markets, beginning in the spring of 2010.
Chukumba said if the retirement actually meant changes to Best Buy's European plans, it was "a good thing," citing the checkered history of U.S. retailers that have opened and operated stores in Europe.
On an older video posted on Best Buy's website to explain why the retailer decided to expand globally, Willett said, among other things: "If you work internationally, it adds a completely new dimension to your experience that you bring back to the mothership and you do a better job here."
Separately, Best Buy said it is starting to sell health and exercise equipment in some of its U.S. stores as it looks beyond electronics equipment for growth. [ID:nN11365738]
In afternoon New York Stock Exchange trading, Best Buy shares were off 1 cent to $42.23. (Reporting by Jessica Wohl and Dhanya Skariachan; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Tim Dobbyn)
