Mexico stocks jump to 17-month high, peso gains
2009-11-11 17:24:00.0
(Reuters) - Mexico's peso firmed on Wednesday and stocks rose to their highest in 17 months as surprisingly strong economic data from China bolstered confidence in a global recovery, boding well for Mexico's exports.
Comments from U.S. Federal Reserve officials worried about a sluggish recovery also suggested that U.S. interest rates will remain near zero for some time, emboldening investors to buy riskier, but higher-yielding assets.
rose 1.01 percent to 31,097.64 points, its highest close since June 6, 2008, boosted by a nearly 2 percent gain in top retailer Wal-Mart de Mexico (
), which closed at an all-time high of 50.95 pesos.
Concerns of a possible Mexico debt downgrade have weighed on the peso, making it lag the rally seen in other emerging market currencies. But traders said the peso could firm further in coming sessions on the back of renewed global appetite for riskier assets.
"With stock markets positive and the euro at its levels, the peso still has more room to go," said Enrique Trejo, head of currency trading at IXE brokerage firm in Mexico City.
Traders said clear signs from Fed officials that U.S. rates will remain at rock bottom for an extended period would keep pushing investors to seek higher-yielding assets. For details, see [ID:nN10315173]
Wall Street credit ratings agencies could downgrade the country's debt ratings after lawmakers watered down a proposal to reduce the government's dependence on taxes from declining oil output.
But agencies have said they will wait until after lawmakers pass the spending side of the 2010 budget, which is expected by this weekend, before issuing any decision.
"Probably withing two to three weeks from now we will have some decision from the ratings agencies and we will see a new inflection point, either higher or lower," said Daniela Blancas, a strategist at Scotia Inverlat.
Stocks rose after data in China showed factory output growth surged to a 19-month high in October, boosting optimism in companies likely to benefit from a global rebound in production. [ID:nPEK212006]
) gained 1.68 percent to 29.64 pesos, while cement maker Cemex (
