FOREX-Dlr near lows, Aussie hits 15-mth high after data
2009-11-11 22:11:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar was on slippery ground on Thursday after the Australian dollar jumped to a 15-month high on strong jobs data, boosting expectations of an interest rate hike next month.
High-yielding currencies such as the Australian and New Zealand dollars were also buoyed by firm commodity prices like gold, which hit a record high for the second straight day. [GOL/]
The euro and yen crosses were lifted after gains in the Aussie, but sterling was under pressure following comments on its weakness by the Bank of England governor.
The dollar index .DXY, a gauge of the greenback's performance against six major currencies, was at 74.996, down 0.2 percent on the day. The index on Wednesday hit a fresh 15-month low of 74.774.
"The euro so far has failed to rise well above $1.5000 and stay in higher ranges. So the dollar index, with the euro being the biggest component, may hold from further falls," said Ayako Sera, market strategist at Sumitomo Trust & Banking.
, having risen as far as $1.5049 on trading platform EBS the previous day.
The Aussie surged after stronger than expected Australian employment data for October, fuelling bets for another interest rate hike by the Reserve Bank of Australia in December. [ID:nSYD490561] [ID:nSYD474270]
"It certainly counts toward another rise of 25 basis points in December. The Reserve Bank will surely be keen to remove more of this emergency stimulus," said Felicity Emmett, senior economist at RBS.
, its highest since August 2008.
, having tumbled more than 1 percent on Wednesday when Bank of England Governor Mervyn King said pound weakness would help British exporters and aid economic recovery.[ID:nLB169687]
King was speaking after the release of the bank's quarterly Inflation Report, which showed UK inflation would be below its 2 percent target in two years.
"The comments from (BoE governor) King yesterday reminded the market that the UK is one of the ailing economies among developed countries, and the pound may have more room to fall," said Kazuyuki Takami, senior manager at the foreign exchange trading department at the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ.
Dealers said they were watching further developments after China said it would consider using a basket of currencies, not just the dollar, in guiding the exchange rate of the Chinese yuan
, its clearest signal yet that it was close to letting the yuan appreciate after an 18-month hiatus. [ID:nSP466424]
