FTSE closes higher; miners shine after China data
2009-11-11 00:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index closed higher on Wednesday, as risk appetite received a boost after reassuring signals on the UK economy, and with miners the biggest gainers after a jump in Chinese factory growth.
ended 36.20 points higher, or 0.7 percent, at 5,266.75, having touched a high of 5,301.14 earlier in the session, a level not reached since September 2008.
"On the whole the market has reacted well to some quite optimistic comments from the Bank of England inflation report," said Angus Campbell, head of sales at Capital Spreads.
"They seem to think that a V-shaped recovery is very much underway and we won't dip back into recession," he said.
UK unemployment numbers were also welcomed. The number of Britons claiming jobless benefit in October rose by its smallest amount in 18 months, while the number of people in work rose for the first time in over a year, official data showed. [ID:nLB152848]
Miners shone, with investors heartened by data from China where factory output jumped to a 19-month high in October, and as the weak dollar buoyed metals prices.
), up 6.1 percent, hit an all-time peak and rebound from a dip after Tuesday's announcement of lower-than-expected quarterly profit.
), Rio Tinto (
), Lonmin (
), Antofagasta (
The Bank of England said in its quarterly Inflation Report that inflation would be below target in two years' time if interest rates rise gradually from the middle of next year as financial markets expect.
However overall the Monetary Policy Committee saw broadly balanced risks of inflation being above or below their 2 percent target by late 2011, suggesting little immediate need for more quantitative easing. [ID:nBOE002097]
Upbeat UK economic news gave banks, often beneficiaries of improved risk appetite, a shot in the arm.
) put on 0.9 percent, extending Tuesday's gain following its third-quarter update, while Standard Chartered (
) added 1.3 percent and 4.7 percent, respectively.
), however, extended losses made the previous session after its update, shedding 0.7 percent, and Royal Bank of Scotland (
), up 3.7 percent, with UBS, Morgan Stanley and Citigroup all raising their price targets for the UK fund firm after its update on Tuesday.
) rose 3.2 percent as the grocer posted a forecast-beating 19 percent rise in first-half profit and said it saw signs of a pick-up in spending, though industry growth would be curbed by lower food price inflation. [ID:nLA671889]
) gained 5.5 percent. European insurance regulators have indicated they could be open to altering rules for annuity providers that, in their present form, could force UK insurers to raise 50 billion pounds ($84 billion) of capital.
), boosted by a Morgan Stanley target price hike, rose 1.9 percent.
Among individual fallers, Reed Elsevier (
