RPT-WRAPUP 1-China commodity output surges but imports lag
2009-11-11 06:05:00.0
(Reuters) - China's production of metals, fuel and power stayed at record levels last month as industrial output hit a 19-month high, but falling imports of copper and iron ore fuelled doubts whether it really needed so much material.
As so often in the past year, calendar-related blips in the data and the inexact influence of China's huge stockpiles have obscured the true picture of demand for each commodity, making it hard to judge if China's growth is solid or hollow.
At least production seemed to rocket from last October: power generation up 17 percent, its fastest rise in 19 months; steel volumes up 42 percent; copper production up 28 percent; output of naphtha, a chemical feedstock, up 37 percent.
But the figures released on Wednesday were flattered by comparisons with last year's slump, when the global financial crisis first took a bite out of China's economic miracle.
Still, Chinese production of many of the ingredients demanded by its economy -- reinforcing steel bars for construction, diesel for transport, copper and aluminium for manufacturing -- scaled new heights this year, and output rates barely fell in October.
The country's leading flat steel producers, Baosteel (
), have raised their prices for December sales, sources said on Wednesday, which analysts said could also point to a robust industrial economy.
"The data are expected to remain strong in the rest of the year, as the steel mills are still enjoying marginal profits, so they are not likely to cut production, supporting ore demand," said Hu Kai at industry consultancy Custeel.
However, the picture of strong Chinese demand was not backed up in the roster of October's imports issued by China's Customs office. Shipments of iron ore and copper both slid by around a third from September, raising fears that China's appetite might be ebbing. Aluminium imports more than halved.
Steel production has been running far ahead of demand this year, according to China's steel industry association, with output hitting an annualised level of more than 600 million tonnes for the past three months, up 20 percent from 2008.
But the threat of steel oversupply was slightly eroded by a modest 10 percent rise in exports of steel products, although at 2.71 million tonnes that was still 41 percent below last October.
For copper, many analysts blamed the import slowdown on China's high stocks and the closure of arbitrage -- buying from the London Metal Exchange and selling in the domestic market -- not only discouraged spot purchases but also prompted merchants to delay contracted shipments.
"Given the perception that China will continue to drive metals demand for some time, these kind of numbers are slightly worrying," said Darren Heathcote at Investec Bank in Australia.
"We've already got some pretty high stock levels out there, so this is likely to cause a bit of a stir today," he added.
The fall in imports might easily be put down to China's eight-day holiday at the start of October, a factor originally expected to weaken September's trade figures, which turned out to be surprisingly strong.
But there was little change in congestion or stockpiles at China's iron ore ports over the period, according to data from Chinica Shipbrokers in Shanghai, and there was no import slowdown in crude oil shipments, which rose 12 percent on the month. GRAPHICS: > Copper:
(Additional reporting by Coco Li, Alfred Cang, Niu Shuping, Rujun Shen and Jim Bai; Editing by Sambit Mohanty and Clarence Fernandez)
