FOREX-Dollar hits 15-mth low, sterling falls on BoE
2009-11-11 07:45:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar extended its recent decline to a 15-month low against the major currencies on Wednesday, hurt by a mixture of downbeat official views on its home economy and bullish signs for Asia and risk appetite.
Federal Reserve officials on Tuesday [ID:nN10315173] said any recovery in the U.S. economy would be erratic, bolstering the view that interest rates would stay low and undermining the dollar from the start of European trading.
Sterling fell broadly, stung after Bank of England Governor Mervyn King said weakness in the currency would help UK exporters and aid Britain's recovery from recession.
Despite its gains versus the pound, the dollar index hit 74.774, its lowest since August 2008, also hurt by strong Chinese economic data that boosted shares and spurred investors' appetite for risk -- generally a negative trend for the dollar.
"It's a continuation of the theme where the view for loose U.S. (interest rate) policy for longer is weighing on the dollar," said Paul Robson, strategist at RBS in London.
By 1225 GMT, the dollar index .DXY traded 0.2 percent lower on the day at 74.872.
was up 0.4 percent at $1.5040, close to the day's high of $1.5048, according to Reuters data.
was down half a percent on the day at $1.6650, having earlier fallen around a cent and a half to the day's low of $1.6635 as the BoE governor emphasised the need for the UK economy to rebalance away from imports to exports, and that a weaker pound would help achieve this. [ID:nKING]
King spoke after the central bank issued its quarterly inflation report, which said UK inflation would be below target in two years' time if interest rates rose gradually from mid-2010, as expected by the market [ID:nBOE002097]
"Most importantly, he refused to rule out an end to quantitative easing and said there's no limit at all on the program," UBS currency strategists said of the BoE governor.
"Clearly King favours a weak pound and we still hold the view that policy uncertainty may restrict sterling's expected gains based on valuation adjustments," they added.
climbed 1 percent on the day, taking a cue from a rise in Asian stocks on the back of strong Chinese manufacturing data which showed the export-driven economy was maintaining its recovery. [ID:nPEK212006]
That also helped prod the high-yielding Australian dollar to a 15-month high against the U.S. dollar, whose safe-haven appeal tends to diminish when risk demand rises.
, having earlier traded at $0.9345, its highest since August 2008. The commodity currency was also boosted after gold prices rallied to a record high .XAU, while oil prices rose.
Currencies including the Australian dollar have been rising against the U.S. currency, which has been stung by expectations for low rates while those in Australia and elsewhere rise, increasing the returns on their assets.
, marking a departure from past language on the currency, which is pegged to the dollar.
