UK and China data boost FTSE to 13-month high
2009-11-11 07:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's FTSE 100 touched a 13-month high on Wednesday as miners led a broad-based rally, lifted by data showing a surge in China's factory output which pushed up metal prices.
was 61.38 points higher at 5291.93, just off a high of 5,300.28, a peak since late September 2008, touched earlier in the session. It closed 0.1 percent lower on Tuesday, ending a four-session winning run.
Data from China, where factory output jumped to a 19-month high in October, underpinned a mining sector rally.
) climbed 5.9 percent, bouncing back from a dip following Tuesday's announcement of lower-than-expected quarterly profit to an all-time high as the gold XAU= price rallied.
), Xstrata XTA.L, Lonmin (
), Anglo American (
), Kazakhmys (
"The figures make for at least relatively cheerful reading," said Philip Shaw, chief economist at Investec.
"On the face of it, it would suggest that there is a process of a stabilisation in the labour market which is in train, which in turn implies some sort of recovery in the economy," he said.
Banks were also in demand as investor risk appetite returned, with HSBC (
) up 1.6 percent, extending Tuesday's gain following it third-quarter update, while Barclays (
) recovered 0.5 percent of the previous session's sell-off.
The Bank of England's latest quarterly inflation report showed broadly balanced risks of inflation being above or below the 2011 target of 2 percent, and there is little immediate need for more quantitative easing. [ID:nBOE002097]
"There is extremely loose monetary policy, macro data is improving and we still have the potential for fund flows back into equities and, until this changes, there's no reason for a pull-back in equities," said Lars Kreckel, equity strategist at Exane BNP Paribas.
) was a big FTSE riser, up 5.1 percent, as UBD, Morgan Stanley and Citigroup all raised their price target following the UK fund firm's update on Tuesday.
) gained 5 percent, as one of the most equity-exposed stocks of the sector was lifted by optimism on the market and a two-week high in the FTSE bluechip index.
) added 3.6 and 3.1 percent while the UK's Prudential (
) added 2.9 percent after the supermarket group's first-half profits beat expectations. [ID:nLA671889]
) fell 2 percent, however, after it maintains guidance for its full-year after posting first-half results.
Among individual fallers, Reed Elsevier (
