Q+A: U.S. base feud hits nerve ahead of Obama visit
2009-11-10 08:08:00.0
(Reuters) - A feud over plans to relocate a U.S. military base on Japan's Okinawa island as part of a broad reorganization of U.S. troops has strained Washington's ties with Tokyo ahead of President Barack Obama's visit this week.
The row coincides with deepening questions about how China's rising military and economic clout will reshape the decades-old U.S.-Japan alliance, long seen as vital to regional security.
WHY CLOSE THE FUTENMA BASE AND REPLACE IT?
Residents of Okinawa, 1,600 km (1,000 miles) south of Tokyo and reluctant host to about half the 47,000 U.S. military personnel in Japan, have long resented what they see as an unfair burden in maintaining the U.S.-Japan security alliance.
The concentration of U.S. bases on Okinawa, a major U.S. military forward logistics base in the western Pacific, is a legacy of America's occupation of the island from 1945 to 1972.
Many locals associate the bases with crime, noise, pollution and accidents, and outrage flares periodically -- most strikingly after the 1995 rape of a schoolgirl by three U.S. servicemen.
As part of a 1996 pact to reduce the U.S. military presence, the United States and Japan agreed to close Futenma Air Station, home to about 4,000 Marines and located in crowded Ginowan City, within seven years if a replacement could be found in Okinawa.
IS THIS JUST ABOUT FUTENMA?
No. The issue is much broader. Washington and Tokyo agreed in 2006 on a "road map" to transform the decades-old alliance, the pillar of Japan's post-World War Two security policies.
Part of a U.S. effort to make its military more flexible globally, the realignment fit efforts by Japan's then-ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) to shed the constraints of its postwar pacifist constitution and assume a higher global security profile.
Central to the pact was a plan to reorganize U.S. troops in Japan, including a shift of about 8,000 Marines by 2014 to the U.S. territory of Guam from Okinawa. The Marines' move, however, depends on finding a replacement site for Futenma.
While Futenma and the Marines' move grab most headlines in Japan, a package of steps to improve U.S.-Japan military cooperation in areas such as missile defense is equally vital.
WHY IS THIS DISPUTE FLARING NOW?
Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama's Democratic Party of Japan, which took power in September, promised in the campaign leading up to its election victory in August that it would review the realignment pact as well as the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) governing the U.S. military in Japan. Hatoyama had said moving Futenma's functions off Okinawa was best.
More broadly, the Democrats have promised to adopt a diplomatic stance less subservient to its close security ally Washington, a shift from the long-dominant LDP, which was defeated in the election.
Anxiety is being exacerbated by questions about the overall future of the five-decade-old U.S.-Japan alliance as both face the challenge of China's rising economic and military might.
Some in Japan fear Washington will cozy up to Beijing, while some in the United States worry Tokyo is tilting toward Asia by promoting the idea of an East Asia Community trading bloc.
CAN A CRISIS BE AVOIDED?
Hatoyama says he wants a deal that will take into account the feelings of Okinawans, but Tokyo will need to convince Washington it doesn't plan to delay too long.
The United States is unlikely to agree to reopen talks given its firm public rejection of that option and Obama's need to focus on other pressing issues such as the war in Afghanistan.
Japan might eventually agree to the current plan as is, or with slight modifications, but bowing to U.S. demands could cause a rift with two tiny coalition partners whose backing is needed to pass laws smoothly, as well as within the Democratic Party.
Appearing to dither or to endanger the U.S.-Japan alliance could undermine Hatoyama's public support, but caving in suddenly to U.S. pressure could also alienate some voters.
A recent media poll found 70 percent of Okinawa residents wanted Futenma moved off the island, but a survey published in the Yomiuri newspaper on Tuesday showed the rest of the country was less concerned.
About 63 percent of respondents said the deal should go ahead as it is or with minor changes, while only 19 percent said they wanted a major rethink.
WILL THIS AFFECT ECONOMIC TIES?
Few analysts expect bilateral strains to spill over into trade and investment ties between the world's two biggest economies, and financial markets have taken the row in their stride even as market players express concern.
But damage to U.S.-Japan ties could spell geopolitical uncertainty in a region home to a rising China and an unpredictable North Korea, eventually affecting investment flows.
