UPDATE 2-Arkema has small Q3 loss, sees more cash flow
2009-11-10 07:09:00.0
(Reuters) - French specialty chemicals maker Arkema (
Arkema -- which develops products for ski shoes, tractor roofs and air conditioning -- raised its goal of making free cash flow of about 140 million euros ($210 million) this year from about 80 million after achieving 206 million end September.
"Our message for 2010 is one of confidence, caution and ambition," Chairman and Chief Executive Thierry Le Henaff said at a conference call, declining to give a more specific outlook.
While demand in Asia, representing 18 percent of sales, kept its "good momentum", uncertainties lingered over Europe and North America, Arkema said, expecting customers there to continue to carefully manage their stock at the end of the year.
"The group's positioning -- limited exposure to emerging countries and considerable exposure to vinyl products -- continues to limit visibility on earnings," Oddo Securities analysts said in a research note, rating the stock "reduce".
They praised the company's free cash flow generation and said third-quarter earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation of 101 million euros were above consensus.
It made a net loss of 3 million euros in the third quarter, which it blamed on a tax charge of 27 million, and the loss was an improvement from 114 million in the previous quarter.
Continued restructuring efforts, product launches, growth in China and improved demand from clients should benefit the Arkema, Le Henaff said, but "we are awaiting how quickly Europe and the U.S. will recover".
In most of its end-markets the crisis-related drain on inventories had come to an end particularly in Europe's car and construction sectors.
Arkema's comments echoed those of other chemical groups like domestic rival Rhodia RHA.PA and Switzerland's Clariant (
) which have been focusing on generating free cash flow, and forced to cut costs, reorganise or close plants to adapt to a drop in demand and pinning hopes for growth on emerging markets.
Arkema's cost savings target of 170 million euros this year is part of a plan to save 600 million euros from 2006 to 2010. Net debt diminished 136 million euros from end last year to 359 million at the end of September.
Sales reached 1.1 billion euros in the quarter, with volumes down 13.4 percent against 18 percent in the second quarter and 27 percent in the first three months of 2009. ($1=.6678 Euro) (Additional reporting by Blaise Robinson; Editing by Jon Loades-Carter)
