Obama may go to Copenhagen to clinch deal
2009-11-09 18:33:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. President Barack Obama said on Monday he would travel to Copenhagen next month if a climate summit is on the verge of a framework deal and his presence there will make a difference in clinching it.
It was Obama's strongest statement yet he may go to Denmark in mid-December to help secure a new global compact in the fight against climate change, a process clouded by disputes between rich countries and big developing nations.
"If I am confident that all of the countries involved are bargaining in good faith and we are on the brink of a meaningful agreement and my presence in Copenhagen will make a difference in tipping us over edge, then certainly that's something that I will do," Obama told Reuters in an interview.
Obama, who has faced resistance from opposition Republicans and even some fellow Democrats to setting caps on greenhouse gas emissions, acknowledged that the U.S. Senate would not pass climate change legislation before Copenhagen.
"I think the question is can we create a set of principles, building blocks, that allow for ongoing and continuing progress on the issue and that's something I'm confident we can achieve," he said.
"The key now is for the United States and China, the two largest emitters in the world, is to be able to come up with a framework that, along with other big emitters like the Europeans and those countries that are projected to be large emitters in the future, like India, can all buy into," he said.
"I remain optimistic that between now and Copenhagen that we can arrive at that framework," he added.
U.S. failure to present its own official target for cutting carbon emissions by the December deadline may dent confidence in its power to ever deliver, despite Obama's strong commitment to the battle against climate change compared to his predecessor, George W. Bush.
Seeking to assuage such concerns, Obama said: "In meeting with world leaders, I've repeatedly explained that America is not a speedboat. We're a big ocean liner. And you can't reverse course overnight."
"What we can do and what we are doing is, I think, changing the trajectory on how we approach this issue both in terms of public opinion, attitude on Capitol Hill and certainly among businesses who really understand that for America to lead on this issue ultimately will create an enormous amount of benefits," he said.
