As nations haggle over CO2 cuts, measurement is tough
2009-11-09 14:36:00.0
As nations haggle over CO2 cuts, measurement is tough | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
As nations haggle over CO2 cuts, measurement is tough
Mon, Nov 9 2009
Mon, Nov 9 2009
Mon, Nov 9 2009
Mon, Nov 9 2009
Sat, Nov 7 2009
By David Fogarty, Climate Change Correspondent, Asia - Analysis
By David Fogarty, Climate Change Correspondent, Asia - Analysis
Mon  EST
The bigger the pledged emissions cuts or reductions in growth in carbon dioxide pollution, the greater the need to prove nations meet those targets and curb the pace of climate change.
The problem, though, is that it is not yet possible to independently monitor a country's greenhouse gas emissions, such as carbon dioxide (CO2) from burning fossil fuels or deforestation.
"Our system is not good enough right now to be able finger one country versus another. I think the density of observations needs to be cranked up two orders of magnitude," said Pieter Tans of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in Boulder, Colorado.
Rich nations, he said, weren't going to hand over possibly hundreds of billions of dollars to poorer nations to help green their economies purely on trust.
Which is why measurement, reporting and auditing of nations' greenhouse gas emissions is a key focus of marathon U.N. climate talks. The world body hopes the negotiations will lead to agreement on a tougher climate pact from 2013 during a meeting in Copenhagen next month.
Big developing nations are also under pressure to curb the pace of their emissions growth. China, India, Indonesia and Brazil are among the world's top carbon polluters.
"If there's no objective system to check lines of success, people are going to claim more than they can deliver. It's natural," said Tans, of NOAA's Earth Systems Research Laboratory.
Rich nations such as Australia and the United States have developed reliable reporting methods on energy use and fossil fuel emissions, said Pep Canadell of the Global Carbon Project. Accuracy for developing countries was often not as good.
"You have huge variability. And of course the issue is let's check on some of the developing countries. That's where it gets the most difficult because the reporting is not that accurate," he said, adding that until recently, China's emissions from burning coal, oil and gas were under-reported by 20 percent.
If CO2 rises to 450ppm, the U.N. climate panel says the planet is likely to warm by at least two degrees Celsius.
Dozens of countries also send greenhouse gas measurement data to the World Meteorological Agency's World Data Center for Greenhouse Gases. Such measurements can give annual and seasonal pictures of carbon emissions.
Trees and oceans soak up CO2, while burning or rotting vegetation can release it. Winds distribute the gas around the globe, and how this occurs is still not fully understood and is only poorly simulated in complex computer models.
"It's seemed to me for a long time that there's been a huge disconnect between the types of emissions trading and associated verification that might be necessary, that's being considered, and what we can actually measure," said Britton Stephens of the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder.
"People have wondered where the CO2 that we're emitting is going and we've been able to tell that in rough numbers that half is staying in the atmosphere. Of the half that is leaving the atmosphere, half of that is going to the terrestrial land plants and the other half is ending up in the oceans," he said.
(For related factbox, click on: [ID:nSP511108]
Because CO2 is shifted around by the atmosphere, scientists need powerful computers to simulate the movement of air around the globe and to crunch all the data from an army of CO2 monitoring sites on the ground, in the air, and in space.
More accurate measurement and models, which for example could show how much CO2 is absorbed by forests and oceans, could give investors more confidence when putting money into large carbon offset schemes.
Computer models, though, were years away from proving accurate. "As everyone knows from complaining about weather forecasts, the atmospheric models are far from perfect," Stephens said.
Current carbon measurement techniques are complex and time-consuming, although a new generation of measuring equipment using lasers promises much faster and more accurate results and could form the backbone of a greatly enhanced global system.
Fossil fuels, being buried underground for millions of years, are free of very rare carbon-14 isotopes so it is relatively easy to track emissions from burning oil and coal in the atmosphere by analyzing air samples. New instruments are also set to make this even easier.
Better and more accurate satellite-based measurements are another key part of the puzzle. At present, only Japan's GOSAT measures CO2 from space, giving data on the gas's concentrations in a narrow column of air.
But the readings can't accurately reveal the CO2 concentration at the surface where the gas is produced and partially absorbed, nor how the winds are shifting it around.
"I think satellites have a chance of being extremely useful only if we have quite an extensive system of both ground based and in-situ measurements through the atmosphere," said Tans of
Remote sensing of forests via satellites was also crucial, said Canadell.
Calculating exactly how much CO2 and other greenhouse gases, such as methane, are released when forests burn or are cleared is critical but this, too, remains an imprecise science.
For example, a study published this month in Nature Geoscience says deforestation is responsible for 12 percent of mankind's total greenhouse gas emissions, instead of previous U.N. estimates of about 17 percent. But the authors note the figure will vary from year to year.
"We don't have a system yet which we're reporting annually exactly what's happening with deforestation and degradation. Second, we have little information on these forests of how much carbon there is. What's the biomass of these forests?"
"It's not just giving money away making sure people are doing the right thing," he said referring to steps to cut emissions.
"It's just we're committing a lot domestically and I want make sure the rest of the folks are doing the same. Otherwise, I'm putting myself at a disadvantage."
