AXA targets Asia growth in spite of China snag
2009-11-09 13:11:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Mon, Nov 9 2009
A seagull is seen in front of the Australian insurer AXA Asia Pacific Holdings building in central Sydney November 9, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Daniel Munoz
Mon  EST
) sought full control of its majority-owned Asian arm to get a tighter grip on the region's booming markets and stuck with plans to grow in China despite regulatory obstacles there.
The insurance market in Asia is growing faster than Europe and the United States, with Ping An Insurance (
As part of its strategy to grow in Asia, AXA announced a two-stage deal on Monday to ultimately acquire full control of AXA Asia Pacific's AXA.AX most lucrative Asian operations.
First, AXA's regional Australian partner AMP (
) will buy all of AXA Asia Pacific, including the 54 percent owned by parent AXA, in a deal valuing the target at about $10.3 billion.
AMP will then sell most of the business to AXA for about $7 billion, while keeping the Australian and New Zealand units. AXA said the deal would result in it making a net cash payment of 1.1 billion euros ($1.65 billion) for the Asian parts of AXA Asia Pacific.
AXA Asia Pacific rejected the proposal, saying it undervalued the business, but analysts said it was likely the parties involved would find an agreement.
AXA Chief Executive Henri de Castries said he was ready for further talks. "Our offer is a reasonable one, and we are always ready to talk," he told reporters.
"AXA Asia Pacific is one of the jewels in the crown and it's a very good idea to buy out the minority shareholdings," said Girard-Tokay, whose firm owns AXA shares.
The rights issue was set as a 1-for-12 issue at a price of 11.90 euros -- a discount of around 30 percent to AXA's closing share price on Friday of 16.88 euros. AXA shares closed up 0.4 percent at 16.95 euros.
AXA said the cash could also fund acquisitions in other fast-growing areas, such as central and eastern Europe where AXA also plans to acquire full control of some local subsidiaries.
"AXA's exposure to fast-growing markets is weak," CM-CIC Securities said in a research note. "This deal, along with others made possible by the rights issue, will help AXA significantly increase its market share," added CM-CIC.
AXA will get more cash from selling 15.6 percent of Taikang, China's fourth-biggest life insurer [ID:nHKGH157023].
Sources told Reuters on Monday that the stake had attracted foreign and domestic bidders, including Temasek TEM.UL, Blackstone (
) KKR KKR.UL and Chinese firms, valuing the holding at more than $1 billion.
In China, AXA also has AXA-Minmetals Assurance Co Ltd, a 51/49 percent joint venture between it and state-owned China Minmetals Group, and AXA plans to invest more in AXA-Minmetals to expand its Chinese insurance coverage, sources told Reuters.
AXA's de Castries said there was no contradiction between the company's planned sale of its Taikang stake and its broader strategy of growing in China.
"The fact that we are selling out of Taikang does not mean that our appetite for the Chinese market has diminished," said de Castries.
AXA's expansion in Asia comes as financial firms plan for a wave of consolidation in a recovery from the credit crisis.
Germany's Allianz (
), which ranks alongside AXA as Europe's top insurer, on Monday posted forecast-beating quarterly earnings but warned that economic weakness was still affecting demand.
The underwriters on AXA's rights issue are being paid 1.9 percent, or about 38 million euros, a person familiar with the matter said.
) are advisers on the deal and each is underwriting a quarter of the rights issue, or 500 million euros. Deutsche Bank (
), Societe Generale (
) and Credit Agricole's Calyon (
(Additional reporting by Sudip Kar-Gupta; Editing by Andrew Callus and Simon Jessop)
