INTERVIEW-Avnet says revenue to bounce back in Q2
2009-11-09 00:16:00.0
(Reuters) - Technology distributor Avnet Inc (
) is looking to an year-over-year growth in revenue in the December quarter as end-demand for IT products appears to be gradually improving, its chief executive said.
After several quarters of dismal sales, the rate of decline in revenue seems to be slowing. The last time the company, which distributes electronic components and computer products, saw a year-over-year revenue growth was in the quarter ending Sept. 27, 2008.
"While we've come off the bottom sequentially, we think revenue is going to further improve and there is a potential that we could cross year-over-year growth in the December
(second) quarter," Chief Executive Roy Vallee said.
Last week, when Avnet reported first-quarter results, it forecast revenue of $4.10 billion to $4.70 billion for the December quarter. It posted revenue of $4.3 billion in the year-ago second quarter.
Analysts say Avnet, Arrow Electronics Inc (
For the December quarter, Vallee said Avnet should see normal seasonality in its IT business.
However, the components space is seeing better-than-normal seasonality due to supply chain adjustments, especially in the western region, which is driving component demand to be greater than end-demand.
Visibility on end-demand still remains hazy, he said. "As we get out into the March quarter, we will get a better picture of what the end-demand is and what supply looks like that time," he said.
"Servers in data centers, almost all, carry maintenance contracts and these contracts get increasingly expensive after the servers are about three years old. So I think there's going to be a server refresh cycle beginning in 2010 and Avnet will benefit very specifically from that," the chief executive said.
The benefits should play out in the first quarter of 2010, he added.
Phoenix, Arizona-based Avnet expects year-over-year revenue in its high-margin markets of North America and Europe to rebound in the March (third) quarter.
Americas contributed about 44 percent to the company's revenue last quarter, while Europe, the Middle East and Africa
Avnet, which has made only one acquisition so far this year, said it had been "conservative" given the weak environment, but will step up M&A activity to levels seen in 2007 and 2008.
A $16 billion-company by global revenue, Avnet made nine acquisitions in 2007 and seven in 2008.
"We do have an active pipeline and we are working on multiple transactions," Vallee said.
The company is looking at all three regions -- North America, Europe and Asia -- with priority on Asia and other emerging markets for acquisitions.
Avnet has seen fastest growth in Asia, with revenue from the region increasing from 18 percent in the last quarter to 25 percent in the first quarter.
"Asia is desirable because of the economic growth rates; we would look to continue to get bigger in both India and China," Vallee said.
Shares of the company, which have more than doubled from their 52-week lows in November last year, were trading up 2 percent at $26.94 midday Monday on the New York Stock Exchange.
(Reporting by Mansi Dutta in Bangalore; Editing by Unnikrishnan Nair)
((mansi.dutta@thomsonreuters.com; within U.S. +1 646 223 8780; outside U.S. +91 80 4135 5800; Reuters Messaging:mansi.dutta.thomsonreuters.com@reuters.net)) Keywords: AVNET/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nWNAB3113
