UK urges G20 to consider bank levy
2009-11-08 01:25:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Sun, Nov 8 2009
Sun, Nov 8 2009
Sun, Nov 8 2009
Sat, Nov 7 2009
Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin (R) poses with his G20 colleagues and central bank leaders during the family photo at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting at a hotel in St. Andrews, Scotland November 7, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Simon Dawson/Pool
ST ANDREWS, Scotland
Sun  EST
ST ANDREWS, Scotland
Meeting for the third time this year, Group of 20 finance ministers and central bankers made little progress on a deal on the cost of climate change after heated exchanges that did not bode well for next month's environmental summit in Copenhagen.
They did, however, launch a new framework aimed at rebalancing the global economy, committing to present detailed economic plans for each other to check by the end of January 2010 to ensure better policy coordination.
"We are not out of the woods yet," British chancellor and meeting host Alistair Darling said when the meeting ended.
While most of the conclusions had been widely expected, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown produced the day's biggest surprise, saying there was an urgent need for the G20 to look at existing proposals to impose a levy on financial institutions.
"We should discuss whether we need a better economic and social contract to reflect the global responsibilities of financial institutions to society," Brown said.
The International Monetary Fund is already looking into this very issue for the G20 but Britain's intervention was striking given it has always previously backed away from supporting any global tax given London's pre-eminence as a financial center.
"There have been proposals for an insurance fee to reflect systemic risk or a resolution fund or contingent capital arrangements or a global transaction levy," Brown said, adding any of those would only work if globally implemented.
Washington and Ottawa immediately made clear they would have no truck with a transactions tax though U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner said there was a case for making financial institutions, which have been bailed out with taxpayer money around the world, pay.
"We agree that we have to build a system in which taxpayers are not exposed to the risk of losses in future, where markets and investors don't live with the expectations that governments are going to save them from their mistakes," Geithner said.
Over the crisis last year, however, it has grown in importance until leaders at a summit in Pittsburgh declared it the premier economic governing council for the world, given it includes countries like India and China, unlike the G7 or G8.
At the heart of those issues for now, though, are the thorny issues of devaluing or revaluing currencies including China's yuan and the dollar, and the forum again steered clear of any formal or public discussion on the issue.
(Writing by Sumeet Desai; editing by Patrick Graham)
