G20 makes little progress on climate financing
2009-11-07 14:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Rich countries and developing nations fought over climate change on Saturday, failing to make progress on financing ahead of a major environmental summit in Copenhagen next month.
Britain, which was hosting a meeting of G20 finance ministers in Scotland, was determined to push toward a $100 billion deal to cover the costs of climate change by 2020.
"There was a heated argument," Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin said.
In the end, they agreed on the need "to increase significantly and urgently the scale and predictability of finance to implement an ambitious international agreement."
"It's a bit disappointing because we would have liked to have done a little bit more work," said French Economy Minister Christine Lagarde, adding that Europe's offer was "substantial."
China is often denounced by Western critics as the main obstacle to agreement, because it argues developing countries should not submit to binding international caps on emissions while they grow out of poverty.
In turn, China and other emerging powers have said the rich countries have done far too little in vowing to cut their own greenhouse gas output, and in offering technology and money to the Third World to help cope with global warming.
"We have not come as far as we had hoped even this morning," said German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble.
A European source said there was also frustration in a sunny St Andrews at the stance of the United States, who were sitting on the fence over climate change financing.
A 175-nation U.N. meeting in Barcelona ended on Friday with little progress toward a global deal on climate change but narrowed options on helping the poor to adapt to climate change, sharing technology and cutting emissions from deforestation.
The final U.N. preparatory meeting before Copenhangen re-opened a rich-poor divide on sharing the burden of curbs on greenhouse gas emissions and criticism of the United States for not tabling a formal, carbon-cutting offer.
About 40 world leaders will go to Copenhagen next month to improve the chances of clinching a climate deal, the United Nations has said.
British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, addressing the G20 delegates, said climate change was a test of global cooperation every bit as stern as the world financial crisis.
(Additional reporting by Gernot Heller and Jan Strupczewski, writing by Sumeet Desai and Patrick Graham; editing by Mike Peacock)
