FACTBOX-Key excerpts from UN report on Darfur violations
2009-11-06 16:24:00.0
(Reuters) - A U.N. Panel of Experts on Friday released a new report on compliance with Security Council sanctions and an arms embargo covering Sudan's western Darfur region.
The Darfur conflict began in 2003 when mostly non-Arab rebels revolted in 2003 after accusing Khartoum of neglecting Darfur. A counter-insurgency campaign drove more than 2 million people from their homes. The United Nations says as many as 300,000 people died, but Khartoum rejects that figure.
"Most of the major armed actors in the Darfur conflict have continued to exercise their military options, violate the United Nations arms embargo and international humanitarian and human rights law and impede the peace process."
"The Darfurian population continues to be victimized by the effects of attacks and counter-attacks involving most of the armed movements that frequently lead to the disproportionate use of force by the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and their auxiliary forces, and result in killings, injuries and displacements."
"Among the armed movements, the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) is the most active violator of the arms embargo, carrying out repeated attacks."
"Because many of the arms and ammunition documented in the Darfur region have been manufactured in China, the Panel has sought with particular interest the cooperation of the Government of China. In the middle of August, the Panel received some relevant information from China."
The report said Khartoum continues to use unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, in Darfur in violation of the embargo. The panel said two Iranian individuals were linked to the sale of video surveillance technology to Sudan that has been used in drones flown illegally in Darfur. [ID:nN0611774]
- "The fight over land and resources;"
- "Violence perpetuated as a result of lawlessness and impunity against the women of Darfur;"
- "The war between armed opposition groups and the leadership of the Sudan and of Chad, in which JEM and Chadian armed opposition groups are the primary actors;"
(Compiled by Louis Charbonneau; editing by Todd Eastham)
