U.S. to tackle trade secret theft from China, others
2013-02-20 16:14:00.0
U.S. to tackle trade secret theft from China, others | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
U.S. to tackle trade secret theft from China, others
Wed, Feb 20 2013
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk (L) and Acting Secretary of Commerce Rebecca Blank speak at a news conference during the 23rd session of the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade in Washingtonin this file photo from December 19, 2012. Credit: Reuters/Joshua Roberts/Files
Wed  EST
"Trade secret theft threatens American businesses, undermines national security and places the security of the U.S. economy in jeopardy," the White House said in a report that laid out its strategy. "These acts also diminish U.S. export prospects around the globe and put American jobs at risk."
"Emerging trends indicate that the pace of economic espionage and trade secret theft against U.S. corporations is accelerating," the White House warned in the report, which listed threats to corporate intellectual property from cyber attacks and more conventional methods of economic espionage.
The report did not specifically name any country as the main culprit. But it listed more than a dozen cases of trade secret theft by Chinese companies or individuals, far more than any other country mentioned in the report.
U.S. corporate victims of the Chinese theft included General Motors, Ford, DuPont, Dow Chemical and Cargill.
"For an economy like ours, that's going to win based on our innovation of what we produce and create, this is a critically important issue," U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told Reuters in an interview ahead of the report's release.
China flatly denied the accusations made by the company, Mandiant, calling them "unprofessional." Its Defense Ministry said hacking attacks are a global problem and that China is one of the biggest victims of cyber assaults.
Victoria Espinel, the White House intellectual property rights enforcement coordinator, said the new strategy coordinates and improves existing U.S. government efforts to protect the innovation that drive the American economy and supports jobs in the United States.
The companies have "had very frank conversations with the Chinese, (saying) 'you know it's one thing to accept a certain level of copyright knock-offs, but if you're going to take our core technology, then we're better off being in our home country," Kirk told Reuters.
(Additional reporting by Matt Spetalnick; Editing by Doina Chiacu, Bill Trott and Todd Eastham)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
US companies need to realize China does not recognize intellectual property rights and domesticate their production again. This could end up costing China a fortune, and they will be cut off from future theft and thus future development. They have repeatedly proven not to be a fair trading partner.
Feb 20, 201310:20am EST--
It takes a private security firm to expose a military attack on America from our congressionally certified free trade partner, military communist china. And what was the transgression? Stealing corporate data from America¡¯s corporate masters. OOooh NOW you¡¯ve crossed the line.
Feb 20, 201310:40am EST--
Can¡¯t we at least block sale, in this country, of all products based on stolen copyright? Talk about getting in bed with the devil; our relationship with China is absurd.
Feb 20, 201310:57am EST--
