No dollar panic yet, but watch for $1.60 in euro
2009-11-06 15:36:00.0
(Reuters) - The death knell for the dollar has been sounded many a time in recent years, but its weakness has still not alarmed investors.
Analysts believe another sharp drop in the dollar or a spike in volatility due to bad news could heighten foreigners' concerns about U.S. assets. That could create a crisis of confidence that fuels calls for rethinking the existing currency regime.
Dollar bears have been worried about the ability of the United States to fund continuing deficits and the detrimental effect of a weak dollar. However, robust equity markets and steady appetite for U.S. Treasuries suggest investors still have faith in U.S. assets.
But there is a tipping point. Analysts point to a move to $1.60 by the euro, the dollar's record against the single currency, as a level that would be the source of alarm.
The dollar has declined 15 percent against a basket of six major currencies .DXY from the highs set in March and is down more than 37 percent from a peak in 2001. This week, the greenback was steady with the euro hovering below $1.50, off about 6 percent from the euro's record high at $1.6040 set in July 2008.
"If we breach $1.60. I think that's too far, too fast and could cause concern about a dollar demise," said Michael Woolfolk, BNY Mellon's senior currency strategist in New York.
Low U.S. rates have contributed to the dollar's weakness in recent months as investors use it as a funding currency in carry trades, in which traders borrow in low-yielding currencies and invest in assets with greater returns.
The Federal Reserve this week kept interest rates at near zero, and expects to maintain that for "an extended period."
The $1.60 level is likely the maximum exchange rate in which central banks will tolerate weakness in the dollar. Beyond that, analysts expect some form of intervention, verbal or otherwise, to support the U.S. currency.
Already, some central banks, such as Australia and Norway, are noting unwanted strength in their currencies as they have started to raise rates. The Norwegian central bank noted that it would likely slow the pace of tightening if its crown currency gains more rapidly than it would like.
"The market appears to be taking the appropriate view that we are sucking the last juice out of the short dollar trade," said Alan Ruskin, global head of currency strategy at RBS in Stamford, Connecticut.
For now, a weak dollar is viewed as desirable for boosting exports for the ailing U.S. economy, even though the Obama administration, like those before it, stresses its preference for a strong dollar. But the weak dollar, along with China's management of its own currency, has other nations, particularly in Europe, concerned about the threat of inflation there.
Some economists caution that a weak dollar risks a flight out of U.S. assets, leading to a damaging spike in U.S. rates.
This fear has been stated previously, but the United States, due to its size and role as the world's reserve currency, has a natural buffer that separates it from Iceland or Hungary, smaller economies that have suffered from the swift exodus of capital.
Ethan Harris, Bank of America-Merrill Lynch's head of global economics, noted that it took a 50 percent drop in the dollar in the 1980s before it created upward pressure on bond yields -- amid fears of knock-on inflation -- and contributed to the 1987 stock market crash.
"Are we in that same kind of environment today? There are some elements of it," he said in a recent conference call.
In addition to the dollar's level, the swiftness of the U.S. currency's fall is also key, and the fear it can cause. Analysts say volatility indicators suggest there is fear of further dollar weakness and a more tumultuous trading environment.
The euro's three-month implied volatility, one of the barometers of risk sentiment in the options market, was trading at 12.54 percent on Friday.
During the September 11 attacks on New York City in 2001, three-month vols on euro/dollar were at 14 percent. At the height of the financial crisis in September last year, volatility rose to 28 percent.
"I think if volatility goes above 14 percent, then that should trigger the alarm," said Marc Chandler, global head of currency strategy at Brown Brothers Harriman in New York. "We don't even have to wait for vols of 28 percent."
Implied volatility curves, which indicate future fluctuations in prices, show an unusually large gap between historical vol and implieds in the euro versus the dollar, an indication volatility is expected to rise.
That said, RBS' Ruskin notes that even with the anticipation of higher volatility, "none of this is consistent with a (dollar) crisis mentality."
