IMF warns G20 off cutting economic support too fast
2009-11-06 00:03:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Fri, Nov 6 2009
Fri, Nov 6 2009
Wed, Nov 4 2009
Wed, Nov 4 2009
Tue, Nov 3 2009
A man passes boarded-up office space in the financial district of the City of London September 4, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Toby Melville
ST ANDREWS, Scotland
Fri  EST
ST ANDREWS, Scotland
In a document prepared for a meeting of Group of 20 finance ministers and central bankers in Scotland and seen by Reuters, the IMF stressed the fragility of global recovery, saying it was largely dependent on government and central bank support.
"One of the key lessons from the experience of similar crises (such as the Great Depression and Japan in the 1990s) is that withdrawing policy stimulus too early can be very costly, particularly if the financial system remains vulnerable and prone to adverse shocks," the IMF paper said.
"I think we can reach agreement on firstly making sure we don't remove support too early because the recovery is by no means established everywhere," he said.
Darling is hosting the third meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bankers this year in St Andrews, Scotland, aiming to put flesh on the bones of agreements made at a leaders' summit in Pittsburgh in September.
The U.S. jobless rate unexpectedly jumped to a 26-1/2-year high of 10.2 percent last month, data showed on Friday, as employers cut 190,000 jobs, more than the 175,000 markets had expected but fewer than the 219,000 lost in September.
"The pace of recovery is uneven, particularly in advanced economies, with consumer confidence remaining subdued, the waning of temporary fiscal measures such as the cash for clunkers program in the U.S. and similar programs elsewhere is slowing production," the paper said.
Ten years after the G20 was formed, leaders agreed in Pittsburgh that it should be the world's main economic governing council, because it also includes most of the key developing economies -- unlike the G7 or G8.
If not, then alternatives can be looked at within the G20.
Asked if that meant countries would be given targets they had to achieve, for example on GDP, Darling said: "I don't think it is a case of people telling countries what they ought to do."
Officials have made clear currency moves are not on the formal agenda for the meeting, even if there is general disquiet about the weakness of the dollar behind closed doors and the fact Chinese currency's peg to the U.S. currency is also keeping the yuan too low and hurting other countries' exports.
On arriving at the meeting, Japan's deputy finance minister called for China to run a flexible exchange rate.
"I want to use this weekend to engage finance ministers in the task of making sure we can get money on the table. We have been very clear we think $100 billion will be required," he said.
