Global equity fund flows turn negative - EPFR
2009-11-05 23:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Global fund flows into equities fell in the week ended Nov. 4 as policymakers shifted focus to unwinding stimulus measures, while unemployment continued to rise, making investors question what will drive economic growth next year, fund tracker EPFR Global said on Friday.
Only six of 24 major global funds and fixed-income fund groups tracked by EPFR Global registered inflows during the week, despite additional liquidity resulting from another week of heavy outflows from money market funds.
Global bond funds drew fresh money for a 30th week. U.S. bond funds remained attractive, absorbing $2.1 billion, and short-term debt funds led the way.
Global emerging market equity funds surrendered $539 million as fresh doubts about the health of Western European banks, whose susidiaries financed East European and Baltic economies, weighed on sentiment across Europe.
BRIC -- Brazil, Russia, India, China -- equity funds overall drew inflows for an eighth week but Brazil funds saw outflows for the first time in eight weeks.
U.S. equity funds posted outflows for the fifth time in six weeks, with U.S. small cap funds hit hardest. U.S. growth funds outperformed value funds, however.
In Japan, weak domestic demand and renewed deflation posed questions about Japan's economic recovery and Japan equity funds saw outflows for a seventh week. As deflation makes holding cash more attractive, regional money market funds benefited.
- Financial sector funds saw $798 million in outflows, the biggest outflow since the fourth week of March, amid concern about further recapitalisation of UK banks and bad results from Europe. The bankruptcy of U.S. lender CIT and a rate rise in Australia also discouraged investors.
- Commodity funds continued to attract money for a ninth straight week, helped by India's $6.7 billion gold purchase to hedge its foreign reserves.
- Technology funds and consumer goods funds posted outflows of $226 million and $216 million respectively. (Reporting by Susan Fenton; Editing by Chris Lewis)
