Russia, China oppose military intervention in North Korea
2013-02-22 05:12:00.0
Russia, China oppose military intervention in North Korea | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Russia, China oppose military intervention in North Korea
Thu, Feb 21 2013
Tue, Feb 19 2013
Fri, Feb 15 2013
Wed, Feb 13 2013
Wed, Feb 13 2013
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov speaks at a news conference after a meeting of the Russia-Arab cooperation forum in Moscow February 20, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Sergei Karpukhin
Fri  EST
The two countries' foreign ministers condemned last week's test but said any action against North Korea had to be agreed at the United Nations, where Russia and China have the right of veto as permanent members of the Security Council.
"We are against the carrying out of a nuclear test in North Korea," Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi told a joint news conference after talks with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in Moscow.
"The U.N. Security Council should give an adequate response ... but the action should be directed towards peace on the Korean peninsula," he said.
North Korea's latest test, its third since 2006, prompted warnings from Washington and others that more sanctions would be imposed on the isolated state.
(Reporting by Alessandra Prentice, Writing by Thomas Grove, Editing by Timothy Heritage)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
These two meddlers have always wanted a weak and divided Korea. The defeat of Japan was the best chance of a free Korea in centuries. Unfortunately, China¡¯s attack on the U.N forces in Korea, and direct military interference from Russia, once again prevented a united Korea. They have not changed their stances in centuries, they are not about to change it now. They see N.Korea¡¯s nuclear arsenal as leverage and pressure on the Asia Pacific. Russia still has a chance to show the people here it is a sincere and honest player. China has already damned itself.
Feb 22, 20134:20am EST--
The caption reads, ¡°Russia, China oppose military intervention in North Korea: Moscow¡± Why are Russia and Communist China always of the same opinion on any subject? Makes no sense, unless you know the ground rules. Here are the ground rules: ¡°U.S. policy for dealing with the North Korean situation is inadequate because it focuses on North Korea in isolation as a rogue state, and naively seeks help from the Russians and Chinese to solve the problem. The North Korea situation and any future nuclear incident, wherever it occurs, must be seen against the background of Sino-Soviet ¡®convergence¡¯ strategy: the interaction of Russian and Chinese policy and the moves they make to derive strategic gains from critical situations should be closely studied.¡± ¨C KGB Defector Major Anatoliy Golitsyn, The Perestroika Deception, March 1989, p. 46. In other words, the ¡°collapse¡± of the USSR was a strategic ruse, as was the so-called Sino-Soviet Split.
Feb 22, 20135:03am EST--
The article¡¯s suggestion that Russia and China oppose military intervention in North Korea is not germane to the severe international military threat this nation poses and the need for the United States and South Korea to end, once and for all, by meeting this threat head on with a nuclear counter attack on all military installations and the North Korean capital inclusive of the use of a minimum of 6,000 MOAB dropped along the DMZ border in order to neutralize their army. The United States concurs with South Korea that a preemptive strike is necessary to avoid any further nuclear and conventional threats. The only issue to be agreed upon for the facilitating a counter attack is when!
Feb 22, 20135:57am EST--
