UPDATE 2-UBM must-see events put group on track for 2009
2009-11-06 05:05:00.0
(Reuters) - A strong performance in Asia and a host of "must-see" events means British media group United Business Media (UBM) (
) expects to report 2009 earnings in line with market expectations, it said on Friday.
UBM, which has cut costs to counter weakness in its print business and trade fairs, said it had managed to trade in line with expectations up until the end of October, sending shares in the group up 0.8 percent.
The owner of trade magazines, news distribution wires and fairs has been boosted by strong performances in Asia and Latin America and a solid performance in Europe.
It has also benefitted from its move into emerging markets, events organisation, data and services and away from a reliance on print advertising.
However, weakness in the U.S. businesses, and particularly those serving the technology and trade sectors, continued while the British businesses and those in property and construction-related markets also faced tough conditions.
UBM repeated its stance that it would look for high-quality acquisitions within tradeshows and IP data and services. It will also look in China, India and Brazil.
"The overall trading outlook for UBM's businesses remains stable, with no indications of either further deterioration or of improvement," the group said.
Analysts, who welcomed the results as "reassuring" expect UBM to produce a full-year pretax profit of around 147 million pounds ($242.8 million), according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
"As reported at the interims, trading varies considerably across the group by geography, vertical and product," Numis analysts said in a note.
The events business, which contributes around half of UBM's earnings, performed well.
"Our largest exhibitor-paid annual tradeshows taking place during the second half in Asia and in Europe have traded in line or somewhat ahead of previously indicated expectations," the group said.
The group's second half tends to feature more events where the exhibitor pays, a traditionally more resilient model, and UBM said these would offset weakness in the events where the attendee pays, which have been hit by a cut in corporate travel.
The data and services business which provides intellectual property products, was described as mixed, while lower levels of corporate activity have hit conditions in the trading, distribution and monitoring unit.
Online advertising revenues were yet to show any improvement while print revenues remained under pressure. The group said it would respond by again reducing the size of its print portfolio to a smaller set of market-leading, commercially sustainable titles. (Editing by Julie Crust and Jon Loades-Carter) ($1=.6053 Pound)
