U.S. sets more duties on China pipe in record case
2009-11-05 18:41:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Wed, Nov 4 2009
Tue, Nov 3 2009
Fri, Oct 30 2009
Fri, Oct 30 2009
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu  EST
It follows Obama's decision in September to put a 35 percent duty on Chinese-made tires in response to a petition from the United Steelworkers union.
The Steelworkers, who campaigned hard for Obama during last year's presidential race and are an important ally in his fight to win approval of comprehensive healthcare reform in Congress, were also a driving force in the oil well pipe case.
Since taking office in January, the Obama administration has initiated at least a dozen anti-dumping or countervailing duty investigations against products from China in response to petitions filed by industry and union groups.
The U.S. International Trade Commission will vote on Friday whether to approve three more probes covering coated paper, certain standard steel fasteners and sodium and potassium phosphate salts from China.
The preliminary duties announced on Thursday by the Commerce Department included a 36.53 percent levy on certain "oil country tubular goods" produced or exported by Tianjin Pipe International Economic and Trading Corp, Zhejiang Jianli Co Ltd, Wuxi Seamless Pipe Co and unspecified other companies.
"China's government and exporters are being told we are fed up with their cheating on our fair trade laws and penalties for these transgressions are long overdue," Steelworkers President Leo Gerard said in a statement praising the action.
Maverick Tube Corp, United States Steel Corp, TMK IPSCO, V&M Star LLP, Wheatland Tube Corp and Evraz Rocky Mountain Steel joined the Steelworkers in April in asking the Commerce Department for the import curbs.
U.S. companies imported $2.63 billion of oil country tubular goods from China in 2008, more than three times the $750 million they imported in 2007.
That makes it the largest U.S. trade action against China, topping Obama's decision to slap a 35 percent tariff on about $1.85 billion of Chinese-made tires.
They reflect the department's determination of how far below "fair market value" Chinese companies are selling steel pipe and tubing product in the United States.
The Commerce Department decided one of China's largest OCTG exporters, Jiangsu Changbao Steel Co, was not guilty of dumping in the United States.
"We question why Changbao was singled out as if they were the only one among 75 other pipe exporters who were considered not in violation. We plan to challenge this finding as the case proceeds in our government's investigation," Gerard said.
In the meantime, importers are required to post bonds or cash deposits based on the preliminary rates.
The ITC could overturn the duties if it determines U.S. companies have not been harmed or threatened with harm by the imports. That vote is set for May 2010. (Reporting by Doug Palmer; Editing by Peter Cooney)
