Asian IPO fatigue hits India, elsewhere
2009-11-05 06:09:00.0
(Reuters) - An ache has hit the belly of investors who feasted on initial public offerings in Asia, in a sign the primary equity window that saw a big revival two quarters ago is beginning to quickly shut.
The indigestion is becoming a familiar trend across India, China and Australia, making a case for firms forming a long IPO pipeline to trim their high price expectations.
The Hong Kong list includes big names such as Rusal, Las Vegas Sands (
), and a clutch of property firms. Reliance Infratel, a unit of Reliance Communications (
), and Vedanta's (
"The pricing has been pretty aggressive. Hopefully this market volatility will prevent some of them from launching their IPOs now," said Ho Yin Pong, a Hong Kong-based portfolio manager at RCM Asia Pacific.
He feels he can pick up the same stocks, especially the Indian ones, cheaper in the secondary market.
Last week, Deutsche Bank pulled out all stops to cover a $100 million IPO of Indian cable television firm Den Networks, which managed to scramble through in the final hours with huge support from India's state run life insurance giant.
"That was a real close one. DB (Deutsche Bank) did rally us to bail out the issue," an official at Life Insurance Corp of India, which put in bids for nearly a quarter of Den Networks, said on the condition of anonymity.
"The pricing was a tad stiff, but we did spot the long-term opportunity."
Deutsche Bank was the primary arranger for the share offering, which closed on the day another Indian firm Indiabulls Power (
Spokespeople from LIC, which plans to pump in 500 billion rupees ($10.6 billion) into Indian equity this year, could not be reached for comment.
Australia has also seen a cooling in demand for new offerings, with shares of department store chain, Myer Holdings (
), falling 9 percent in their debut earlier this month. Its price to earnings ratio was a tad below a main competitor.
Asian property listing are seen particularly vulnerable to the softening sentiment, with at least 16 Indian developers and a bunch of Chinese real estate firms eyeing listings.
"Even if one or two of these fail, it will be disastrous for the industry, because the confidence that is gaining now, will be hit," said Pranay Vakil, India head for global property services firm Knight Frank,
) fell 23 percent on its Hong Kong debut this month, Shenzhen-based Excellence Real Estate Group Ltd last week shelved plans for an up to $1 billion Hong Kong IPO month, blaming market conditions.
That should give caution to companies waiting in the wings to cash in on the equity rally this year, which has boosted the MSCI Asia Pacific ex Japan stocks index .MSCIAPJ nearly 60 percent so far this year despite the recent correction.
"The opportunity is shrinking, fading fast. Too many at the same time," said a banker who has helped arrange about $5 billion in new share sales so far this year for his Indian clients.
"The answer to sustain the momentum is attractive pricing but I would lose my job if I insist that." The banker, who is not authorized to speak to media, did not want to be named.
(Additional reporting by Parvathy Ullatil in Hong Kong; Editing by Michael Flaherty and Lincoln Feast)
