UPDATE 2-One-offs boost Lenovo Q2, but thin margins worry
2009-11-05 05:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Lenovo (
), the world's No.4 PC maker, warned its outlook remains challenging even as tech spending picks up in a global economic recovery and its quarterly profit was more than double market forecasts.
"Margins look very thin in China, and that's something that seems quite worrying," said Ellen Tseng, an analyst at Nomura Securities. "While things are looking good overall, how they protect their margins is going to be the biggest issue."
Still-weak corporate spending also continued to drag, with July-September revenue slipping 5 percent to $4.1 billion as companies held off spending on Lenovo's high-end products.
A one-off $38 million gain, which Lenovo attributed to the disposal of some investments, helped push it back into profit after three quarters of losses.
July-September net profit more than doubled to $53.08 million, and was well ahead of market forecasts for $24.5 million, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
"One-off gains or not, the figures are a step in the right direction, and should help convince some nay-sayers," said Edward Yen, a UBS analyst. "They're keeping expenses in check, which is really vital in today's business environment."
The company, which remains heavily reliant on corporate spending as a result of buying IBM's (
) laptop PC arm in 2005, said it expects to see a corporate refresh cycle in the second half of 2010.
"As commercial market demand improves, we will be able to further enhance and scale in expenses in mature markets and enhance our profitability in the region," Chief Financial Officer Wong Wai Ming told reporters on Thursday.
), reaffirming a return in technology demand and raising hopes that spending is picking up again.
However, Lenovo said it expected a challenging market environment in the second half as commercial demand remains soft.
The company, which is cutting jobs and consolidating its divisions, has been a big beneficiary of China's $600 billion stimulus package partly aimed at encouraging the public sector and rural consumers to buy electronic products.
Lenovo's reliance on its home market could eventually come under pressure as rivals such as Dell (
), Acer (
Lenovo is China market leader in PCs with around a 28 percent share, and ranks ahead of HP (
) and Dell, according to research firm IDC.
Lenovo's shares have more than doubled this year, outpacing a 50 percent rise on the Hang Seng Index
