Poor demand binding treaty in Copenhagen
2009-11-04 15:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Wed  EST
Stacy Feldman, SolveClimate
BARCELONA, Spain (SolveClimate) -A new global warming pact coming out of Copenhagen in December must be a legally enforceable treaty, not just promises from politicians, developing nations said Wednesday at international talks in Barcelona.
The statement was in response to rich nations' newest push for a "politically binding" deal, the idea being it's way too late to get a legal one on the books by December.
Political agreements "are worth very little," said Lumumba Stanislaus Di-Aping, the Sudanese chair of the Group of 77 and China.
"Tell me of any politician who delivered on his political manifesto," he said.
Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen started the firestorm on Monday when he said, "We are working very strongly to reach a politically binding agreement in Copenhagen." Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt added to that on Wednesday, stating on Swedish Radio that a legal treaty is "simply not possible to deliver."
Although no one as officially defined "politically binding," the concern is that it will result in political promises for cutting emissions without accountability.
Anders Turesson, chief negotiator for Sweden in Barcelona, said the European Union "wants" a "legally binding" treaty "in all aspects of that word." But for now it's "extremely important" to get a framework that leads to an eventual legal agreement after Copenhagen.
These are not happy times for green groups, who have been fighting for two years to get a new treaty in place by year's end.
"We are not in Barcelona to replace the Kyoto Protocol with a political binding agreement," said Tove Ryding of Greenpeace International. Copenhagen is about getting a legal treaty "that prevents climate chaos."
Adding more pressure on Wednesday, Di-Aping said that poor nations will not accept from the rich anything south of a 40 percent carbon emissions cut below 1990 levels by 2020.
Without it, "there will be no solution," he said.
Quoting UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown, Di-Aping said that "damage posed by inaction will not be reparable." In contrast to the rich nations of the world, it is the poor who "will feel the damage," he said.
Research affirms this. According to a major study by the World Bank in September, nations in Africa and Asia will bear nearly 80 percent of the damage from floods, increased desertification and other climate-related disasters, while contributing a third of world emissions . If temperatures rise just 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial times, these countries will lose as much as 5 percent of their GDP, compared to 1 percent for the globe on average.
Sweden's Turesson admitted the G77 request of a 40 percent cut "was not unreasonable," given the scale of the climate change problem.
The U.S., the world's second largest carbon polluter, has yet to utter a peep on specific carbon cuts. The country's delegation in Barcelona said it is waiting on the U.S. Congress.
That could be a long wait. On Wednesday, news broke that the U.S. Senate's climate bill will likely wait at least five more weeks while a cost analysis is completed, killing hopes that concrete U.S. figures would be on the table by Copenhagen. That bill currently would require roughly a 7 percent cut from 1990 levels by 2020, if it becomes law.
The statements by the G-77 and China came after the African Group returned to negotiations, following a one-day walk out on Tuesday triggered by a lack of detail from wealthy nations on binding carbon cuts.
On Tuesday, Di-Aping called the Barcelona discussions "a wasteful exercise."
Di-Aping said he's "guardedly optimistic" for progress. As of late Wednesday, however, "there has been no momentum," he said.
Scaling back expectations, Turesson said cuts are the "hardest part of the deal" and could end up being the final piece of the puzzle.
"We may not have a full picture until the last night in Copenhagen," added Artur Runge-Metzger, the European Commission's chief climate negotiator.
