SABMiller joint venture to buy Chinese breweries for $863 million
2013-02-05 10:31:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Feb 1 2013
Fri, Feb 1 2013
Fri, Feb 1 2013
Thu, Jan 31 2013
Sun, Jan 27 2013
Tue  EST
), the world's second-biggest brewer, is to expand further into high-growth regional markets in China after a local joint venture agreed to buy Kingway Brewery (
Asia's $258 billion beer market is growing twice as fast as the rest of the world, leading to rising competition and expectations of more industry deals in the region this year.
CR Snow, a brewing joint venture between SABMiller and conglomerate China Resources Enterprise (
), will see its capacity rise 8.5 percent with the acquisition of seven breweries that Kingway put up for sale early last year.
Four are in Guangdong province, one of China's fastest-growing and most affluent regions, SABMiller said on Tuesday. The other breweries are in Sichuan, Shaanxi and Tianjin.
SABMiller said last month lager sales fell in China in the final three months of 2012 as the country's coldest winter in 28 years hit demand and, as a consequence, the group's growth.
"The acquisition of Kingway (assets) gives us greater access to high growth and attractive regional markets in China, thereby enhancing CR Snow's competitive position," SAB Asia Pacific managing director Ari Mervis said.
Kingway, which is to change its name to Guangdong Land Holdings Ltd, said at a news conference in Hong Kong it was to focus on property development and investment in China.
), China's fourth-largest domestic brewer, had been in advanced talks to strike a deal with Kingway last year, after beating Anheuser-Busch InBev NV (
), the world's biggest brewer, in the final round of bidding, sources previously told Reuters. That agreement failed.
The price of the Kingway deal includes a small portion of loans and debt, the companies said.
SABMiller shares were up 0.9 percent at 1530 GMT, outpacing a 0.6 percent gain in the broader London market
(Additional reporting by Rosalba O'Brien in London and Annemarie Roantree; Editing by David Holmes and Dan Lalor)
