Obama vows to redouble effort on climate change
2009-11-03 19:58:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. President Barack Obama and European Union leaders pledged on Tuesday to redouble efforts for a deal on climate change at a summit in Copenhagen, but gave no details of how to reach that ambitious goal.
"We discussed climate change extensively and all of us agreed that it was imperative for us to redouble our efforts in the weeks between now and the Copenhagen meeting to ensure that we create a framework for progress," Obama told reporters.
The U.N. conference to fight climate change will be held in Copenhagen from Dec. 7 to 18, pitting emerging economic powerhouses China and India against Western industrial nations in the drive to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Obama spoke after a White House meeting with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, EU Foreign Affairs chief Javier Solana and Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt, whose country currently holds the EU's collective presidency.
"Regarding climate change, I want to tell (you) that I am more confident now than I was in days before," said Barroso. "President Obama changed the climate on the climate negotiations. Because with the strong leadership of the United States we can indeed make an agreement."
Merkel, making the first address by a German leader to a joint session of the U.S. Congress since Konrad Adenauer in 1957, was much more specific in what a deal would require.
"We need an agreement on one objective -- global warming must not exceed 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 F)," she said. "To achieve this, we need the readiness of all countries to accept internationally binding obligations," she said. [nN03496830]
In a declaration issued after the U.S.-EU summit, the leaders said they had agreed "to promote an ambitious and comprehensive international climate change agreement in Copenhagen."
"Together, we will work towards an agreement that will set the world on a path of low-carbon growth and development, aspires to a global goal of a 50 percent reduction of global emissions by 2050, and reflects the respective mid-term mitigation efforts of all major economies, both developed and emerging," the statement said.
Work toward a new deal ran into obstacles in the U.S. Senate and at U.N. negotiations that began on Monday in Barcelona, Spain, the last session before Copenhagen.
In Barcelona, African nations staged a daylong boycott of part of the 175-nation U.N. climate talks to demand far deeper 2020 cuts in greenhouse gas emissions by rich countries.
African nations want the rich to cut by at least 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020, saying their people are hit the most by disruptions to water and food supplies.
"People in Africa are suffering now, people are dying now, when the developed countries are not willing to express ... ambitious reductions," said Kemal Djemouai, chair of the African group.
In Washington, Senate Democrats on a key committee began a debate on reducing U.S. carbon dioxide pollution despite a boycott by Republicans who want to delay climate change legislation.
The business group, which has long opposed climate change legislation, said it wanted to engage in a "new conversation" on the issue. But it did not embrace the central approach of the legislation before Boxer's committee: government mandating carbon dioxide emission reductions on industry.
The U.S. bill seeks to cut emissions of greenhouse gases by 20 percent by 2020, from 2005 levels -- a cut of about 7 percent below 1990 levels used as the benchmark for the Kyoto Protocol.
In London, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said a Copenhagen deal in December would be "a very important milestone." But he said it would not be a detailed legal text, reflecting a global scaling back of ambition for the meeting. [nL3370999] (Additional reporting by Patricia Zengerle; Writing by Alister Doyle and Gerard Wynn in Barcelona, and Alister Bull in Washington; Editing by Peter Cooney)
