GLC says dollar to thrive in 2010
2009-11-03 06:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar, U.S. equities and emerging market currencies like the Mexican peso should thrive in 2010 as the global economy recovers, but European equities will be pressured by a strong euro, hedge fund GLC said.
The $315 million (194 million pound) GLC Global Macro hedge fund is long on the U.S. dollar versus the euro and yen on the view that the U.S. market is better positioned for recovery, Steven Bell, who co-manages the fund, told Reuters.
GLC as a whole manages around $1.5 billion in assets. The fund gained 24.7 percent for the 12 months to September, outperforming the Global Lipper benchmark by 4.5 percent.
"We think the whole level of earnings for next year is going to be revised up," Bell said.
"With no inflation in sight, there's no reason why stock markets shouldn't continue to strengthen."
A global stocks rally -- founded on the belief the economy is recovering -- has proved bad news for the dollar since March, but Bell said the fund had now gone short on a very strong euro and, as a result, European equities.
"The strength of the euro does cast a shadow over the stock market," he said. "It has been going up, profitability has seen significant improvement but I do think the outlook for the European stock market is not as rosy for the United States."
"Although there are structural issues around drugs, violence and politics, the cyclical side is very strong and we expect the peso to strengthen further," Bell said.
Mexico's peso is down around 25 percent since mid-2008.
Taiwan and Korea also looked good value in Asia, he said.
"We've just gone long Taiwan versus Europe, it has a lot of positive political developments vis a vis China, the tech cycle is turning up, it's very competitive because of the weak dollar," Bell said.
"Most of our risk is in currencies where there is a good cyclical, structural or competitiveness story and Korea is the best example, it's fantastically competitive against Japan and everywhere else."
(Reporting by Simon Falush; editing by Patrick Graham)
