FACTBOX-Five political risks to watch for Taiwan
2009-11-02 23:18:00.0
(Reuters) - The threat of conflict between Taiwan and China is becoming increasingly remote, analysts say, but investors still face a range of political risks.
President Ma Ying-jeou's promotion of closer economic ties with China has boosted trade and reduced the risk of military conflict. The government is expected to press ahead with achieving an economic cooperation framework agreement -- essentially the precursor to a free trade deal. But the issue of ties with China remains highly divisive in Taiwan and there is always the risk of new controversies, as occurred in September 2009 with a visit by the Dalai Lama. The United States backs China diplomatically but remains Taiwan's staunchest informal ally, infuriating Beijing whenever it sells arms to the island.
President Ma Ying-jeou has a strong mandate to govern, as the KMT controls parliament and the presidency, which has been positive for government effectiveness and avoiding political deadlock. But widespread criticism of the response to Typhoon Morakot dented the government's popularity and led to a cabinet reshuffle. The high degree of polarisation between the two major parties, the China-friendly Nationalists (KMT) and the anti-China opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) has also raised questions about long-term political stability and government effectiveness.
-- The DPP's policy platform. Analysts say that if it softens some of its stances, particularly on relations with China, Taiwan's political stability and effective government could benefit from more bipartisan policymaking.
Taiwan is generally rated as being far freer of damaging corruption than most of its regional peers. But many corruption rankings, including the World Bank's World Governance Indicators, suggest there has been a significant deterioration in control of corruption in recent years. Graft is considered most common in local government, but life sentences given to former president Chen Shui-bian and his wife on corruption charges in September 2009 thrust the central government back into the spotlight.
-- Taiwan's rating in global corruption perceptions rankings. If investors think Taiwan's corruption levels are worsening, markets will suffer.
The central bank says it will maintain loose monetary policy for now, and most economists expect rates to stay on hold this year. But policy tensions could rise if the central bank feels the need to start focusing on containing inflationary pressures while the government remains committed to sustaining the nascent economic recovery.
-- Comments by ministers and the central bank on monetary policy. Markets will watch for hints that rate rises will resume, or for signs of policy conflict with the central bank.
Taiwan continues to place limits on foreign portfolio investment and restricts foreign direct investment in some sectors. As the economy recovers, investors will start to focus again on whether economic reform may relax some restrictions.
