U.N. assembly draft urges action on Gaza war crimes
2009-11-02 17:54:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Nov 2 2009
Sat, Oct 31 2009
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
A Palestinian girl sleeps in front of a house, destroyed during the three-week offensive Israel launched last December, in the northern Gaza Strip October 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Mohammed Salem
Mon  EST
The Arab draft resolution, obtained by Reuters, says the assembly "requests the Secretary-General to transmit the report ... to the Security Council." It also urges Israel and the Palestinians to comply with the report's recommendations for launching investigations into allegations of war crimes.
Western diplomats said the United States would most likely vote against the resolution. Unless it is revised, they said, most European delegations would join Washington and reject it.
Resolutions of the General Assembly, unlike those of the Security Council, are nonbinding. But U.N. diplomats say such a resolution would intensify pressure on Israel to launch a full investigation into the actions of its army during the war.
The Goldstone report lambasted both sides in the war, which killed up to 1,387 Palestinians and 13 Israelis, but was harsher toward Israel. It gave Israel and Palestinian Hamas militants six months to mount credible investigations or face possible prosecution in The Hague.
Both Israel and Hamas denied committing any war crimes. Israel has criticized the report as unbalanced and says the 47-nation Geneva-based U.N. Human Rights Council, which commissioned the report, is biased against the Jewish state.
An Israeli official in New York condemned both the report and the assembly's discussion of it. "At a time when we are debating restarting peace talks, this is not helpful to anyone," said the official, who asked not to be identified.
Diplomats said the five veto-wielding permanent council members -- United States, Britain, France, Russia and China -- all agreed that there was no point in bringing the issue to the Security Council, which meant it was unlikely the 15-nation panel would do anything with the Goldstone report.
But it does endorse an HRC report that included the resolution. Sudan's U.N. Ambassador Abdalmahmoud Abdalhaleem said it amounted to a full endorsement of the HRC resolution.
"It endorses the Human Rights Council resolution, that is the point," he told Reuters. " And it exposes the double standards that some permanent Security Council members have toward the occupying power (Israel) in Palestine."
