Danish PM upbeat on new global climate deal
2009-11-02 14:48:00.0
(Reuters) - The host of next month's global climate conference said on Monday he saw momentum for a substantial, political deal to replace the Kyoto Treaty and said he hoped to convince top world leaders to attend.
With Kyoto set to run out in 2012, the talks are seen as the last chance for all countries to agree on painful measures needed to ease the pace of climate change.
Rasmussen, speaking in an interview to Reuters in Moscow after meeting Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, said he hoped there would be a substantial enough agreement on the table to entice national leaders to attend.
"Convinced is probably too big a word, but I have decided to stay optimistic about this because I have been engaged in talks with many leaders in the last couple of months and I sense a very strong political willingness to conclude a result in Copenhagen," he said.
"Everybody understands that we now have created a momentum and Copenhagen is really the deadline and, if we fail in Copenhagen, it will be a huge failure. I have chosen to stay optimistic about this but it's not easy at all," he said.
"Hopefully, I will be able to issue invitations for heads of state and government in a few weeks time," he said. "I really believe that they will participate if it's realistic that we could seal an ambitious deal in Copenhagen in December."
Developed nations say the poor must also do more by 2020 to slow their rising emissions. China, the United States, Russia and India are the top emitters.
After their meeting, Putin warned that Russia would only sign up if all other major industrialised countries do so too, a position that Rasmussen saw as a logical position. [ID:L2403800]
"It's not a major setback, it's quite obvious -- why should any country sign if not all countries sign?"
"It is a challenge for every single industrialised country in the world to deal with the climate change issue and that's why we are working very strongly to reach a politically binding agreement in Copenhagen which would cover all the major countries in the world whether they are part of the Kyoto regime, as is Russia, or not, as is the U.S.A., for instance."
"We simply can't conclude all the legal discussion in all details in five, six weeks from now, so there will still be some work to be done after Copenhagen."
"Our end goal is an internationally legally binding treaty for when the Kyoto treaty comes to an end in 2012." (Reporting by Conor Sweeney; Editing by Richard Williams)
