Exclusive: Russia plans $25-$30 billion oil-for-loans deal with China
2013-02-13 13:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Rosneft is seeking to borrow up to $30 billion from China in exchange for possibly doubling oil supplies, making Beijing the largest consumer of Russian oil and further diverting supplies away from Europe.
Four industry sources familiar with the situation told Reuters that Rosneft was in talks with Chinese state firm CNPC about the borrowing, which would echo a $25 billion deal the two companies clinched last decade.
In the previous deal, Rosneft and Russian pipeline monopoly Transneft borrowed money to help Rosneft acquire the assets of nationalized oil producer YUKOS while agreeing to build a pipeline to supply China with 300,000 barrels per day for 15 years.
This time, Rosneft wants to borrow money as it is close to completing a $55 billion acquisition of rival TNK-BP to become the world's largest listed oil producer.
Russia's leading oil company, controlled by the Kremlin, is considering ultimately doubling supplies to China, sources said.
"It can be a combination of delivery options. The strategic line is to increase supplies to China," one source familiar with the situation said.
"The reason why China is willing to lend is simple. They sit on over 3 trillion of dollars in reserves and are looking to diversify their investments," he added, referring to China's foreign exchange reserves of $3.3 trillion.
The first loan-for-supply deal between the two companies connected directly for the first time the world's largest energy producer and consumer.
It came after a number of energy disputes between Russia and its neighbors which cut gas and oil supplies to Europe several times, drawing criticism and calls from the European Union for diversification away from Russian energy resources.
Should deliveries to China double, the share of Russian exports to Asia will amount to over a fifth of overall exports by the world's largest oil producer and the second largest exporter after Saudi Arabia.
'CRAZY DEFICIT'
Energy relations between Moscow and Beijing have been, however, complicated in the past by disputes over oil shipping tariffs along the existing pipeline.
They were ultimately resolved after Russia agreed to apply a discount on supplies. The head of Transneft, Nikolai Tokarev, said this week that deliveries to China would rise over time.
"We are neighbors and we need to develop ties, especially given that China has a crazy oil deficit," he told business daily Kommersant.
Finding the needed oil resources will also be challenging as Russia is several years away from a fresh increase in output in East Siberia, the region closest to China.
"They don't know where they can source the oil and the route issue is a significant one," one of the sources said.
"Building a parallel link is certainly not nearly as expensive as building the first one from scratch," he said.
A third industry source said China was ready to lend as long as Rosneft agreed to ship more oil via Kazakhstan's existing pipeline to China, which would soon be short of volumes due to depletion of some Kazakh fields.
"These discussions are under way on a working level," Russian Deputy Prime Minister Arkady Dvorkovich said on Wednesday when asked about possible deliveries though Kazakhstan.
However, Transneft fiercely opposes the plan as it would cut its transport earnings.
Whatever the approach, funding is a pressing issue for Rosneft.
But it also needs dozens of billions of dollars to launch new huge fields in Russia's Arctic and funds to finance a $25 billion refinery modernization program.
(Additional reporting by Alexander Ershov and Melissa Akin; editing by William Hardy and Jane Baird)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This plan will benefit both countries because Russia needs to sell its oil and gas and develop more fields and transport capabilities. China needs to receive oil and gas and develop more diversified investments for its foreign exchange holdings. Russia, the world¡¯s biggest oil and gas station, may sit next to China, the world¡¯s biggest automobile and energy market, but it needs to raise its capacity to produce and move its products to its markets. China must do more with its foreign exchange reserves than finance America¡¯s ability to increase the US national debt before the US declares bankruptcy.
Feb 13, 20131:31pm EST--
