FTSE closes up 1.2 pct; miners, oils surge
2009-11-02 00:13:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top shares closed 1.2 percent higher on Monday, as miners and oil firms rose, underpinned by firmer commodity prices on the back of bullish economic data, while RBS fell as the lender faces asset sales.
closed 59.95 points higher at 5,104.50 points, recouping some losses from Friday's 1.8 percent fall.
The index was down 1.7 percent overall in October, the first monthly drop since June, but is still up about 48 percent since its March low.
), Vedanta Resources (
), Lonmin (
Rising to the top of the gainers list, Randgold Resources (
Meanwhile, HSBC's China Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) rose to an 18-month high in October of 55.4, pointing to sustained strength in the fast-growing manufacturing sector.
Analysts say the market will focus on the Bank of England's next policy meeting on Thursday, with two-thirds of economists polled by Reuters expecting the central bank to extend its 175 billion pound quantitative easing programme. [ID:nLAG005868]
"The market is waiting for direction at the end of the week when we'll know if quantitative easing is going to be extended," said Tim Whitehead, head of portfolio strategy at Redmayne-Bentley.
"That's the big news this week and as a consequence I wouldn't expect the market to make a great deal of headway in the short term," he said.
), BP (
), also part-owned by the government, was off 2.3 percent as investors awaited developments with regards to a planned capital raising.
Across the Atlantic, the Federal Reserve said U.S. banks face risks from souring loans, particularly from commercial property, and some banks may face capital adequacy problems. [ID:nWEQ003541]
) and heavyweight HSBC HSBC.L, up 2.5 and 2.4 percent respectively, provided some strength to the UK banking sector.
Some nerves ahead of quarterly earnings reports put pressure on selected blue chips. British Airways BAY.L fell 1.1 percent before its results on Friday, when analysts expect the airline to report widening second-quarter losses.
), made no upward revision to its full-year profit forecasts.
), which reports on Tuesday, dipped 3.5 percent, while Liberty International LII.L and Segro (
), which also report results this week, shed 2.8 and 3.1 percent respectively. (Editing by David Holmes)
