FOREX-Euro edges up but markets skittish
2009-11-02 08:12:00.0
(Reuters) - The euro rose against the dollar on Monday as risk-averse sentiment eased on improved economic data and as stocks pared losses, but markets remained skittish before key central bank events and U.S. jobs data this week.
), a U.S. lender to hundreds of thousands of small and medium-sized businesses, filed for bankruptcy on Sunday. [ID:nN01408863]
Market sentiment was also buoyed after data confirmed an expansion in euro zone manufacturing activity. Final euro zone manufacturing purchasing managers' index for October rose to 50.7 in October from 49.3 in September - in line with an earlier flash estimate and economists' forecasts.
"Today's data suggest that the recovery in the euro area is starting to gather pace," said Colin Ellis at Daiwa Securities.
. By 1237 GMT, it was up 0.3 percent at $1.4768.
The single currency also hit the day's high against sterling of 90.37 pence EURGBP=R, as the pound was hit, with the government set to finalise plans this week to carve up rescued banks Royal Bank of Scotland (
), triggering selling in their shares. [ID:nL1174390]
The UK currency is sensitive to news about the country's struggling banking system given the economy's heavy dependence on its financial sector, and a rise in UK manufacturing PMI data failed to boost the currency.
Meanwhile, the yen reversed gains made early in Asian hours, with traders citing an earlier very low trade in South African rand against the yen, which had a knock-on effect on all yen pairs.
Data also showed China's manufacturing sector expanded at the fastest pace in 18 months in October. [ID:nSEO80466]
But investors remained cautious before a slew of events later in the week, including monetary policy decisions in the United States, the euro zone and the UK.
"The market is quite thin and there are a lot of big events coming up, a lot of risk news flow. Ahead of that we are likely to get some position-switching after Friday's month-end fixes saw the dollar and the yen well bid," said Peter Frank, currency strategist at Societe Generale in London.
The Australian dollar strengthened as the market fully anticipated the Reserve Bank of Australia will raise key interest rates on Tuesday by 25 basis points to 3.5 percent, with some chance of a 50 bp rise. [ID:nSYD436754]
Attention turned to the release of the latest U.S. ISM manufacturing survey at 1500 GMT, expected to show expansion in the sector for the third month in a row. ECONUS (Additional reporting by Jessica Mortimer; editing by Stephen Nisbet)
