HSBC plans big China boost in run-up to planned IPO
2009-11-02 05:15:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Fri, Sep 25 2009
Sandy Flockhart, chief executive of Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp (HSBC), attends a news conference in Taipei November 2, 2009. HSBC Holdings, Europe's biggest bank, will focus its Asia acquisition strategy on China and other expanding markets, Flockhart said on Monday. Credit: Reuters/Pichi Chuang
Mon  EST
) is preparing to boost its China presence about 20 percent next year, as it ramps up for an IPO in one of its fastest growing markets, a top company executive said.
Europe's biggest bank aims to open 15-20 new branches in China next year pending regulatory approval, up from the 90-100 it will have at the end of this year, Sandy Flockhart, Asia chief executive said in Taipei on Monday.
"We will be the largest international bank in China," Flockhart told reporters, following the bank's first board meeting in Taipei. "We will continue to invest in China in 2010."
HSBC has been among the most active foreign banks in China, where it earned a pre-tax profit of $752 million in the first half of the year, accounting for about 15 percent of the company's total. It competes there with the likes of Citigroup (
In addition to its own branch network, HSBC's China investments also include a 19 percent stake in Bank of Communications (
), a 16.8 percent stake in Ping An Insurance (
), and a 12 percent stake in Industrial Bank (
Last month, the bank said it was swinging its power base back to its place of birth 144 years ago by moving its chief executive to Hong Kong.
Flockhart said his bank, which posted a 50 percent drop in first half profit, will focus its Asia acquisition strategy on China and other emerging markets as it increasingly relies on the region for growth.
To underscore the importance of China to its future, HSBC has become one of a handful of foreign companies to announce its intent to list in China when the country announces rules for such listings as soon as late this year or in early 2010.
Hong Kong's Bank of East Asia (
) has said it would like to make such a listing, and media have reported Standard Chartered, which also has a heavy China presence, is also interested in such a listing.
HSBC's planned China IPO is dependent on regulatory requirements, and there is no specific timeframe yet, Flockhart said.
HSBC could raise as much as 50 billion yuan ($7.3 billion) in a Shanghai listing as soon as next year as it vies to become one of the first foreign companies to list in China, people familiar with the matter told Reuters in August.
) to help arrange an initial public offering in Shanghai, a person with direct knowledge of the situation told Reuters.
The Shanghai flotation is a way to accelerate the bank's growth in the mainland at a time when international rivals have retreated, the company has said.
HSBC Holdings said in August its first-half profit halved to $5 billion as it was hit by rising bad debts in the United States, Europe and Asia.
