FTSE up 0.6 pct as miners, oils bounce
2009-11-02 07:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's top share index rose 0.6 percent in mid-session trade on Monday supported by gains from miners and oils after bullish economic data, which offset weaker defensive stocks.
By 1205 GMT the FTSE 100 was up 31.71 points at 5,076.26, having fallen 1.8 percent on Friday, notching up its largest weekly fall, at 3.8 percent, since March.
The index fell 1.7 percent overall in October, the first monthly drop since June but is still up about 46 percent since its March low.
Miners were the top gainers boosted by a rise in copper, which was underpinned by strong purchasing managers data from both the UK and China, highlighting that a recovery in demand is well underway.
The news came on the back of HSBC's China Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), which rose to an 18-month high in October of 55.4 from 55.0 in September, pointing to sustained strength in the country's fast-growing manufacturing sector.
), BHP Biliton (
), Xstrata XTA.L, Anglo American (
), Kazakhmys (
) was one of the top FTSE 100 risers, up 4.5 percent after it agreed with AngloGold Ashanti to buy an additional 20 percent in the Moto gold project in the Democratic Republic of Congo for about $113.6 million.
Energy majors were also in demand as the price of crude oil CLc1 rose, with BG Group (
), BP (
However, Anthony Grech, a market strategist at IG Index said the index's moves merely looks like posturing ahead of more important data due out towards the end of the week.
"With the Bank of England tipped to extend quantitative easing at their meeting later in the week and the US non-farm payrolls (employment data) due on Friday there's no shortage of scope for further volatility to be seen in the near term," he said.
"For the time being there seems to be quiet confidence that last week's correction may be at an end," Grech added.
Royal Bank of Scotland topped the blue chip fallers, down 7.8 percent, after the part-nationalised lender said talks with the European Commission as competition regulator over its state aid will include some divestments not initially contemplated.
Lloyds Banking Group, also part-owned by the government, fell 3.5 percent as investors awaited developments with regards to a planned capital raising.
) up 1 percent each, while Standard Chartered fell 0.1 percent.
), GlaxoSmithKline (
) and Shire fell 1.2 to 1.6 percent, while British American Tobacco (
Among individual stocks, British Airways BAY.L, which along with retailer Marks & Spencer (
) reports results this week, fell 2.8 percent. Analysts expect the ailing airline to report widening second-quarter losses.
U.S. stock index futures pointed to a higher open on Wall Street on Monday, signalling a rebound after the previous session's steep losses, with futures for the S&P 500 SPc1, Dow Jones DJc1 and Nasdaq 100 NDc1 up 0.4-0.6 percent.
The U.S. ISM report for October, plus September pending homes sales and construction spending numbers should attract attention later in the session. (Reporting by David Brett; Editing by Greg Mahlich)
