Poulter holds on for victory in Singapore
2009-11-01 05:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Briton Ian Poulter overcame a mid-round crisis to fire a one-over 72 and win the Singapore Open by one shot on Sunday, finishing the $5 million event on 10-under 274 for a wire-to-wire victory.
China's Liang Wenchong finished second on nine-under-par, with Australian pair Scott Hend and Adam Scott tied for third, a further shot adrift of Poulter, who won for the first time on the European Tour since the 2006 Madrid Open.
"I was playing fairly solid but mishit some shots," Poulter said in a greenside television interview.
"To stand on the last knowing you have to make par for the victory, I was fairly happy."
Returning to action after a six-week layoff, the 33-year-old twice looked poised to run away with the tournament before shocking spells in both of his last two rounds gave the rest of the field a chance to catch up.
On Sunday, he started the day tied for the lead with 12 holes remaining in his third round and birdied his first hole back before surrendering back-to-back bogeys around the turn to slip back to seven-under for the tournament.
Poulter had stretched his lead over McDowell to three strokes by the time he reached the seventh fairway, but there his game suddenly fell apart when his approach to the relatively easy par-five hit a tree.
He ended up taking a bogey six and was unable to drive the ball straight for the next five holes, racking up three more bogeys to slip one behind McDowell.
"It really pumped me up," Poulter added. "I was getting angry. I had played so well in spells around here this week but it was so annoying to let easy holes slips and all of a sudden lose the lead.
Back in front, Poulter regained his composure and played par golf all the way through to the finish to register his eighth European Tour victory.
Liang was solid if unspectacular and tied for the lead at one stage, but his challenge faltered with a bogey on the ninth and another dropped shot on 13.
"I tried my best but lady luck eluded me," said the Chinese number one. "I just couldn't find a birdie on the 18th hole after a poor third shot. There are no regrets, however, golf is like that."
