TIMELINE: Iran's nuclear program
2009-10-30 16:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Iran has told the U.N. nuclear watchdog that it wants fresh nuclear fuel for a reactor in Tehran before it will agree to ship most of its enriched uranium stocks to Russia and France, diplomats said on Friday.
In what the International Atomic Energy Agency has described as an initial response to an IAEA-drafted nuclear fuel proposal, Western diplomats said major Western powers found the Iranian demand for immediate access to fresh atomic fuel unacceptable.
February 5 - Russia says it plans to start up a nuclear reactor at Iran's Bushehr plant by the end of 2009. It says the plant is purely civilian and cannot be used for any weapons program.
March 20 - After years of U.S. attempts to isolate Iran, new President Barack Obama calls for "engagement that is honest and grounded in mutual respect." Iran cautiously welcomes the overture, but said it wanted to see practical steps.
April 9 - Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says Iran has mastered the nuclear fuel cycle and also tested more advanced machines for enriching uranium. He inaugurates the country's first atomic fuel fabrication plant near Isfahan.
June 5 - A quarterly IAEA report says Iran has 7,231 centrifuge enrichment machines installed, a 25-percent increase in potential capacity since March.
September 12 - Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki says Iran will not back down in its nuclear dispute with the West, a day after the United States said it would accept Tehran's offer of wide-ranging talks with six world powers.
September 24 - China dampens expectations of further sanctions against Iran, telling major powers more pressure would not persuade Tehran to halt its nuclear program.
-- In contrast, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown tells the United Nations the world should consider tougher sanctions.
September 25 - The IAEA says Iran has told it about a second uranium enrichment plant being built. Construction of the plant, near the city of Qom, began in 2006.
October 1 - Iran meets six world powers in Geneva. Iran's chief nuclear negotiator Saeed Jalili meets U.S. Undersecretary of State William Burns.
October 19 - Vienna talks between Iran and world powers start well, despite Iran's reported refusal to negotiate with France.
October 21 - U.N. nuclear watchdog presents draft deal to reduce Iran's stockpile of enriched uranium.
Oct 25 - U.N. nuclear experts inspect the newly disclosed centrifuge plant being built near the Shi'ite holy city of Qom. The site will refine uranium for civilian nuclear energy.
Oct 30 - Iran tells the U.N. nuclear watchdog it wants fresh nuclear fuel for a reactor in Tehran before it will agree to ship most of its enriched uranium stocks to Russia and France, according to diplomats at the United Nations.
