Japan's Abe seeks to show off alliance, gets Obama nod on Abenomics
2013-02-21 05:48:00.0
Japan's Abe seeks to show off alliance, gets Obama nod on Abenomics | Reuters
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Japan's Abe seeks to show off alliance, gets Obama nod on Abenomics
Tue, Feb 19 2013
Mon, Feb 18 2013
Fri, Feb 15 2013
Wed, Feb 13 2013
Tue, Feb 12 2013
Thu, Feb 21 2013
Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe attends an upper house budget committee session at the parliament in Tokyo February 19, 2013. Credit: Reuters/Toru Hanai
Thu  EST
Abe, who has kept his ratings high since taking office in December, also needs Obama's signoff on his economic revival recipe of big spending and hyper-easy monetary policy.
Expectations for "Abenomics" - especially drastic monetary easing - have sliced about 10 percent off the yen's value against the dollar since Abe took office, raising concern abroad that Japan is weakening its currency to export its way out of recession.
"The situation in East Asia is becoming more and more precarious," said Mikitaka Masuyama, a professor at the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies in Tokyo. "One of the things he wants to achieve will be reinforcement of the Japan-U.S. alliance."
"It would be a successful trip for Abe if his economic policy wins a nod from the U.S. side or at least if it is not rejected outright," he added.
Abe, who leaves for Washington on Thursday, also hopes to secure at least a wink and a nod from Obama that would allow him to argue that Japan can negotiate special treatment for politically sensitive sectors such as rice if it joins talks on a U.S.-led free trade pact.
U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told Reuters in an interview on Wednesday that Tokyo must be willing to negotiate all trade sectors, but did not rule out the possibility of special treatment in the final deal.
Japan's big businesses wants it to join the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) deal to avoid being left behind in global competition, but powerful farm lobby groups are opposed, dividing Abe's ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
Aides say Abe's top priority for the visit, during which he will hold a summit on Friday with Obama and deliver a policy speech entitled "Japan is Back", is to repair an alliance they argue was dented by the 2009-2012 rule of the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ).
"During the three years and three months of the Democratic Party government, there was a great gap in the U.S.-Japan alliance," said a close aide to Abe. "So the biggest objective is to rebuild the alliance."
Outside experts agree the alliance suffered under the first DPJ prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, who tried unsuccessfully to revise a deal to move a U.S. Marine air base to a sparsely populated part of Japan's Okinawa island.
But Abe's immediate predecessor, Yoshihiko Noda, did much to repair the damage, they say.
The two leaders will certainly spend time on the need for stronger sanctions on North Korea and are likely to discuss beefed up missile defense after Pyongyang's latest nuclear test last week.
"It is important for us to have them recognize that it is impossible to try to get their way by coercion or intimidation. In that regard, the Japan-U.S. alliance, as well as the U.S. presence, would be critical," Abe told the Washington Post in an interview.
Tension has raised fears of an unintended military incident near the islands, known as the Senkaku in Japan and the Diaoyu in China. Washington says the islets fall under a U.S.-Japan security pact, but it is keen to avoid a clash.
Abe is expected to come bearing one welcome gift - a promise that Japan will finally join an international treaty on settling cross-border child custody disputes, known as The Hague Convention. Japan has been the only member of the Group of Eight advanced nations not to join the pact, despite pressure from the United States and other countries.
(Additional reporting by Paul Eckert in Washington; Editing by Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Acting as a defeated vassel state, Abe is seeking approval for currency manipulation and applying for military intervention for territory dispute from his suzerain state. I don¡¯t know how long can Japan put up with this sort of humiliation according to its mentality.
Feb 21, 20131:29am EST--
Japan, end whaling and strengthen ties with other countries of the Pacific. Depite being victims of Japanese militarism, this is not the 20th century and many countries who were victims, are far more mature when it comes to matters of reality that the militaristic, expansionist state of China. We live in today and today only one country is attmepting to change the status quo, it is not Japan. Those of us who are free should now lock hands and stand as friends in the face of the greatest threat to peace and stability in our region since Facism.
Feb 21, 20132:43am EST--
Abe has yet to find a domestic comrade to head the Bank of Japan to perpetuate his Abenomics at home. Even G-20 downplayed the likelihood of currency war, it is done more than said. The Japanese economy is apathetic to relaxation since 1991 without fresh impetus.
Feb 21, 20133:12am EST--
