Nikkei gains 1.5 pct buoyed by U.S. GDP, earnings
2009-10-30 05:26:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei average rose 1.5 percent on Friday, buoyed by shares of tech companies with improved earnings prospects such as Pioneer Corp (
), while exporters climbed on data showing the U.S. economy had returned to growth.
), operator of the Uniqlo casual clothing chain and one of the most popular stocks on the main board.
The Tokyo bourse said while it was still looking into the cause, the problem was believed to be a glitch with the trading system.
Analysts said that while individual stocks were either being bought or sold on their results during the peak earnings day for this season, there hadn't been enough bullish results to push the market beyond the lift given by U.S. GDP data.
"A rally in U.S. stocks prompted a market rise here, but further gains may be tough for now as investors now want to monitor the economic outlook going forward," said Kazuhiro Takahashi, general manager at Daiwa Securities SMBC.
), But Nintendo 7974.OS slid after it cut its annual earnings outlook as it Wii video game console loses its title as the console to beat.
In moderate trade, the benchmark Nikkei
climbed 143.64 points to 10,034.74, a day after it finished at a three-week low below 10,000. The index's close was priced more than 40 minutes after the regular closing time.
On the week, the index shed 2.4 percent, while it slipped 1 percent in October. But it has gained about 13 percent so far this year.
Market participants said the glitch did not appear to have had much of an impact on broker's trading systems but it would not be good for the exchange's reputation which has suffered from technical glitches in the past.
Masayoshi Okamoto, head of dealing at Jujiya Securities noted the bourse would be using a new computer system from January.
"Even though the new system will be going in and will probably be able to deal with something like this, the fact that this happened just two months before isn't so good," he said.
The closing price of Fast Retailing has yet to be updated, but its price a minute before the end of trade showed the stock down 1.1 percent at 15,120 yen, and as the top drag on the Nikkei 225.
In earnings news, Pioneer surged 6.9 percent to 231 yen after it raised its sales forecast by 7 percent, citing improved demand for car electronics as the auto industry raises production and a boost to optical disc sales.
) jumped 6.4 percent to 5,340 yen after lifting its annual operating profit forecast by 14 percent, helped by a recovery in demand in China while Olympus Corp (
) surged 9.2 percent to 2,900 yen on a report that it would beat its first-half earnings estimate.
But Nintendo slid 3.6 percent to 23,180 yen after its earnings missed consensus estimates on cooling demand for its family-friendly games as rivals Sony and Microsoft Corp (
Some market participants said that even in cases where profits were turning higher, there was not too much to cheer about.
"We're seeing gains in profits, but without a rise in sales even these good results lack long-term power as incentives," said Kenichi Hirano at Tachibana Securities.
In other news, Japan Airlines 9205.T gained 1.7 percent to 117 yen after it said it would apply for assistance from a state-backed corporate turnaround body, setting the stage for a large injection of public funds into the troubled airline. [ID:nT315449] [ID:nT367188]
After the bell, Sony Corp (
) posted a loss for the fourth consecutive quarter, hit by sluggish cellphone sales and as it cut prices of its PlayStation 3 game gear, but trimmed its full year loss forecast close to market expectations. [ID:nT247231]
Sony ended the day's trade up 2.8 percent at 2,785 yen.
Some 1.9 billion shares changed hands on the Tokyo exchange's first section, in line with last week's daily average.
Advancing stocks outnumbered declining ones by more than 2 to 1. Investors will be watching a slew of U.S. events and economic indicators next week, including a Federal Reserve meeting. (Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
