UPDATE 2-Lincoln Electric Q3 profit tops Street, shares jump
2009-10-30 00:47:00.0
(Reuters) - Lincoln Electric Holdings Inc's (
) quarterly profit came well ahead of market expectations on lower expenses, and the welding products maker pointed towards early signs of recovery in some key markets, sending its shares up as much as 16 percent.
Lincoln, which posted a sequential growth in profit and sales in the third quarter, said the improvement in sales had carried over to the start of the fourth quarter.
The company said on a conference call with analysts it was optimistic that key market segments and geographies were showing signs of improvement, but remained cautious in its outlook.
Due to the uptick in demand, Lincoln -- which earlier this year cut jobs and closed facilities -- said it moved up production levels during the quarter and capacity utilization has picked up a bit.
Order trends picked up through the quarter in the United States, with many large manufacturers coming off holiday shutdowns, and the company saw "good" signs of recovery in Asia, Chief Executive John Stropki said on the call.
While U.S. stimulus funds are just starting to come in, stimulus packages in China and India have spurred action in the construction and infrastructure sectors, Stropki said.
Lincoln recently acquired Jinzhou Jin Tai Welding and Metal Co to add to its growth prospects in China, the world's largest welding market. It expects the deal to add 8 cents to 12 cents a share to earnings over the next 12 months.
Lincoln, which serves the construction, transportation, metal fabrication and power markets, also sees some margin pressure in the fourth quarter.
The company, which uses inputs such as steel, copper and chemicals, sees indications of higher input costs going into the fourth quarter and 2010.
Earlier in the day, Lincoln posted net income of $12.8 million, or 30 cents a share. Excluding special items, the company earned 63 cents a share, while sales fell 30 percent to $441.8 million. [ID:nWNBB8013]
Selling, general and administrative expenses fell 21 percent to $84.8 million.
Shares of the Cleveland, Ohio-based company were up $3.51 at $47.81 Friday afternoon on Nasdaq. They earlier touched a high of $51.39. (Reporting by Bhaswati Mukhopadhyay and A.Ananthalakshmi in Bangalore; Editing by Ratul Ray Chaudhuri, Anne Pallivathuckal)
