CORRECTED - Emerson sees negative underlying sales growth in 2010
2009-10-30 10:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Industrial conglomerate Emerson Electric Co (
) expects underlying sales growth to remain negative in 2010 as the global economic downturn batters demand, scuttling hopes for an earlier recovery, its chairman said on Friday.
Emerson, which makes everything from equipment used to run factories to shelving for consumers, had said in August that its order rates were stabilising, raising hopes that industrial demand was bottoming. [ID:nBNG422422].
But Emerson's Chairman David Farr, speaking at an American Chamber of Commerce event in Hong Kong, said no significant recovery was likely before late 2010, reiterating the company's earlier forecast.
"We'll be down for the next couple of years," Farr said, referring to the company's underlying sales growth.
Still, Emerson aims to boost its operating profit growth rate to 15-17 percent per year and underlying sales to 5-7 percent over the long term business cycle, Farr told Reuters on the sidelines of the event.
"I think it's going to be very challenging," he said about the economy. "The global recovery is going to be muted, especially in developed countries."
In August, Emerson reported a 37 percent drop in quarterly net profit as the strong U.S. dollar reduced sales in four of its five divisions. [ID:nN0466496].
The St. Louis-based company, which announced a deal to buy network equipment technology provider Avocent Corp AVCT.O for about $1.2 billion in October, was "actively courting companies," Farr said.
Emerson has identified 322 companies with $49 billion worth of sales for possible acquisitions, he added.
He declined to be specific on the type of acquisitions, but said deals could be worth $500 million to $1 billion.
Emerson has said it expects to spend up to $1.5 billion on acquisitions this fiscal year, which began this month, and up to $400 million on share repurchases. [ID:nBNG531147].
Farr added that emerging markets including China, India and Southeast Asia would account for 40 to 45 percent of sales within five years, up sharply from 33 percent now.
In the next three to four years, Asia will account for about $6 billion of sales, of which China will make up half, Farr said.
"China will be a $3-4 billion business, but it wouldn't surpass the U.S., not in my tenure," Farr said. "I don't want it to be all China. We'll try to have a balanced approach. I don't want one market to take me down." (Editing by Doug Young and Chris Lewis)
