Investors shift to bonds from equities -EPFR
2009-10-29 23:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Fund flows into equities tapered off in the week ended Oct. 28 as mixed economic data prompted a shift to fixed-income assets with global bond funds drawing record inflows for the third time in a month, fund tracker EPFR Global said on Friday.
Flows into emerging markets equity funds slid to $2.2 billion, after averaging $4.4 billion in the previous two weeks, while U.S., Japan and Europe equity funds all posted outflows.
The Boston-based firm said in a statement that all equity funds tracked posted posted net outflows of $2.1 billion while fixed-income funds, excluding money market funds, saw inflows of $6.6 billion.
Upbeat corporate earnings, which had boosted equities in previous weeks, were now seen as a potential prelude to fiscal tightening, while a mixed bag economic data globally raised doubts about the pace of recovery, it said.
Emerging market bond funds took in $569 million in new cash, while high yield bond funds extended their current inflow streak to 18 straight weeks.
BRIC markets -- Brazil, China, India and Russia -- showed resilience with the exception of Russia, as Russian equities saw net outflows of $43 million. BRIC equity funds overall took in a net $225 million.
Latin American equity funds, which collectively posted a 7.7 percent loss on their portfolios for the week, were underpinned by enthusiasm for Brazil, despite the recent introduction of a foreign porftolio capital tax. Brazilian equity funds took in $90 million, extending inflows to a seventh straight week.
European equity funds posted modest outflows for only the second time since the beginning of September and Norway's decision to raise interest rates put the question of exit strategies into sharper focus, EPFR said.
on exporters and the new government's ability to translate campaign rhetoric into policy.
Healthcare/biotechnology sector funds saw the biggest redemptions as flows into sector funds shrank as regulatory initiatives in the U.S., Japan and Europe, weak U.S. home sales and fears about exit strategies curbed demand.
As U.S. lawmakers continued to work on healthcare proposals, healthcare/biotechnology funds saw redemptions of $276 million.
Commodity funds, however, saw inflows for an eight straight week, totalling $113 million for the week ended Oct. 28. (Reporting by Susan Fenton; Editing by Kazunori Takada)
