UPDATE 2-Sandvik sees stability, Q3 loss smaller than f'cast
2009-10-30 04:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Tool and machinery maker Sandvik (
) posted a smaller-than-expected quarterly loss on Friday, helped by cost cuts, and the company echoed peers' cautiously positive view that demand is stabilising.
Orders fell less than forecast and demand firmed in Asia in the third quarter, Sandvik said. Its shares rose more than 3 percent in early trading.
The global downturn has hit demand from industrial customers for metalworking tools, mining equipment and specialty steels, forcing Sandvik to cut costs and lay off thousands of staff while making workingtime and pay-cut deals with thousands more.
But there are now signs the global economy may be through the worst, and though demand may not be improving, it has at least pulled out of the steep nose-dive entered as the global financial crisis struck in earnest last year.
The third-quarter pretax loss was 523 million crowns ($74 million) versus a profit of 3 billion in the year-earlier period, beating the mean forecast for a loss of 944 million in a Reuters poll. Sandvik ran a pretax loss of 2.4 billion in the second quarter.
Sandvik shares rose 3.3 percent to 81.9 crowns by 0807 GMT, outperforming a 0.3 percent gain in the Stockholm bourse's blue chip index
"I think this looks really strong," Evli analyst Magnus Axen. "There are a number of issues that look good -- the cost cuts are biting well and order bookings were well above consensus."
Sandvik saw order bookings fall less than expected -- to 17.2 billion crowns from 22.1 billion a year ago, above the 16.8 billion poll forecast. The company said that order cancellations, that had slammed Sandvik earlier this year, had slowed to a trickle.
Sandvik said market demand had remained weak in all customer segments, with the exception of the energy segment.
"The market situation was weak in Europe and North America, while Asia -- and China in particular -- performed slightly better, as did the mining aftermarket," the company said.
Earlier this week, U.S. toolmaker Kennametal (
) -- one of Sandvik's competitors -- posted a net loss in the third quarter, but raised its outlook for full-year earnings. [ID:nN29350449]
), a rival in the mining and construction equipment segment, posted a smaller-than-expected fall in third-quarter pretax earnings last week and said it expected demand to remain flat in most markets in the near term. [nLM435605]
The company said demand for its products was in line with the preceding quarter and that the rate of price increases was stable during July through September, while cancellations of placed orders had been "marginal".
"At current inventory levels production rates will gradually be increased," it added. "As customer de-stocking reduces, the need for Sandvik's products will grow, meaning that production rates can be increased thereby gradually improving earnings."
(Reporting by Niklas Pollard and Johannes Hellstrom, editing by Will Waterman and Rupert Winchester) ($1=7.046 Swedish Crown)
