PRESS DIGEST - Financial Times - Oct 30
2009-10-29 23:40:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu  EDT
) has announced it is seeking stock market listings in Shanghai and Mumbai in an attempt to boost its presence in the Asian markets. While a Chinese listing is still only in the planning stages, chief executive Peter Sands says an Indian listing could take place as early as the first half of 2010. According to Sands, "the quantum of capital" is not the driving force behind the move. Rather, Standard Chartered hopes relatively small listings will "reinforce the profile and positioning of the bank" in these territories. In addition, analysts suggest Asian markets currently offer a more favourable growth outlook compared to the UK. Standard Chartered's shares were up 54.5 pence to 15.37 pounds at the close of trading on Thursday.
First Quench has been placed in KPMG-led administration, threatening 6,500 jobs across the company's Threshers and Wine Rack businesses. Although KPMG has stated its intention to continue running First Quench as normal while seeking a buyer for the business as a going concern, sources close to the matter fear a quick sale may not materialise. Julian Mash, chief executive of First Quench's owner Vision Capital, said: "We were making progress on the turnround in 2008, when it was hit by the impact of the credit crunch and the withdrawal of credit insurance across the sector."
) has entered discussions with investors concerning a 21 billion pound capital raising, comprising the issuing of 7.5 billion pounds of convertible bonds and a 13 billion pound rights issue. News of the capital raising -- the largest in the world -- boosted Lloyds' shares by 7.5 percent. Chancellor Alistair Darling has provisionally backed the move, which would mean Lloyds could opt out of the government's toxic asset insurance scheme. The government would maintain its 43.5 percent stake by claiming its full allocation of new shares, adding 6 billion pounds to the 17 billion pounds it pumped into Lloyds at the start of 2009.
TANFIELD'S FORD DEAL SET TO BE UNPLUGGED
) to manufacture a battery-powered Transit Connect van is to be terminated. The deal, announced in February, had served to boost Tanfield's shares and built on excitement surrounding a further tie-up that would see Tanfield launch its Smith electric vehicles in the United States. Ford is expected to seek another partner for its venture. Production of larger electric trucks has begun at Smith Electric Vehicles U.S. Corporation, where Tanfield has a 49 percent stake. In a statement released last month, Tanfield's reported turnover was down from 92.8 million pounds to 29.9 million pounds. Shares closed up 3.75 pence on Thursday at 35.5 pence.
Despite a drop halfway through the year, Virgin Media [VMEDL.UL] has performed above expectations for the third quarter and has added a net 17,800 further cable subscribers to its customer base. For the period to September 30, Virgin reported record average turnover per user of 44.24 pounds, largely through sales of multiple services. "Our focus remains on attracting high-value customers, who buy more from us and stay longer," said Neil Berkett, chief executive. Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, amortisation and other charges rose 22 million pounds from the same period last year. Virgin Media's shares were up 55 pence to 900 pence.
Blacks Leisure BSLA.L is hoping to persuade its landlords to break leases on the company's unprofitable stores in order to head off administration. With first-half pre-tax losses standing at 18.1 million pounds, Blacks has until the end of November to secure a deal on the leases of 89 stores to avoid collapse. The outdoor goods retailer is depending on its landlords to approve a company voluntary agreement, with analysts suggesting that the option of a CVA, while widely criticised for the apparent advantage they offer struggling retailers over rivals, is probably preferable to full-blown administration. Losses per share rose from 16.79 pence to 43.06 pence. Blacks' share price dropped 2.25 pence to 27 pence.
For the first time, Hinchingbrooke Hospital in Huntingdon is offering private sector investors the opportunity to enter into a seven-year franchise deal. However, the NHS district general hospital's franchise conditions are so exacting that analysts are already predicting no takers for the tie-up, with the NHS Partners Network suggesting the offer "appears to lack commercial reality". The responsibilities that any investor will have to take on, including retaining all current services and paying off some of the hospital's 38.9 million pounds of debt, have led analyst William Laing to point out that whoever wins the contract is "being asked to take all of the risk while being denied the tools needed to make any real changes".
On Thursday, Graham Love announced that he is to step down as chief executive of Qinetiq (
). The news pushed the former defence research laboratory's shares up almost 16 percent. Love will be replaced by Leo Quinn, who joins from De La Rue and is "highly regarded" among City analysts, according to Investec's Chris Dyett. Qinetic says a change in leadership has been on the cards for nearly a year and that Quinn's experience with turnrounds has already been proven during his time with Honeywell International.
) announced third-quarter revenue at the higher-end of predicted levels on Thursday, sending shares up almost eight percent. Despite caution over the economy among CSR's consumer electronics clients, the wireless chip manufacturer has seen an increase in sales of its chips to mobile handset makers, including Nokia. As a result, CSR has adjusted its estimate for a drop in handset shipments from the nine percent it predicted at the start of the year to seven percent. In addition, the company believes its expansion prospects can only improve as the market for chips providing wireless connectivity potentially doubles by 2012. Shares closed up 30.3 pence at 432.4 pence.
