UPDATE 3-Teck done selling assets, open for business-CEO
2009-10-29 17:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Teck Resources (
) doesn't plan to sell off any more assets to pay down debt taken on last year to finance its takeover of Fording, and may start considering acquisitions, the company's CEO said on Thursday.
The completion of the asset sale program means Teck doesn't plan to part with its 20-percent stake in the Fort Hills oil sands project, which it previously said it might sell. Teck's partners in the project are Suncor Energy (
"We don't expect to announce any additional sales," Teck Chief Executive Don Lindsay said on a conference call.
The company borrowed $9.8 billion last year to buy Fording Canadian Coal Trust, a top metallurgical coal producer.
Actions such as the asset sales, a recent bond issue and the sale of a 17-percent equity stake to state-owned China Investment Corp have brought the acquisition debt down to $2.7 billion. Teck expects to cut that by another $1.1 billion when its remaining announced asset sales close.
Lindsay suggested the company was at a turning point in its year-long ordeal to recover from the takeover, which was completed just as global resource markets tanked.
"We're in a different stage now, we're open for business. There's a lot of proposals that float around that we consider," he said, in reply to a question about whether Teck might seek acquisitions.
However, he said the company has plenty on its plate with development assets such the Galore Creek copper-gold deposit in British Columbia and the Relincho copper property in Chile.
"We have a lot to work with, and there's no real need from a resource stage point of view, to do acquisitions," he said.
"There will be opportunities from time to time that we'll look at quite seriously... But for right now our focus remains repaying that term loan and getting back to investment grade."
Teck lost its investment grade rating after the Fording takeover, and has been working to get its debt ratios down to a level where rating agencies will restore its status.
Its debt to debt-plus-equity ratio was 34 percent at the end of the quarter, compared to a company target of 25-30 percent.
Shares of Teck, which late on Wednesday reported a stronger-than-expected third-quarter profit, rose 5.8 percent, or C$1.79 to C$32.51 on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The company's improving fortunes have driven its shares up nine-fold from its low in March. ($1=$1.07 Canadian) (Reporting by Cameron French; editing by Janet Guttsman)
