PREVIEW-Higher pulp prices, tax breaks to drive Domtar Q3
2009-10-29 16:06:00.0
(Reuters) - Higher pulp prices along with lower input costs are expected to drive forestry firm Domtar Corp's (
) strong third-quarter results, but analysts are concerned about the sustainability of pulp prices.
The company, which has operations in the United States and Canada, is also expected to improve its debt position through help from the U.S. government's Alternative Fuel Tax Credit program and Canada's Pulp and Paper Green Transformation Program.
Prices for northern bleached softwood kraft (NBSK) pulp have been steadily going up, defying analyst expectations.
Pulp prices have jumped from $580 a ton at the end of April to $770 a ton in August, following a surge in Chinese pulp buying.
"We're looking for a fairly significant (earnings) beat here," Raymond James analyst Daryl Swetlishoff said.
Analysts on average were forecasting a profit of 29 cents a share, before items, on revenue of $1.34 billion in the third quarter, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
"We're going to see better pulp prices (in third-quarter results) - that's for sure," Scotia Capital analyst Benoit Laprade said, adding that less market-related plant downtime in the quarter should boost Domtar's results.
Laprade said Domtar's input costs, like certain chemicals, have been falling, which should also contribute to its performance in the third quarter.
However, Raymond James' Swetlishoff said he does not expect the high pulp prices to be sustainable for much longer.
"To be honest we've been proven wrong over the past couple months but we do expect pulp prices to go down and give back some of these gains in late 2009, early 2010," Scotia Capital analyst Benoit Laprade said.
RBC Capital Markets analyst Paul Quinn questioned whether pricing momentum will last through the end of the year, with weak paper demand, increasing pulp supply and China remaining the only region experiencing demand growth.
"Thanks to over $550 million in alternative fuel tax credits that they're going to get in 2009, the balance sheet is in great shape," Scotia's Laprade said.
The company's use of "black liquor," a by-product of pulp production, to power its mills, has earned it tax credits under the U.S. government's Alternative Fuel Tax Credit program. The 2009 credit was intended to encourage the use of biofuels.
Scotia's Laprade said this could continue to benefit Domtar in 2010 as Washington mulls further such initiatives.
Domtar may also use the tax breaks to pay back some of its long-term debt, even though it said in August it would continue to carry more cash on its balance sheet, compared with what it used to do prior to the recession.
"The debt is actually well under control here," Laprade said.
Domtar shares, which have risen two-fold over the last 6 months, closed up C$2.05 at C$42.09 Thursday on the Toronto Stock Exchange. (Reporting by Isheeta Sanghi in Bangalore; Editing by Anthony Kurian)
