PRESS DIGEST-Australian Business News - Oct 30
2009-10-29 15:53:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Wed, Oct 28 2009
Thu  EDT
Jan Cameron, co-founder of outdoor clothing retailer Kathmandu, yesterday continued her criticism of the companys float, saying that Kathmandu's high retail prices are not realistic in today's climate. The company was purchased by Quadrant Private Equity and Goldman Sachs JBWere in 2006 for A$223 million, and this week launched the retail section of its proposed A$375 million initial public offering. Page 43.
Betfair Australasia Pty Ltd, the holding company for online betting exchange Betfair, has recorded a net loss of around A$11.8 million for the year to the end of April 2009, according to accounts filed with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. Betfair's marketing costs increased to A$7.7 million for the year, up from A$1.3 million. Chief executive Andrew Twaits said the increased marketing costs followed the lifting of bans on interstate advertising. Page 43.
) is relying on consultancies to gather data on Chinese steel and iron ore production growth rather than sending its own research and analysis team into the field. The change follows the arrest of Stern Hu in July, the Australian citizen who was in charge of Rio's Shanghai office where much of the data on China's steel industry was previously gathered. Rio's Chinese sales and marketing team have been relocated from Shanghai to Singapore following Mr Hu's arrest. Page 44.
Power company AGL Energy's AGL.AX chief executive Michael Fraser yesterday said that the group had taken note of recent criticism of dilutionary institutional share placements. "We need to make sure we look after the interests of all shareholders," Mr Fraser said, noting that AGL has a large proportion of retail shareholders. AGL, which may require funds to pay for the acquisition of power assets in New South Wales, is likely to instead raise equity through a rights issue. Page 45.
The Australian sharemarket yesterday fell 2.4 percent, wiping A$30 billion off the value of stocks as fears grow that the equities market may have out-paced the global economic recovery. Investors switched to defensive investments on the news of weak economic data from the United States. The Australian dollar also fell to close at US89.92 cents as currency investors favoured the Japanese yen and the United States dollar. Page 21.
The two-day bookbuild process has been completed for department store Myer's initial public offering, priced at A$4.10 after being offered at a range of between A$3.90 and A$4.90. The discounted price means Myer's private equity owners will miss out on as much as A$310 million in sale proceeds. Myer will publicly list on the Australian sharemarket on Monday, 2 November, becoming the sixth-largest float in Australian history at A$2.2 billion. Page 21.
) chief executive Mike Smith has warned Australia's prudential regulator not to try and fix something that does not need fixing. Mr Smith made the comments after Australian Prudential Regulation Authority chairman John Laker said that despite surviving the ravages of the economic crisis, local banks will need to comply with tighter global standards. "We have to say our piece on this; there's not one size fits all," said Mr Smith. Page 21.
) chairman Don Mercer told investors at the company's annual general meeting yesterday that the company needs to pursue growth through mergers and acquisitions, as tightening world supplies of gold strengthen demand. "The outlook for gold has been strong during the year in review and remains positive," said Mr Mercer. This month gold prices hit all time highs, with United States gold futures reaching US$1070 an ounce. Page 23.
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group yesterday posted a profit of A$2.29 billion for the year to the end of September, translating into an 11 percent fall in annual profits compared to the previous year. Cash earnings surged 12 percent to A$3.38 billion for the year due to an increase in revenue. Chief executive Mike Smith said the bank would continue on the path of making acquisitions as it looks for growth in Asia. Page 1.
) has warned that despite the positive outlook in most economies, the strength of the rebound in commodity prices needs to be questioned. Chairman Don Argus told shareholders at the company's annual meeting in London that China may be close to ending its stockpile rebuilding, and demand from developed economies may not be seen until the middle of next year. Page 1.
) and V Australia, Virgin Blue's VBA.AX trans-Pacific carrier, may come under pressure from United Airlines, as the United States (US) airline commits to maintaining services on the US-Australia route. United is third-largest carrier in the US and has recently increased services on the route. "It's a hugely significant market for us and we are in that market for the long haul," said United chief executive and chairman Glenn Tilton. Page 5.
) says it may become the first network in the country to launch a third free-to-air channel. The network has not confirmed whether the new channel will be launched in the first or second half of next year. Ten currently has two free-to-air channels; the high definition One sports channel, and a standard definition simulcast channel of its regular programming. Ten can launch the channel at any time, and says it has a wide range of possible programming options. Page 9.
More than 2000 grower investors in failed managed investment scheme provider Timbercorp yesterday launched a class action against the company as well as its responsible entity and three of its directors. The investors statement of claim includes allegations of conflicts of interest, breaches of directors duties, misleading or deceptive conduct, and other breaches of the Corporations Act. B 3.
) had made excessive termination payments to former senior executives over the past year, and recommended that ACSI members vote against the groups remuneration report. ACSI, whose members control around A$250 billion in funds, also criticised executive bonuses paid by Fairfax, saying it was not clear on what basis these bonuses were paid. B 3.
) has acknowledged that the system of relying on financial planners to contact the bank's customers with margin calls had failed in the case of its Storm Financial clients. Financial planning network Storm received around 1000 margin calls from Macquarie in September and October last year, most of which Storm failed to pass on to borrowers. B 4.
Australia's Future Fund, set up in 2006 to meet the Commonwealth's superannuation liabilities to public sector employees, has released its annual report for 2008-09. The report shows that the funds holding in telecommunications company Telstra cost the fund 11.4 percent, with its non-Telstra holdings losing only 4.2 percent. Chairman David Murray said the fund believes it can achieve its target average return of 4.5 percent to 5.5 percent above the consumer price index in the longer term. B 4. --
