ADR Report-ADRs rise as emerging markets, commodities rebound
2009-10-29 15:31:00.0
(Reuters) - Overseas shares traded in the United States rose sharply on Thursday as investors were emboldened by a return to growth in the U.S. economy, snapping up shares in emerging market and commodity companies.
U.S.-listed shares of Japan's Toyota (
) rose after a local newspaper said the world's largest car manufacturer would post better-than-expected results after rival Honda Motor (
Among companies based in emerging markets, shares of Brazilian miner Vale (
) reported a surge in third-quarter profit, driving its U.S.-listed stock higher.
Sinopec's results followed a disappointing performance for sector peer PetroChina (
) in the last session. Sinopec, whose U.S.-listed stock rose 2.9 percent to $87.07, said net profit more than doubled, but analysts said the company might be hit by fuel price cuts in China. For more, see [ID:nHKG320574]
Toyota is expected to post a consolidated operating loss of about 250 billion yen ($2.75 billion) -- an improvement from the previously projected loss of 400 billion yen, the Nikkei business daily said, citing a weaker yen as a boost to earnings derived from exports. Toyota's U.S.-listed stock climbed 3.2 percent to $80.22 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Vale, the world's largest iron ore producer, said strong demand from China and the global economic recovery would likely drive growth in metal consumption. Its stock rose 10.5 percent to $26.75 on the NYSE. For more, see [ID:nN29358522]
The Bank of New York Mellon index of leading Latin American ADRs .BKLA rose 6.5 percent, the steepest one-day rise since March.
In Latin America, major stock indexes climbed. [.MX] and [SA]
In Europe, banks' stocks rebounded after their recent slump. Lloyds Banking Group Plc (
) inched closer to plugging a capital gap of more than $33 billion, boosting the British bank's shares on prospects a deal could happen before year end.
Lloyds' New York-listed shares rose 10.4 percent.
The Bank of New York Mellon index of leading European ADRs .BKEUR rose 3.2 percent. In Europe, the FTSEurofirst 300
(Reporting by Edward Krudy; Editing by Jan Paschal)
