Oil use yet to recover, rally not supported: Shell
2009-10-29 07:38:00.0
(Reuters) - Oil demand has yet to pick up again, giving the recent rally in prices little fundamental support, Royal Dutch Shell Plc's (
)'s chief financial officer said on Thursday.
The comments from Shell echo the view of many others in the oil industry that oil's rise has not been driven by firmer underlying demand. Crude oil hit a one-year high of $82 a barrel last week.
"It's difficult for me to say what has actually driven it but I don't see it yet supported by fundamentals because demand has not yet picked up again in the markets in which we operate," Shell CFO Simon Henry said.
"Around the world, oil stocks storage capacity is pretty much full, oil stocks are well above historical levels and therefore there is quite a stock overhang that makes us prudent or cautious in our approach to planning."
"So while we might see higher oil prices at the moment, fundamentally we don't see demand turning again yet and there is plenty of supply available."
Analysts say expectations of economic recovery and a weak dollar are two of the main reasons for oil's more than 50 percent rally so far in 2009.
Shell, Europe's largest oil company by market value, takes its view on the wider economic outlook and demand from sales of products including chemicals, gas and supplies of diesel for aviation and trucking, Henry said.
The Shell CFO said demand trends were following a mixed pattern around the globe, with consumption in Europe the weakest and Asia showing more signs of growth.
"In Europe, there are few if any signs of demand recovery, and demand is down significantly on a year ago," he said.
"In the U.S., if anything there is some bottoming out and improvement in one or two sub-sectors, but still not yet firm enough to call a recovery on what we see."
"In Asia, we do see chemical demand picking up. China and India continue to grow, but in our own industry that doesn't necessary help us because some very significant new refining capacity has come on in that area."
(Reporting by Alex Lawler; Editing by Sue Thomas)
