UPDATE 2-Iraq to sign deals with BP, Eni
2009-10-29 14:29:00.0
(Reuters) - Iraq's Oil Ministry said on Thursday that it will sign a final deal on Nov. 3 with BP (
) and China's CNPC to develop its biggest oilfield, Rumaila, the nation's first major oil pact since the U.S. invasion in 2003.
The ministry will also sign an initial deal on Nov. 2 with Italy's Eni SpA (
) over the Zubair oilfield, Oil Ministry spokesman Asim Jihad said.
The agreement with Eni and its partners, Occidental Petroleum Corp (
) and South Korea's KOGAS (
), must be approved by Iraq's cabinet before a final contract can be signed, Jihad said.
In June Iraq's Oil Ministry said Eni, with other bidders, was not willing to accept the government's contract terms for the Zubair oilfield.
"(We changed our minds) because the tax terms are different now," said Eni's Chief Operating Officer for E&P Claudio Descalzi on Thursday.
Speaking to analysts on a conference call, Descalzi said that under the original Zubair terms taxes were on total revenue -- on both cost oil and profit oil.
"Now taxes are just on profit oil," he said.
Iraq's oil infrastructure is dilapidated after years of war, sanctions and underinvestment, and while it has the world's third largest reserves, it is only the 11th largest producer.
Rumaila, with estimated reserves of 17 billion barrels, is the workhorse of Iraq's oil sector, producing almost half of the country's total daily output.
The deal with BP and CNPC was the only one that emerged from Iraq's first post-invasion auction of oil contracts in June after international firms balked at Iraq's stiff terms.
Subsequent negotiations behind closed doors have, however, led to other deals being worked out on some of the fields that were not successfully auctioned off. One of those is the agreement with Eni and its partners over Zubair.
Eni has said it expects to invest $10 billion in Zubair, which has estimated reserves of 4 billion barrels, and will boost production to 1.125 million bpd from 200,000 bpd within seven years.
Iraq will hold a second round of oilfield tenders on Dec. 11-12 in which largely undeveloped fields will be on offer. (Additional reporting by Stephen Jewkes in Milan; Writing by Michael Christie; Editing by David Brough and Jon Loades-Carter)
