Zimbabwe expels U.N. rights investigator
2009-10-29 07:13:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
United Nations special investigator on torture Manfred Nowak speaks during a news conference in Amman in this June 29, 2006 file photo. U.N. human rights expert Nowak, who was detained by security officials on arrival in Zimbabwe on October 28, 2009, has been deported from the country, a U.N. official said on Thursday. Credit: Reuters/Ali Jarekji/File
Thu, Oct 29 2009
Thu  EDT
Nowak, the UNHRC' special rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, told reporters after arriving in South Africa that his mission had failed.
"I think that it is the end of the mission. I think I have not been treated by any government in such a rude manner than by the government of Zimbabwe. I will not (go) back," Nowak said.
Nowak said actions open to the council included the adoption of a resolution condemning Zimbabwe and requesting an investigation, or the council could set up an independent investigation team to look into human rights in the country.
He said he had been invited to Zimbabwe by Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai, whose power-sharing deal with President Robert Mugabe is under severe strain.
DELIBERATE ATTEMPT?
The refusal to allow him entry to Zimbabwe was either a misunderstanding or something more deliberate on the part of some members of Mugabe's ZANU-PF party.
"There was a lot of either miscommunication, or it was a clear strategy by certain sections within the ZANU-PF, including of course the minister of foreign affairs, who just wanted to deny me entry and to deprive me of the possibility of assessing the human rights situation in the country," he told Reuters.
Tsvangirai's Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) has stopped cooperation with ZANU-PF in the unity government.
Zimbabwe's state-owned Herald newspaper accused Nowak of trying to "gatecrash into the country."
Officials from SADC, a regional grouping, opened talks on Thursday with the rival Zimbabwean parties in a bid to patch up the rift threatening the power-sharing government.
"The SADC delegation has already started the engagement process, with the ministers and officials talking to the different parties, laying the groundwork for consultations with the principal leaders," one SADC official told Reuters.
"We are not going to be playing this in the gallery because that is not constructive or the way to conduct a review or to mediate in any dispute," said the official who declined to be named or to discuss his team's chances of success.
Mugabe, who has led Zimbabwe since independence in 1980, formed a power-sharing government with Tsvangirai to end months of feuding in the impoverished country.
Nowak's invitation marked the first time Zimbabwe had offered to open up to an expert working for the UNHRC.
The urgency of an objective fact-finding by an independent U.N. expert was highlighted by allegations of the arrest, intimidation and harassment of MDC supporters and of human rights defenders in the past few days, the U.N. said.
(Additional reporting by Cris Chinaka in Harare and Serena Chaudhry in Johannesburg; Writing by Marius Bosch; Editing by Giles Elgood)
