UPDATE 1-AEI IPO postponed by a day, prospects cloudy
2009-10-28 16:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Energy company AEI AEI.N, which operates power and gas distribution lines in Latin America and China, delayed its planned $750 million initial public offering by a day, with the pricing of the deal now expected Thursday, an underwriter said.
AEI's presence in growing markets such as Brazil, where the emerging middle class will consume more and more electricity, will appeal to investors, but it could face concerns over the political and operational risks of being in 19 different countries, analysts said.
The company has a total of 4.9 million electric power customers and its assets include nearly 120,000 miles of power distribution and transmission lines and power generation capacity of 2,181 megawatts, according to its prospectus.
"The utility business doesn't lend itself to consolidation to this extent," said Ryan McLean, an equities analyst with Morningstar, adding that having assets in so many countries represented a daunting managerial challenging.
If AEI completes its U.S.-listed IPO as expected, it will be the first by a traditional energy company since May 2008, when Western Gas Partners (
) raised $343.4 million, according to Thomson Reuters data.
), AEI's business is exclusively outside the United States, making it hard to compare the value of its shares to those of rivals.
"It's a way to ride rising energy demand in emerging countries," said Francis Gaskins, president of research firm IPO Desktop. "But they are running currency and political risks, and in many of those countries, it only has one customer -- the government."
AEI also owns assets in Venezuela and Bolivia, both countries that have nationalized foreign companies' energy infrastructure.
Based in the Cayman Islands but with a main U.S. office in Houston, AEI is expecting to sell 50 million shares for between $14 and $16 and start trading them on Friday on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol "AEI."
AEI is selling about a third of the shares in the offering, with existing shareholders selling the rest.
AEI's main shareholders include funds that have invested through Ashmore Investment Management Ltd, part of Ashmore Group Plc (
), and own 55 percent of its shares, as well funds managed by Eton Park Capital, which owned 6 percent as of June 30.
Ashmore bought the former Enron International unit in 2006. AEI's CEO, James Hughes, worked at Enron for nearly 10 years.
The company expects net IPO proceeds of $233 million, which it will use for general corporate purposes, including paying down some debt, according to its prospectus.
For the six months ended June 30, AEI had revenue of $3.7 billion, a drop of 19.6 percent over the year-earlier period, but earned a profit of $221 million.
The IPO's underwriters, led by Goldman Sachs & Co, Credit Suisse, Citi, and JP Morgan, have the option to buy another 7.5 million in the offering. (Reporting by Phil Wahba; Editing by Gary Hill)
