CORRECTED - CORRECTED-UPDATE 2-Nippon Steel lifts forecast, shares perk up
2009-10-29 01:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Nippon Steel Corp (
), the world's No.2 steelmaker, booked a third consecutive quarterly loss but raised its full-year outlook amid a recovery in exports to Asia and demand from the auto industry.
Shares of Nippon Steel rose 1.5 percent to 344 yen after the results, bucking a 1.5 percent fall in the Nikkei average
China's near-$600 billion stimulus package has revived the region's steel industry, but subsequent production boosts by Chinese mills and their rising inventories are worrying global steelmakers. They say China could ramp up its exports and damage the balance in the market.
Nippon Steel's earnings recovery has been slower than its domestic rival JFE Holdings Inc (
) as trouble at a mill in August curbed output at a time when demand from exports was strong. In addition, a shutdown until August at another mill, one of its most efficient, raised Nippon Steel's cost base.
"The outlook is neither positive or negative, so the points are whether its stock price is cheap and the momentum of its business," said Tomomi Yamashita, a fund manager at Shinkin Asset Management.
"The current stock price is not so expensive, but the macro conditions are not good enough to encourage buying it up. I expect it to move in a range of 300 to 400 yen."
) and competes with the world's No.3 Baoshan Iron and Steel Co (
) in Asia -- said on Thursday its recurring loss, which is before tax and and special items, came to 30.3 billion yen ($334 million) in July-September.
The loss was smaller than the previous quarter's 56.7 billion yen loss and its own forecast of 53.3 billion yen loss. The company booked a profit of 118.15 billion yen a year earlier.
Japanese steelmakers' profits will be well below those of Asian peers this year as lower costs of raw material inputs such as iron ore and coking coal triggered big inventory writedowns mostly in April-June. The Japanese have tougher asset impairment accounting rules than their rivals. (Reporting by Yuko Inoue and Taiga Uranaka; Editing by Lincoln Feast)
