UPDATE 3-ABB still uncertain about recovery after order drop
2009-10-29 03:49:00.0
(Reuters) - Swiss engineering group ABB AG (
The seller of power equipment to utilities as well as oil and gas companies posted an expected third-quarter net profit of $1 billion, helped by a $380 million cut in provisions. [ID:nLJ400807]
ABB, which competes with Germany's Siemens AG (
) and France's Areva SA CEPFi.PA in electricity transmission and distribution equipment, said the outlook for its business remained uncertain through the rest of 2009 and 2010.
But the group confirmed the targets in its five-year plan, which ends in 2011. ABB is aiming for revenue growth of between 8 percent and 11 percent and for an earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) margin of between 11 and 16 percent in the mid-term.
Shares in the group were seen opening around 2.3 percent lower. ABB stock has already gained 31 percent so far this year, slightly outperforming a 27 percent rise in the DJ Stoxx European industrial goods and services index .SXNP.
"It remains unclear when and how quickly capital investments by customers will recover from the downturn," the group said in a statement.
"The volatility of raw material prices and the limited availability of project funding continue to influence the timing of many power and industrial investment decisions, especially among small- to medium-sized companies," it said.
ABB's conservative stance contrasts with rival Schneider Electric SA (
), which earlier this month raised its full-year margin forecast on the back of an improving economic environment. [ID:nLM422744]
ABB is looking to cut costs by $2 billion by the end of 2010 to offset the impact of crumbling demand in the industrial, construction and automotive markets as a result of tighter credit markets and the economic downturn.
The group said it had already cut more than $1 billion in the first three quarters, putting it ahead of schedule.
"Margins and base orders (are) more under pressure than expected, partly compensated by cost reductions ahead of plan; in my view, not extremely exciting and rather uninspiring," said Vontobel analyst Panagiotis Spiliopoulos.
ABB's Orders fell to $7.1 billion, just below the average forecast in the Reuters poll. [ID:nLN296728]
The stock trades at nearly 20 times forecast 2010 earnings, at a premium to Schneider at nearly 16 times, according to Reuters data.
