UPDATE 2-SABMiller spends $370 mln to tap African growth
2009-10-28 09:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Global brewer SABMiller Plc (
The London-based brewer of Miller Lite, Peroni and Castle beers also added that should the privately-held French drinks group Castel seek to dispose of its West African beer business then SABMiller would be interested in buying it.
"We are spending $370 million on capex this year. After that, it will halve to $200 million. We think it's sustainable capex (capital expenditure)," SABMiller Africa's Managing Director Mark Bowman said at a media briefing on Wednesday.
He added that the brewer is spending $130 million in Angola, $50 million each in Mozambique and Tanzania and $37 million in Sudan. Overall, it intends to open four new breweries in Africa during its current financial year to March 2010.
The group will commission at the end of the year a second brewing plant in Angola, which will be the biggest in Africa outside South Africa, while it has also commissioned new breweries in the three other African countries.
Bowman added the company would invest further on smaller upgrades, buying containers, fridges and bottles in the continent during the group's current financial year.
In Africa, SABMiller has brewing and beverage operations in 14 countries, and a presence in further 19 nations, largely in West Africa, through a strategic alliance with Castel.
"Should Castel seek to dispose of their African business, SABMiller would be an interested buyer, however there is no indication that Castel is seeking to offload this element of its business at this stage," said Bowman.
The brewer, which earns nearly 90 percent of its profits from emerging markets like South Africa, Colombia, Poland and China, said there was no particular reason to sell its stake in South African wine and spirits company Distell (
SABMiller's Africa region was one of only two, along with Asia, to show beer volume growth in the group's first half to end-September with underlying volumes up 3 percent compared with falls in Europe Latin America, North America and South Africa.
The group is investing in African bottled water companies, buying Voltic Water in Ghana and Voltic Nigeria. It has also acquired Ambo Water from the Ethiopian government.
SABMiller is seen by analysts as the front runner to acquire FEMSA's (
Earlier this month, FEMSA said it was in talks with several parties to explore opportunities involving its beer business. (Editing by David Jones and David Cowell)
