Canadian farm exports snagged in world safety net
2009-10-28 16:46:00.0
(Reuters) - A series of trade restrictions on Canadian farm products this year has ratcheted up the pressure on farmers, many of whom say the barriers reflect protectionism rather than genuine concern over food safety.
From China to Europe, various foreign markets have banned shipments of Canadian-produced raw materials for cattle feed, vegetable oil, linoleum flooring and hot dogs, driving down prices at the farm gate.
Making matters worse, the trade bans causing farmers so much pain seem strangely arbitrary to many Canadians.
"A lot of it comes down to recessionary (pressure) that they're under," Canadian Agriculture Minister Gerry Ritz said on Wednesday. Export markets "tend to get more protectionist as they safeguard their own folks."
As for the specific restrictions, Ritz said: "Some are based on a bit of reality, some are a real stretch."
Whatever the basis for trade restrictions, the results are clear. ICE Canada canola futures RSX9 plunged 4 percent Thursday with news China would not accept Canadian canola with blackleg disease. Prices of flax, cattle and hogs, which have also been targeted, are also under pressure.
Much of the price pain traces to disingenuous safety concerns, Canadian agriculture sources say. In particular:
* China's ban on Canadian and Australian canola with blackleg targets a disease already present in China. Some analysts believe China is seeking to draw down its supply of canola, which is crushed for use in vegetable oil.
* Four Canadian canola-crushing plants owned by Cargill [CARG.UL], Viterra VT.TO and two by Bunge (
) are under U.S. shipping restrictions because of salmonella bacteria in meal shipments. Salmonella is a serious concern in human food, but canola meal is cattle feed. Some believe the Obama administration is scoring political points based on food-illness fears. Even so, U.S. food safety officials maintain that animal feeds can act as vehicles for transmitting harmful bacteria to humans and animals.
* A U.S. country-of-origin labelling law has sharply reduced Canadian cattle and hog exports to the United States. Some U.S. packers and farm groups oppose the law, causing Canadian farmers to suspect reflects effective lobbying by certain cattle groups rather than food traceability concerns.
Restricting imports gives an immediate boost to local farmers, said William Kerr, a professor in agricultural economics at University of Saskatchewan.
Canada, which is under more trade restrictions at one time than usual, is a target because it is a big farm product producer, Kerr said.
Consumers' voice is also finding more ears, leading to other trade bans:
* Flax, used in food and industrial uses like flooring, lost its top market Europe this summer after two dozen countries found genetically modified flaxseed in Canadian flax shipments [ID:nN05373740]. European consumers are reluctant to eat GMO food because of concerns about unproven long-term health effects. Stricter regulation in Canada of GMO crops is needed to prevent similar threats to farmers, the National Farmers Union of Canada has said.
* More than a dozen countries, notably Russia, banned North American pork in spring after the discovery of the H1N1 flu virus on a Canadian hog farm. The World Health Organization said pork is safe to eat, but the bans were slow to disappear.
"The H1N1 thing is (about) politicians covering their butts essentially and in direct violation of international agreements," Kerr said.
That points to another reality -- the WTO complaint process isn't swift enough to prevent industry pain, Kerr said.
"Any time you're banned from a market, you're going to suffer. The unfortunate thing is we probably would win some of these cases at the WTO, but it takes a long time."
(Additional reporting by Randall Palmer in Ottawa; Editing by Frank McGurty))
