UPDATE 1-China's BoCom Q3 flat, loan growth slows
2009-10-28 05:20:00.0
(Reuters) - Bank of Communications (
) (BoCom), China's fifth-largest lender, posted a flat quarterly net profit as lower margins offset the benefit of loan expansion, but analysts expect profitability to improve as the economy recovers.
Banks' net interest margins had narrowed to about 200 basis points on average compared with more than 300 basis points last year, said Jin Lin, an analyst at Oriental Securities Co. A basis point is 1/100 of a percentage point.
The margin pressure has begun to ease as Beijing tightens its ultra loose monetary policy, but loan growth has also slowed sharply in the second half of the year.
"BoCom's numbers don't look so good, if you compare them with its peers," said Ivan Li, an analyst at Kim Eng Hong Kong. "I'm positive about China's banking sector, based on a few factors, including rebounding net interest margin, improving marcoeconomic conditions, and smaller-than-expected bad debt provision."
BoCom, nearly one-fifth owned by HSBC Holdings Plc, earned 7.32 billion yuan ($1.07 billion) in the quarter ended Sept 30, compared with a net profit of 7.2 billion yuan a year earlier, the lender said in an announcement filed on Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
For a complete copy of the results, click on:
The results lagged behind expectations of seven analysts polled by Reuters, who had forecast a third-quarter profit of 7.55 billion yuan on average.
"Despite rapid loan growth, profit was dented by narrowing margains," said Oriental Securites' Jin before the results came out. "But interest margins have bottomed out and will likely rise if the government tightens monetary policies."
Analysts are worried not only about tight interest margins, but also about asset quality after China's major banks embarked on a lending spree this year to support the government's 4 trillion yuan infrastructure-focused stimulus.
BoCom shares rose 8.6 percent in Hong Kong during the quarter, underperforming a 14-percent gain in the benchmark Hang Seng index
Loans outstanding increased by 2.3 percent to 1.77 trillion yuan, from 1.73 trillion yuan at the end of June. The growth rate was down sharply from the 30 percent growth rate in BoComm's total outstanding loans in the first half of the year.
Its net interest margin fell to 2.22 percent from 3.02 percent at the end of 2008, but up slightly from 2.21 percent in the previous quarter.
BoComm's results were similar to those of China Construction Bank (
), China's second-biggest lender, which reported earlier in the week that lending growth slowed sharply in the third quarter as net interest margins showed signs of stabilising. [ID:nHKG251036]
BoComm's shares fell 2.11 percent to HK$10.20 in Hong Kong before the company released its results. ($1=6.828 Yuan)
