Yum's chicken in China contained excessive levels of drugs - Xinhua
2013-01-25 05:46:00.0
(Reuters) - Chicken sold to KFC's parent Yum Brands Inc in China contained excessive levels of chemicals, the official Xinhua news agency reported on Friday, escalating a month-long food scare that has hit Yum's sales in its biggest market.
The Shanghai Municipal Food Safety Committee said KFC's checks on its suppliers were lax, and that it found excessive levels of chemical residue in some of the fast food chain's supplies, the report said.
The investigation has now been passed to authorities where the suppliers are based, Xinhua said, without elaborating.
Yum and McDonald's Corp's have come under intense scrutiny from local media since the official China Central Television reported in late December that some of the chicken supplied to them contained excess amounts of antiviral drugs and hormones used to accelerate growth.
On investigating, the Shanghai Food and Drug Administration found the levels of antibiotics and steroids in KFC chicken were safe, though the watchdog found a suspicious level of an antiviral drug in one of the eight samples tested.
Yum warned earlier in the month that sales in China - where it earns over half of its worldwide revenue and operating profit - shrank more than expected in the fourth quarter, citing bad publicity from a government review of its chicken supply.
McDonald's Chief Executive Don Thompson said on Wednesday the chicken scare "minimally impacted" McDonald's sales in China during the fourth quarter and continues to hurt business this year.
(Reporting by Kazunori Takada and Shanghai newsroom; Editing by Daniel Magnowski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Now that¡¯s giving them a taste of their own medicine!
Jan 25, 20138:20am EST--
Of course, the suppliers are Chinese, and of course, regulations on chicken producers are not effectively enforced due to corruption. yet, Yum brands is being labelled the culprit. It¡¯s a political move, intended to discredit imported brands in favor of domestics.
Jan 25, 20132:41pm EST--
