UPDATE 2-Assa Abloy sees tough Q4 after Q3 EBIT tops forecast
2009-10-28 04:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Assa Abloy (
), the world's biggest lock maker, beat quarterly profit forecasts and announced further cost cuts on Wednesday, sending its shares up even though it said the rest of the year would be challenging.
Cost savings and decent demand within commercial construction has helped Assa Abloy shelter earnings in recent quarters from falling demand elsewhere in the industry, as the economic downturn pummels building activity in major markets across the globe.
While recent months have seen growing signs that the global economy is on the mend, construction remains hard hit, not least in the United States where housing starts last month grew a weaker-than-expected 0.5 percent on the year. [ID:nN20424995]
"Our expectation remains that the fourth quarter of 2009 will be challenging for both sales and earnings, especially because the important U.S. market is predicted to weaken further," the company said in a statement.
Assa said it had also initiated a new review of its production base under a programme that would cut staff by 1,100 employees across 15 plants at a cost of 800 million crowns, to be booked in the fourth quarter.
The company has cut about 7,700 jobs since the fourth quarter of 2007, roughly 24 percent of its total number of employees, as it seeks to improve efficiancy across the group.
"It [the results] came in better both in terms of EBIT and growth. They are carrying out more restructuring, which I believe is positive since they have been so successful in this in the past," Penser analyst Kenneth Toll Johansson said.
Shares in the company rose 3.1 percent to 118.2 crowns as trade got underway in Stockholm while the bourse's blue-chip index
Assa Abloy said separately it was acquiring Pan Pan, China's largest high security steel door manufacturer with 4,000 employees in a deal which it said would positively impact earnings per share immediately on completion. [ID:nWEA7154]
Penser's Johansson said the acquisition "looks good" and was evidence that "nothing that is heading in the wrong direction".
Assa Abloy, which competes with the likes of U.S. Ingersoll-Rand (
), said sales in the quarter fell to 8.4 billion crowns from 8.7 billion a year-ago, in line with the 8.4 billion seen by analysts.
The more keenly watched organic sales measure, which strips out acquisitions and currency swings, fell 13 percent on the year versus the mean forecast for a 14 percent drop and Assa repeated organic growth would be negative for the full year.
"Positive trends during the quarter were that Asia returned to growth and that the downturn in Europe was less negative," it said. "However, the North American market continued to weaken as a result of falling non-residential construction activity." ($1=6.899 Swedish Crown) (Editing by Simon Jessop)
