ADR Report-ADRs down after mixed earnings reports
2009-10-27 14:10:00.0
(Reuters) - Overseas shares traded in the United States fell on Tuesday after mixed earnings from Japanese exporters, Chinese Internet company Baidu Inc (
) helped lift the European energy sector after the company's third-quarter earnings beat analysts forecasts but European shares traded in the United States lost their gains by the afternoon.
) rose 4.7 percent. The the world's seventh-biggest carmaker surprised investors with a near tripling of its annual profit forecasts. Shares in rival Toyota Motor Corp (
) rose 1.3 percent. For more on this story, see [ID:nT324227]
) fell 2.4 percent as the photographic and photocopy equipment maker posted a sharp fall in quarterly profit on sluggish copier demand. For more, see [ID:nT203059]
Elsewhere in Asia, Chinese Internet companies suffered after China's top search engine Baidu said a bumpy introduction for its new system to sell search-based advertising will hit its business into the first quarter of next year. For more, see [ID:nSHA283787]
Baidu's shares fell 12.9 percent and weighed on those of Internet company Sohu Com Inc (
), down 4.7 percent.
The Bank of New York Mellon index of leading Asian ADRs .BKAS fell 0.7 percent. In Asia, shares were mainly lower, with the Nikkei
seeing its largest drop in three weeks and Chinese shares at multi-week lows. See, [.T] and [.HK]
U.S.-listed Shares in BP rose 4.7 percent after the company said underlying results were almost 50 percent ahead of the average analyst forecast. The news lifted the energy sector, with the The Bank of New York Mellon's European oil and gas index .BKEOG up 2.1 percent. For more on this story, see [ID:nLQ683027]
In Europe, the FTSEurofirst 300
index of top shares ended up 0.4 percent after paring earlier gains following weaker-than-expected consumer confidence data in the United States. For the latest market report, see [.EU]
The U.S. listed stock of America Movil, Latin America's No. 1 mobile phone provider, fell 3 percent after the number of additions of new customers disappointed investors, particularly in the company's home market. For more, see [ID:nN26208722]
Raymond James, a U.S. brokerage, downgraded the stock to "market perform" from "outperform."
Receipts with the Bank of New York Mellon index of leading Latin American ADRs .BKLA fell 2 percent. In Latin America, major benchmarks were lower. See, [.MX] and [.SA] (Reporting by Edward Krudy; Editing by Padraic Cassidy)
