Emirates NBD Capital eyes project finance, M&A
2009-10-27 13:48:00.0
(Reuters) - Investment bank Emirates NBD Capital sees opportunities in restructuring companies suffering from the financial crisis and project finance in the oil exporting region as a key driver of future business, its chief executive said.
"In some parts of the GCC (Gulf Cooperation Council) project finance is hugely important," chief executive Suresh Kumar told the Reuters Investment Summit in Dubai on Tuesday.
Governments are ramping up spending sharply, including on infrastructure projects in healthcare and education, to spur growth. Oil prices have almost doubled since December lows, fuelling more investment into new projects.
Still, according to research firm Proleads GCC countries remained the most active construction markets in the world for the oil, gas and petrochemical industries with projects budgeted at more than $690 billion.
Kumar pointed to new public private partnerships in Abu Dhabi, which would need integrated financing, and a government push in Saudi Arabia, which is pumping $400 billion in infrastructure over the next five years.
"Pricing (for project financing) is distinctly improving to the point it's a compelling proposition," Kumar said.
Certain fragmented sectors are ripe for consolidation as companies stung by the crisis are forced to review their balance sheets, possibly divesting non-core activities, which will spur mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity, he said.
Cross border M&A activity in the Gulf Arab region has been negligible with the largest acquisition carried out in 2007 when Qatar Telecommunications QTEL.QA bought a 51 percent stake in Kuwait's Wataniya (
"It's still early days but those are the ones we'd like to strategically pursue ... the crisis is a good setting, backdrop to try to achieve that," Kumar said.
He added that the investment bank has started talking to companies about obtaining mandates, "on this basis it's no longer nice to have a conversation ... what they need to do is tidy up their balance sheet."
In terms of geographical focus, the bank is eyeing "the usual suspects" such as Saudi Arabia and India, but added the investment bank would follow customers in markets such as Turkey.
The parent company Emirates NBD ENBD.DU plans to open a representative office in Beijing early next year, which it would use to serve regional customers seeking to do business in China.
(Reporting by Nicolas Parasie and John Irish; Editing by Rupert Winchester)
