UPDATE 5-Celanese profit tops Street view, shares spike
2009-10-27 13:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Specialty U.S. chemical maker Celanese Corp (
) posted better-then-expected quarterly profit and revenue on Tuesday, sending its shares up as much as 11 percent.
Dallas-based Celanese makes the building blocks for many consumer items such as paints, packaging and automobiles. As the recession unfolded last year, demand for those products slumped, dampening Celanese's earnings.
Global demand remains weak and prices for acetyl intermediates and industrial specialties products -- two key revenue streams -- fell during the third quarter, the company said.
The company posted net income of $396 million, or $2.53 per share, compared with $155 million, or 97 cents per share, a year earlier.
Excluding a one-time tax benefit of $382 million and a charge to close a French plant, the company earned 58 cents per share.
On that basis, analysts had expected 43 cents per share, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S estimates.
"We saw tremendous benefits from growth in several of our business combined with some cost reduction programs that are permanent," Chief Executive David Weidman told Reuters.
Those factors, combined with the tax benefit, helped produce a "blow-out quarter," he said.
But cost cuts have made Wall Street nervous, and many investors are eager to see profits generated from actual sales growth.
Sales fell 28.5 percent to $1.30 billion but topped analysts' average forecast of $1.26 billion.
Weidman pointed to Celanese's low-calorie sweetener Nutrinova, which is used in products such as Coke Zero, as one product helping to fuel overall demand.
Sales did improve from the second quarter, but the company said it does not expect the economy to recover in 2010.
"To continue to improve earnings at a sustainable rate, Celanese must see improved demand at some point," Morningstar analyst Joung Park told Reuters. "Cost-cutting can only go so far."
For 2010, the company expects to cut an additional $100 million in fixed costs, boost volumes and have an adjusted tax rate in the low 20 percent range. It said these factors are expected to add about $1 per share to 2010 earnings.
The company expects its tax rate to continue in that range for the next few years, due in part to its broad business activity outside the U.S., especially China, Weidman said.
Celanese has about $1.3 billion in cash on hand, sharply up from the beginning of the year, due in part to the sale of a land parcel in Frankfurt.
The cash could be used for acquisitions, investments, or buybacks or debt repayment, the company said.
Celanese shares were up $2.19 or 8.4 percent at $28.15 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock Exchange, after setting a new 52-week high of $28.86 earlier in the session. (Reporting by Ernest Scheyder; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Matthew Lewis)
