MONEY MARKETS-Australia less sure of 50 bps interest rate hike
2009-10-27 04:53:00.0
(Reuters) - Australian rate swaps fell on Tuesday and bond futures rose as markets pared back expectations for a 50 basis point interest rate increase next month and as caution prevailed ahead of price index data.
"The writer now sees a 50 bp hike as less likely, really not a surprise given the lower PPI reading and the wobbles that are appearing in equity markets," said Sean Keane, director of Triple T Consulting and former money market trader at Credit Suisse.
Implied cash rates, based on money market and swap rates CSRBA=CSAU, are fully pricing in a 25 basis point hike and factoring in around a 25 percent chance the central bank will raise rates by 50 basis points on Nov. 3.
"People are squaring up ahead of tomorrow's consumer price index data and equity markets were not impressive today and that probably helped bonds and fixed income products," said JPMorgan rate strategist Sally Auld.
A reading of a less than 0.7 percent gain in the core measure could trigger a sharp rally while a reading of 0.9 percent or higher could see a large sell-off as the market would then fully factor in a 50 basis point hike, it said.
In China, where a recent change in rhetoric about the economic recovery had led to concerns that monetary policy may be tightened, traders cut their bets on an immediate move after the central bank kept yields flat at the sale of one-year bonds.
Money markets eased as liquidity remained easy in the absence of big IPOs and after the central bank kept the auction yield on its one-year bills at 1.7605 percent on Tuesday, the 10th auction in a row at that level.
In Singapore, 3-month dollars SIUSD3MD=ABSG fell to 0.28786 percent from 0.28671 percent on the back of the dollar squeeze being seen in global markets these past few sessions.
"Demand is picking up for dollars to hedge against some of the positions taken up in the NDFs in Asian currencies," said Suresh Ramanathan, strategist with CIMB Investment Bank.
The greenback rebound sparked a wave of profit-taking in Asian currencies on Tuesday, with the high-yielding Indonesian rupiah falling as much as 1 percent.
Analysts said offshore names were hedging their long onshore rupiah positions by buying dollar/rupiah via NDFs. That triggered a jump in 3-month dollar/rupiah NDFs IDR3MNDFOR= to 9,675 from Monday's close at 9,562. (Editing by Jan Dahinten)
