FOREX-Punch-drunk U.S. dollar rallies, keeps fighting
2009-10-26 19:58:00.0
(Reuters) - The U.S. dollar held a firmer tone on Tuesday, pulling away from recent 14-month lows, as investors unwound short positions and took profits in high-yielding currencies after a sharp drop in stocks and commodities.
The VIX indicator .VIX, Wall Street's favourite barometer of market volatility, jumped 9.16 percent on Monday, highlighting how skittish sentiment had become towards stocks
The U.S. dollar, seen as a safe-haven when doubts about a global recovery emerge, traded firm around the 76 mark against a basket of currencies .DXY =USD. The index posted its best daily gain since September on Monday, pulling further away from a 14-month low of 74.94 on Oct. 21.
"The unwinding in short U.S. dollar positions has a bit more to run," said Anthony Gray, head of risk solutions department at Travelex in Sydney. "The correction in the euro and the Aussie were long due given the stretched long positions."
Analysts said the heavy short positioning on the U.S. dollar had made many investors hesitant to sell the greenback despite the economy's weak fundamentals.
Investors are likely to stay wary ahead of U.S. consumer confidence numbers for October and house price index data for August, both due later in the day. Also, some wariness among traders is likely to prevail ahead of third-quarter U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) data on Thursday.
Analysts expect the U.S. economy to expand 3.3 percent in the third quarter [ECONUS]. Anything lower, like the shock GDP numbers from the UK late last week, could trigger another wave of selling in riskier assets.
edged lower to $1.4864, from $1.4872 late in New York on Monday, when it shed 0.85 percent. The euro peaked on Monday in Asia at $1.5064 after a report from China suggested the Asian giant should increase the share of the euro and yen holdings in its foreign exchange reserve stockpile.
The author of the report later told Reuters he was not speaking for the People's Bank of China, helping the U.S. dollar to rebound. [ID:nPEK275970]. Chartists expect support at $1.4830 for the euro and a break of that level could see it ease to as low at $1.4675.
The U.S. dollar was also firmer on the yen, inching up to 92.25 yen
