UPDATE 2-Baidu revenue outlook falls short, shares plunge
2009-10-26 19:39:00.0
(Reuters) - China's leading Internet search company Baidu Inc (
) warned that the transition to a new advertising technology would crimp revenue in the current quarter, sending shares plunging nearly 13 percent.
Baidu, named after a line in a classical Chinese poem, forecast sales far below Wall Street's estimates in the fourth quarter from discontinuing its Online Marketing Classic Edition. It said it would complete the switch to its Phoenix Nest advertising bidding system on Dec. 1.
Baidu on Monday forecast revenue in the fourth quarter to range between $174 million and $180 million, below the average analyst estimate of $204.7 million, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Baidu's shares have more than tripled since the start of the year, as the company appeared positioned to benefit from the economic recovery and a pick-up in advertising spending in China, the world's largest Internet market.
"It's a temporary setback, but I don't think it's a long term issue," said Weinstein, who described Baidu's third-quarter results as very strong.
Baidu had 61.6 percent of China's search market in the second quarter, according to Analysys International, compared to Google Inc's (
Its Phoenix Nest technology, introduced in April, is an overhaul of the company's keyword advertising bidding system and is expected to improve Baidu's monetization of its search results.
In the third quarter, Baidu said that more than 20 percent of its total revenue came from Phoenix Nest.
Revenue in the three months ended Sept. 30 totaled $187.3 million, a tad below the average analyst estimate of $189 million but higher than the 135.4 million a year-earlier.
Third-quarter net income rose to $72.2 million, or $2.07 a share, from $51.2 million, or $1.47 a share, in the same period last year.
"With 70 percent of our customers already using Phoenix Nest, we believe this is the right time to complete the switch to the new system," Li said.
Shares of Baidu fell nearly 13 percent to $377 in after hours trade on Monday. (Reporting by Alexei Oreskovic and Melanie Lee; editing by Gunna Dickson)
