PREVIEW-Dry bulk Q3 to be mostly in line with estimates
2009-10-26 00:24:00.0
(Reuters) - There will be little surprise in third-quarter earnings for most dry bulk shippers as long-term contracts restrict them from capitalizing on the strength in spot charter rates.
Over the last year, dry bulk shipping companies have increased their fleet's long-term contract coverage in a bid to lower their exposure to the volatile spot charter markets.
However, charter rates in the spot market have been stabilizing after a prolonged recession, the worst since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
"For the dry bulk industry, the day rates for the third quarter were better than what we had anticipated," Oppenheimer & Co analyst Scott Burk said.
The analyst noted that actual dry bulk day rates during the third quarter were 19 percent above his forecast, with rates for Panamax and Handymax vessels largely responsible for the upside due to the seasonal strength in coal and grain trades.
"But again, similar to the last quarter, most of the companies' day rates had already been locked-in going into the quarter," Burk said, adding that he expects most of them to report in-line results.
BB&T Capital Markets analyst Kevin Sterling also believes the majority of dry bulk shippers will report third-quarter results in-line with expectations, given the contracted nature of their revenue stream.
"I am not looking for any major deviations or surprises to the upside or downside," he said.
), which has been aggressively increasing its long-term charter coverage, will report its third-quarter results after the market closes on Oct. 26, kicking off the sector's earnings season.
Analysts, on average, are expecting DryShips to report third-quarter earnings of 20 cents a share, before special items, on revenue of $210.7 million, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
BEAT OR MISS?
), which will report its third-quarter results Oct. 28, is the most likely dry bulker to beat Wall Street expectations, helped by its stronger spot market presence.
"We think they can beat by 5 percent," Oppenheimer's Burk said.
Credit Suisse analyst Gregory Lewis, who is expecting a rather uneventful quarter for dry bulk shippers with results mostly similar to last quarter, also picks Genco as the most likely to beat the market.
"The company has a little more spot exposure versus its peers, and its management has historically done a good job of controlling costs," Lewis said.
On the other hand, similar to the second quarter, Diana Shipping Inc (
Analysts forecast Genco to earn $1.01 a share for the third-quarter, while Diana Shipping is expected to earn 34 cents a share.
While there is consensus among analysts on the third-quarter results, views about the fourth quarter are mixed.
"I would expect that if rates stay where they are now, then fourth quarter would be a little bit lighter compared to the third quarter," Oppenheimer's Burk said.
Charter rates, which had spiked in July, started deteriorating in September or towards the end of the third quarter.
However, Credit Suisse's Lewis expects the fourth quarter to be "mildly" better sequentially.
"We are seeing continued demand for bulk commodities into Asia, and with some of the European steel mills coming on-line we expect demand to pick up in the fourth quarter. Also, we expect coal and grain demand to pick up as we head towards the end of the year," Lewis added. BB&T's Sterling noted that the fourth-quarter tends to be strong from a grain perspective because of the fall-harvest season in the Northern Hemisphere, and coal demand is also likely to be stronger as China has become a net importer of coal in recent years. (Editing by Pradeep Kurup)
