Aggressive China online game firms eye global crown
2009-10-26 05:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Armed with cash from recent listings, Chinese online game makers are gearing up to play in Western markets, challenging industry leaders Electronic Arts ERTS.O and Activision Blizzard (
Having prospered at home, companies such as Changyou (
) want to take a page from China's export machine in sending their wares abroad.
Changyou, which raised $120 million in an April Nasdaq IPO, is in the final testing stage for its martial arts multiplayer online game, Dragon Oath, for the U.S. market, making a commercial launch in end of 2009 or early 2010 probable. The company began testing the game in Europe in August.
Many U.S. gamers still prefer consoles such as Microsoft's (
) Xbox and Sony's (
However, analysts said a slow but sure shift toward online gaming, which allows for flexible formats, multiple players and can be played at any Internet terminal or mobile phone, is taking place and will benefit Chinese online game developers.
"The Western markets are changing, it is a console-driven market but I think MMOs (massively multiplayer online) games are the next wave," said Atul Bagga, an analyst at research firm ThinkEquity.
With more than 50 million online gamers, China is expected to corner more than 40 percent of the global market by 2011, according to research firm Samsung Securities.
Where Asian game operators have a head start is in their micro-transaction business model where gamers pay nothing for the game itself, but pay small fees each time they want to buy an upgrade, be it a map or a weapon. This differs from the current business model in the U.S. and Europe which is subscription based.
) have the operational expertise and business model to take on global rivals. In September, Shanda Interactive spun off its gaming unit, Shanda Games (
), to expand overseas.
The U.S. console market makes up about half the gaming market, with console software set to rake in an estimated $26 billion in revenue in 2009, according to Samsung Securities and UBS.
The online game sector is growing rapidly, with revenue expected to grow 21 percent to more than $13 billion in 2010, while revenue from video games fall 5 percent, according to Samsung Securities.
For a graphic on the global gaming industry, click:
) have had success in overseas markets, but Chinese firms may find it tougher due to the competitive landscape, high entry costs and their own cultural baggage.
"The issue with most Chinese gaming companies is that the games they have are very Asian-themed, so for the Western audience it is difficult for them to associate with," Bagga said.
Changyou's Dragon Oath is based on a martial arts story, but was rebranded for the U.S.
Unfamiliarity with Western tastes is also likely to trip up the Chinese firms, who will have to plunk out much bigger bucks than they do in China to promote their products in those markets.
"It's very hard, I can tell you not a chance (of success) because ... of the cultural and social specificity it's not going to suit the audience in Europe and the U.S.," said Tian Hou, an analyst at Pali Research, commenting on Changyou's chances for success in the United States for its future games.
One firm that may fare better is Perfect World, whose games are based more on fantasy than cultural specifics, analysts said.
Perfect World derives about $2.5 million from its U.S. operations every month, Bagga estimates, and trades at a relatively modest 12.9 times its 2010 earnings, according to data from Thomson One Analytics.
Changyou trades at 9.6 times, while Shanda Games and NetEase trade at 11.1 and 13.1 times respectively, versus the industry average of around 16 times.
Shares of Changyou and Perfect World are up about 120 percent and 170 percent respectively, while EA and Activision Blizzard shares are up 23 percent and 41 percent respectively.
