Brazil stocks higher on optimism, real strengthens
2009-10-26 10:25:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks bounced back from a lackluster week in early trading on Monday as investors recovered their optimism in the country's economy.
Brazil's benchmark Bovespa stock index
added 1.1 percent to 65,775.9 in morning trading after having closed on Friday at a 1.73 percent cumulative loss for the week.
Last week's fall came on a new 2 percent tax on capital inflows. The tax -- a bid by the government to brake the appreciation of the country's currency, the real BRBY -- had a swift, sharp effect on implementation on Tuesday.
But economists see the tax's effects as short-lived, at best, as investors consider potential returns in Brazil to outweigh the levy.
Monday's movement was an extension of that investor confidence in Brazil, said Andre Luis Querne, a partner at Rio Gestao de Recursos.
Brazil's currency, the real, strengthened 0.58 percent to 1.704 per dollar as the greenback fell against a basket of major currencies .DXY. As investors see momentum behind a global economic recovery, they turn to riskier assets, rather than the safe-haven dollar.
As the week wears on, data from the United States will likely give investors their cues, he added. "This week is more about monitoring the American market."
Among the expected data are the U.S. third-quarter gross domestic product, which could show the world's largest economy has stopped contracting.
The data could show U.S. GDP growth of 3.2 percent in the third quarter, according to economists polled by Reuters. The figure is due on Thursday. [ID:nN23126614]
), the world's largest iron ore producer, gained 1.85 percent to 41.76 reais. Vale reports third-quarter results on Wednesday.
Those numbers will likely show an improvement in global iron demand, noted a report from Brascan brokerage dated Monday, including not only China but also Japan and Europe.
Steelmakers, which have seen strong advances recently on recovery outlooks, climbed on Monday. Gerdau (
) climbed 2.19 percent to 29.44 reais, Usiminas (
) rose 0.96 percent to 51.50 reais, and CSN (
"We believe that flat steel prices internationally are close to the bottom and reiterate our Buy recommendation on USIM5," noted an emailed update from Deutsche Bank by analyst Rodrigo Barros.
The two were among the most highly traded contracts of the morning. Investors use the contracts to bet on trends in the country's benchmark interest rate, the Selic.
The minutes from that meeting are due on Thursday. Investors will scour the document, hoping for clues as to when the bank will begin to hike rates. (Reporting by Luciana Lopez, editing by W Simon)
