EU mergers and takeovers (Oct 26)
2009-10-26 10:18:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon, Oct 26 2009
Mon  EDT
-- Canadian auto parts maker Magna International Inc MGa.TO and Russian banking group Sberbank SBER03.MM plan to acquire 55 percent of the shares in Adam Opel GmbH, the main European business and assets of U.S. automaker General Motors Co [GM.UL]. GM will retain 35 percent of the new company, known as NewOpel. Magna, Sberbank and GM will have joint control over NewOpel. (notified Oct. 26/deadline Nov. 27)
), through their jointly controlled private equity fund Global Infrastructure Partners and affiliated funds, acquire sole control of Gatwick Airport Ltd, currently owned by British airport management group BAA Airports Ltd [FERBA.UL] (notified Oct. 21/deadline Nov. 26/simplified)
) acquires Belgacom International Carrier Services SA (BICS), a global provider of voice, data and value-added telecoms services. These include services currently carried out by BICS as a joint venture between Belgacom and Swisscom Belgium SA (
) and international wholesale telecommunications activities MTN-ICS, which will be acquired from MTN Dubai Ltd (
) acquires control of bottling company Pepsico Bottling Group PBG.N, which operates bottling units mostly in the United States, Mexico, Canada, Spain, Russia, Greece and Turkey (notified Sept. 21/deadline Oct. 26)
) acquires control of Pepsi Americas PAS.N, which mostly bottles Pepsico beverages with operations in the United States, Central and Eastern Europe, the Caribbean and Central America (notified Sept. 21/deadline Oct. 26)
) takes control of counterpart BVT Surface Fleet Ltd, currently controlled jointly by BAE Systems and VT Group Plc (notified Sept. 24/deadline Oct. 29/simplified)
-- Dutch fresh produce group Univeg Holding BV, controlled by Luxembourg-based private equity firm CVC Capital Partners, and F.lli Ciccolella, an Italian firm that grows and sells cut flowers and potted plants, acquire joint control over Univeg Holding's flower and plant activities (notified Sept. 25/ deadline Oct. 30/simplified)
-- SNCF-Participations, belonging to French state-owned railway group SNCF, and Caisse de Depot et de Placement du Quebec, a manager of pension and insurance funds mainly in Quebec, take joint control of public transport operator Keolis and Effia, a provider of services to facilitate passenger mobility (notified Sept. 15/deadline Oct. 20/on Oct. 9, deadline extended to Nov. 4 due to referral request)
-- The Czech Republic's Cez Bohunice, belonging to Czech power group Cez CEZPsp.PR and Jadrova a Vyrad'ovacia Spolocnost AS (JAVYS), a Slovakian nuclear waste treatment firm, acquire control of new joint venture Jadrova Energeticka Spolocnost' Slovenska AS (JESS) (notified Sept. 29/deadline Nov. 4)
-- Volkswagen Financial Services AG, a Volkswagen AG (
) unit that provides financial services mainly relating to car distribution, and Norway's MoellerGruppen AS, engaged in the sale, service, repair and leasing of VW Group vehicles, take joint control of Norwegian venture Newco BilFinans AS, a provider of financial services for vehicle leasing (notified Oct. 2/deadline Nov. 9/simplified)
NOV 10 -- Saint-Gobain Vetri SpA, an Italian glass packaging producer owned by France's Saint-Gobain SA (
); Zignago Vetro SpA (
), an Italian maker of hollow glass containers mainly for food packaging; and Italy's Ardagh Glass srl, belonging to the Irish Ardagh Glass Group, take joint control of Ecosud srl, an Italian recycler of glass waste (notified on Oct. 5/deadline Nov. 10)
-- French electricity firm Electricite De France SA, belonging to EDF Group (
), acquires Belgian electricity supplier SPE SA through the acquisition of shares held by Belgium's Segebel SA, which owns a 51 percent stake in SPE (notified Sept. 23/deadline Oct. 28/on Oct. 15, deadline extended to Nov. 12 due to referral request by Belgium/commitments offered Oct. 23)
-- Canada's Brookfield Asset Management Inc (
) to acquire indirect control of Babcock & Brown Infrastructure Ltd and Babcock & Brown Infrastructure Trust, collectively forming Babcock & Brown Infrastructure, an Australian infrastructure fund (notified Oct. 9/deadline Nov. 16/simplified)
-- NIBC MBF IB BV, part of Dutch merchant bank NIBC, and Dutch bank ABN AMRO's ABN AMRO Participaties Fund I BV to acquire joint control of Dutch business gift supplier Mid Ocean Group BV and its subsidiaries (notified Oct. 19/deadline Nov. 16/simplified)
-- Clayton, Dubilier & Rice Fund VIII LP, part of U.S. private equity investor Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, and holding company Commercial Markets Holdco Inc to acquire joint control of JohnsonDiversey Holdings Inc, which owns U.S. commercial cleaning company JohnsonDiversey Inc (notified Oct. 19/deadline Nov. 17/simplified)
), part of the Shenzhen Dongyangguang Group, China; Japanese aluminium maker Furukawa-sky Aluminium Corp (
), and Japanese trading company Mitsui & Co Ltd (
), acquire joint control of Ruyuan Dongyangguang Fine Aluminium Foil Co Ltd and Shaoguan Yangzhiguang Aluminium Foil Co Ltd in China (notified Oct. 13/deadline Nov. 18/simplified)
-- U.S. enterprise communication systems provider Avaya Inc [AVXX.UL], jointly controlled by private equity funds TPG Partners V.L.P and Silver Lake Partners III, acquire control of certain assets and subsidiaries associated with Nortel's Enterprise Solution business owned by Canada's Nortel Networks Corp (
