Afghanistan in focus at trilateral meet in India
2009-10-26 05:18:00.0
(Reuters) - The foreign ministers of Russia, India and China will meet on Tuesday with the threat of rising Taliban violence in Afghanistan and ways to rebuild the war-torn country expected to be major topics.
The three ministers could also discuss the role of Pakistan in stabilizing the region, Indian official and analysts said.
"All three have shared concerns about the violence emanating from Afghanistan, but there is divergence between India and China on the Pakistan military's role," said Uday Bhaskar, a New Delhi-based strategic affairs analyst.
New Delhi is seeding Afghanistan with development projects worth $1.2 billion but its citizens and embassy in Kabul have come under repeated attacks from Islamist militants uneasy with Hindu-majority India's growing clout.
Many in India see the hand of Pakistan's military in these attacks. Islamabad considers Afghanistan a fall-back position in the event of war with India.
"China will seek to balance its pro-Pakistan tilt with its concerns about Islamist radicalism spilling on to Xinjiang province among the Uighurs," said an India government official.
Along with Tibet, Xinjiang is one of the most restive and politically sensitive regions in China. Uighurs are Muslims native to Xinjiang, which Islamists call East Turkistan, and have cultural ties to Turkic peoples in Central Asia.
Bhaskar said while Islamist violence in Afghanistan was not an immediate problem for Russia, it was wary of religious radicalism overhauling Central Asian countries and reaching its borders.
"This meeting provides an opportunity to improve the atmosphere, lower the harsh rhetoric that has reached unprecedented levels," Brahma Chellaney of the Center for Policy Research told Reuters.
Bilateral relations have warmed in recent years, mostly on the back of mutual trade expected to pass $60 billion next year, a 30-fold increase since 2000. The two sides are also coordinating positions on climate change and global trade.
But friction over a lingering dispute along their Himalayan border has been rising, most recently over plans for Tibet's spiritual leader the Dalai Lama to visit the Indian border state of Arunachal Pradesh in two weeks.
