INTERVIEW-UPDATE 1-India TCS says AsiaPac growth recovering
2009-10-26 03:42:00.0
(Reuters) - Tata Consultancy Services
But the growth in its business in the region will still lag the 40 percent compound annual growth rate (CAGR) seen in the past five years before the current financial year, Girija Pande, the Asia-Pacific head of India's top IT services company by sales told Reuters in an interview on Monday.
"Pipelines are improving, we think green shoots are now getting leaves," Pande said.
"Will it come back and reach the 40 percent revenue growth that we have in the past? I doubt it will. 40 percent growth are not easy to maintain, but that's the CAGR we have, but certainly it will be double digit growth," he added.
Pande said the financial services firms are driving the deal pipeline for the Mumbai-based TCS, part of Tata Group that spans commodities, autos, and business services.
"Asian banks are not affected as badly as the western banks, they are buying the core banking services, while telecommunication companies are expanding," he added.
Pande's comments came a few weeks after TCS beat forecasts with a 29 percent rise in its quarterly net profit helped by demand from recession hit financial customers, but warned that a sharp growth rebound in the near term was unlikely.
The company's financial year runs from April to March.
India's nearly $60 billion outsourcing sector is seeing some signs of revival in business prospects after getting badly hit by the global economic slowdown and financial sector turmoil that had forced clients to shut the tap on technology spending.
Pande reiterated that Tata Consultancy, which provides services such as consulting, system integration and manages call centres, is aiming to raise its headcount in China to 5,000 people in the next five years, up from more than 1,000 now.
) are expanding in Europe and elsewhere to cut their dependence on the U.S. market, which accounts for over half the sector's revenues. They face competition from big global players such as IBM Inc (
), Hewlett-Packard (
), and Accenture (
TCS shares traded 1.77 percent higher at 652.5 rupee ($14.04) as of 0644 GMT, outperforming the largely flat Indian market
((harry.suhartono@thomsonreuters.com; +65 6403 5658; Reuters Messaging: harry.suhartono.reuters.com@reuters.net)
((If you have a query or comment on this story, send an email to news.feedback.asia@thomsonreuters.com)) Keywords: TATA CONSULTANCY/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nSIN487158
