Opinion: ESAI sees potential oil bull trap
2009-10-23 11:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
ESAI, Energy Security Analysis, Inc, is a Massachusetts-based energy consultancy. The opinions expressed are those of ESAI.
Oct 22 - ESAI estimates the global contraction in oil demand will average around 1.75 million b/d in 2009 and then oil demand will grow by at least 1.3 million b/d in 2010. OPEC production has begun creeping up, although quota discipline remains impressive in the face of almost $80 crude oil prices.
The combination of creeping OPEC output and still weak demand will result in a counter seasonal surplus in the fourth quarter and very high distillate stocks, indicating a fundamentally soft market this winter. But, this fundamental picture is overwhelmed by other signals coming from the investment community.
Gold has become a popular investment for the financial sector, driven by rising inflation fears about the dollar. This flight to quality has contributed to further weakness for the dollar, and consequently stronger commodity prices. In the meantime, while absolute levels of distillate inventories are currently high, future stories of product draws for heating oil will be painted as bullish factors for the market over the winter months.
So, the weak fundamentals are masked by other factors in the financial markets. This could result in a bull trap in which oil prices continue rising until the consensus believes that they are too high for the fundamentals.
ESAI's Crude Oil Outlook outlined this view late last week. Crude prices have recently climbed to levels near $80 per barrel, bolstered by both a weakening dollar, and also some stronger economic news. ESAI never joined the "Great Depression 2.0" crowd, instead consistently arguing for a more moderate contraction near two million b/d of demand in 2009.
Stronger recent data from Asia have improved the demand forecast to just a 1.7 million b/d contraction this year. This still represents a tremendous volume of lost demand in global oil markets. There are a number of bearish fundamental factors the market appears to be ignoring in its current rally: 1. The U.S. unemployment rate rose more than expected in September to 9.8 percent, and appears certain to crest well over 10 percent next year. This high rate of joblessness will be a drag on consumer spending and gasoline consumption. 2. As the market turns attention away from gasoline, global distillate inventories surged to 1.162 billion barrels last month. Overflowing global stocks are 100 million barrels above the average for the past five Septembers, and highlight distillate's weakness on the eve of heating season. 3. The recent downturn was largely driven by a collapse in the global financial sector. Recessions with this cause historically have slower recoveries. As a consequence ESAI is not projecting a dramatic bounce back in demand on the horizon. 4. By the same token, the unexpectedly early recovery has largely been driven by expansionary fiscal policy, particularly in the U.S. and China. As these countries confront worsening budget deficits, they will face growing pressure to moderate their spending. This reduced support will slow the economic recovery.
The relationship between the U.S. dollar and crude prices has been strong in recent years, making the dollar an important component in determining future crude prices. The recent rise in gold prices provides some insight into the market's short-term perspective on the U.S. dollar.
There are likely two main issues driving the move into gold; short-term inflation expectations and longer-term fears over the viability of the U.S. dollar as the world's reserve currency. Both of these issues threaten to further undermine the value of the dollar in the short-term. Inflation expectations will play a significant role in the market as the economy begins to recover.
The money supply, the amount of money in the financial system, has exploded in recent years, as the U.S. tried to limit the impact of the financial crisis. (For a graphic, click
The money supply has grown by nearly 20% in recent months, its fastest pace in over 25 years. If the Federal Reserve is unable to manage this excess cash when the economic recovery strengthens, inflation could rise quickly in response.
The extreme weakness of the U.S. dollar has also increased broader concerns that the U.S. dollar will soon lose its place as the world's reserve currency. The dollar index, an index of the value of a dollar versus other major currencies fell below 80 in May 2009 for only the second time since the U.S. abandoned the gold standard.
Although there are no clear signals that the world is ready to cash in its reserve currency, growing concerns that it might will likely be enough to limit demand for the U.S. dollar in the short term. ESAI expects that concerns over these two issues will likely persist in the short-term, keeping the value of the dollar low.
Even with all of the bearish fundamental factors, many observers in the market remain convinced that prices will rally through the fourth quarter, primarily due to the inflation concerns highlighted above. In addition, strong results from Intel and other bellwether companies, along with more bullish economic outlooks from the IMF and other multilateral institutions, are creating a narrative of a global economy already recovered.
Combining these bullish market perceptions with a still relatively bearish fundamental picture, ESAI forecasts a slight dip from current price levels. WTI should fall back to the upper $60s in December before rising in the run up to gasoline season next Spring.
