TAKE A LOOK: Five world markets themes next week
2009-10-23 09:57:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri  EDT
Markets are alert to whether the balance of risks for global stocks may be shifting given some recent asymmetric reactions. Positive Q3 earnings surprises have outweighed negative ones so far in the United States and in Europe but it is starting to take no more than one analyst sell recommendation on a particular stock to knock broader equity markets. That could leave fund managers who are underperforming the benchmark a thorny choice of selling too early and lagging even further behind, or holding on too long and getting burned.
A slide that has seen a broad dollar index shed about 16 percent of its value since March is eliciting forthright comments from France, China and Canada, while Brazil says it is open to complementing its tax on capital inflows with extra measures. How much more rhetoric emerges in the coming week will determine how much traders expect to hear about FX issues at the G20 finance ministers' meeting in November. Corporate earnings from Europe next week will highlight the extent of exporters' pain and could compound pressure on politicians to be seen to be addressing the issue.
The reaction of currency and interest rate markets to Bank of England minutes that omitted any specific mention of QE extension was a foretaste of how markets might cope with the prospect of a reversal of ultra-loose monetary policies in Britain and elsewhere. The rise in sterling Libor rates may have paused after unexpectedly weak UK Q3 GDP data but if they resume their climb, it may start to affect traders' inclination to short the pound. Still, with a relatively long lead time before the BoE actually reverses QE, traders may prefer safer bets, for example on the currencies of countries that are closer to tightening policy.
Sovereign debt issuance picks up with a vengeance next week with a record $123 bln worth of U.S. paper set to hit the market. Speculation is growing about how close some major central banks are to winding up their asset purchases and so far the 10-year part of the curve has borne the brunt of the market reaction. But while curve steepening has been seen over the past couple of weeks, a flattening could be on the cards given next week's issuance is concentrated at the shorter-end. Closer analysis of which countries' debt servicing costs will rise most steeply when monetary policy is normalized could start to influence spread performance.
Chinese data and official comments have put markets on alert for more signals that policy "normalization" is closer at hand than previously thought. What form this takes, and how FX revaluation speculation develops, will shape expectations of the extent to which China will drive global economic recovery and has the potential to affect both domestic and international markets. The Australian dollar, which is viewed as a China growth proxy, could be in the frontline of any such fallout in the developed world, while pressure on NDFs could spill over into other Asian currencies such as the Korean won.
