UPDATE 2-Bucyrus raises '09 rev view, shares hit year-high
2009-10-23 14:00:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. mining equipment maker Bucyrus International Inc BUCY.O raised its 2009 revenue view, helped in part by strong after-market bookings, sending its shares up 19 percent to a new 52-week high.
The company, which reported strong third-quarter results on Thursday, now expects 2009 revenue of $2.6 billion to $2.63 billion, up from its prior view of $2.5 billion, it said on a conference call.
There is an increase in original equipment quotation activity, driven by the stabilization of commodity prices, mainly in the case of copper and oil, Chief Executive Timothy Sullivan said.
"We think that this bodes well for not only near-term original equipment business, but for continued after-market business as we move into fiscal 2010," Sullivan said.
Since the start of the year, copper MCU3 prices on the London Metal Exchange have nearly doubled to about $6,000 a ton.
Improving economic data, Chinese stockpiling and new investor cash have helped boost industrial metal prices.
As economies in the company's markets such as China, Russia and India improve, increased equipment use has generated higher demand for parts, analyst John Collopy of Briggs Ficks Securities said.
"Certain parts wear very quickly and that provides a nice flow of income even when, as in the case of last two quarters, the new equipment orders have been rather indifferent," Collopy said.
Bucyrus, which makes mining equipment for the extraction of coal, copper, oil sands and iron ore, reported a 44 percent rise in earnings, mainly helped by strong revenue in its underground mining segment.
For the third quarter, the company reported earnings of $92.1 million, or $1.21 a share, compared with earnings of $64.2 million, or 85 cents a share, in the year-ago period.
"Our sales performance was a direct result of a solid high-quality backlog," the CEO said.
), Joy Global Inc JOYG.O and Terex Corp (
Shares of the company, which gained 37 percent in value in the last three months, were trading up about 13 percent at $48.24 in afternoon trade Friday on Nasdaq. They touched a year-high of $50.66 earlier in the day. (Reporting by Bijoy Koyitty in Bangalore; Editing by Unnikrishnan Nair)
