China launches second board for start-ups
2009-10-23 06:12:00.0
(Reuters) - China officially launched ChiNext, the Nasdaq-style second board for start-ups, on Friday, underlining Beijing's determination to shift its economy away from traditional manufacturing towards innovative, higher-value industries.
"Launching ChiNext is a strategic decision made by the central government," said Shang Fulin, Chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), during the opening ceremony for ChiNext in Shenzhen.
"It is very significant to the development of China's capital market, as well as to sustainable and healthy development of China's economy and society."
Shares of 28 firms, including movie maker H.Brothers (
) and Aier Eye Hospital Group 300015.SZ, will start trading on ChiNext on Oct. 30, becoming China's first batch of companies to list there.
"The timing is very good -- the world is coming out of recession while China has decided on a transformation path," said Shao Chingxiao, managing partner of SMC China Fund Ltd, a unit of asset manager Simon Murray & Co.
"The government has realised that the transition from a government-led, infrastructure-led economy to a consumption-led economy is not going to be successful without the participation of the private-sector."
CHINA'S WARNER BROS.
The new board would provide desperately needed funding to China's private enterprises, which are crucial in creating jobs and fostering innovation.
One is H.Brothers, founded by brothers Wang Zhongjun and Wang Zhonglei, which will become the first company in China's tightly regulated film making and distributing industry to list.
H.Brothers' debut could help foster China's Warner Bros. and make billionaires of the two founders.
) -- have listed on the Nasdaq, and nearly 50 have listed on Hong Kong's Growth Enterprise Market (GEM).
Currently, China's main board in Shanghai and Shenzhen are dominated by state-owned firms such as Industrial & Commercial Bank of China (
"The biggest challenge for (China's) entrepreneurs ... was how to raise their first capital," said Rupert Hoogewerf, publisher of the Hurun Rich List.
Analysts say innovation will be essential if China is to restructure its economy and trim reliance on manufacturing and exports, both hard hit by the global crisis.
Indeed, China has been promoting industries such as information technology, biotech, new materials and clean-technology, in hopes that the country can climb the global value chain and sustain growth.
"Innovations are more likely to emerge during economic recessions, when manufacturing costs are lower," Yu Jun, analyst at Citic Securities, said in a recent report on ChiNext.
Among the 28 firms to be listed on ChiNext, six are new energy and new material companies, six in the pharmaceutical and medical equipment business and the rest are in advanced manufacturing, info technology and modern service industries.
"ChiNext faces relatively high risks of irrational trading, speculation and market manipulation," CSRC's Shang said.
"Of course there will be concerns," said Shao of SMC China Fund, which aims to raise $250 million in three years to invest in China's high-growth start-ups. "China is a big economy but it's a small board, so there's definitely going to be some speculation in it."
Shao, at least, remains optimistic. "If you think China's economy will grow, this board is going to grow." (US$1=6.832 Yuan)
