Snubbed at top table, China chases oil M&A crumbs
2009-10-23 04:30:00.0
(Reuters) - China's state-owned oil giants are likely to lose out to global rivals in a race for top energy assets, as they lack experience and hit a protectionist wall, forcing them to settle for smaller, but riskier buys.
), Sinopec (
), and put CNOOC at risk of missing its ambitious production targets, analysts said.
Kosmos Energy's recent decision to award its prized Jubilee oil field stake in Ghana to Exxon Mobil (
) is the latest sign that Chinese energy companies are not ready for oil prime time, bankers say.
While Kosmos did not explain its decision, analysts say concerns over inexperience and a long approval process at home for making such acquisitions could have played a factor.
) would probably prefer Exxon to be successful as it has greater technical capability," said David Hewitt, an analyst with CLSA. "I suspect they want Exxon to prevail."
Chinese oil companies, tasked with securing energy supplies to fuel the world's fastest-growing major economy, are already being hemmed in by recent consolidation that has limited the number of assets on the global market.
Such concerns derailed CNOOC's $18.5 billion bid for Unocal in 2005, and observers say similar worries have left China National Petroleum Corp's (CNPC) bid for a majority stake in Spanish oil major Repsol's (
"The challenge they face in large corporate deals is one of resource nationalism," said Neil Beveridge, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein.
With so many options off the table, remaining possibilities could include Canadian oil firm Opti Canada Inc OPC.TO, which may be on PetroChina's radar, and its peer Nexen Inc NXY.TO, which CNOOC and CNPC may be interested in, bankers say.
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE, JOINT VENTURES
China's energy and power companies have spent $19.7 billion on outbound acquisitions this year, mostly in risky areas such as Africa, where Western rivals fear to tread, or in locations with aging assets.
For example, Sinopec Group paid $7.24 billion in June for Switzerland's Addax Petroleum AXC.TO, whose main assets are in West Africa and Iraqi Kurdistan.
Even in markets where governments would welcome them, Chinese have recently met with obstacles, most recently in Angola and Libya.
China's state oil giants have had more success chasing better assets by relying on Beijing's deep pockets to provide economic assistance to targeted nations, and by teaming up with better known companies to jointly bid for assets.
In July, China signed a $1 billion loan-for-oil deal with South American OPEC member Ecuador in its latest move to secure energy supplies via financing deals with producer nations.
"Chinese companies must settle for joint ventures or minority stakes given the political sensitivities," said a resources banker who has worked with Chinese companies on deals.
Taking a second stab at the Jubilee oil deal, CNOOC is said to be talking to Ghana National Petroleum Corp as a potential partner for a joint bid for the 23.5 percent stake in the field.
If that doesn't work, CNOOC will have failed to make any large-scale acquisitions since 2006, when it bought a stake in French oil major Total's (
"They definitely need acquisitions to meet the 16 percent growth target in the next few years," said Gordon Kwan, head of regional energy research for Mirae Asset Securities.
