Eldorado Gold lowers M&A sights after Sino Gold
2009-10-22 13:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu  EDT
) does not plan to seek additional large acquisitions once it wraps up its C$2 billion ($1.9 billion) takeover of Sino Gold SGX.AX, and will instead keep an eye out for smaller early-stage projects, the company's CEO said on Thursday.
Speaking to Reuters Television, Eldorado Chief Executive Paul Wright said the company's traditional model for acquisitions has been to seek undeveloped projects it can build and add value to on its own.
"That, I would say, would be more characteristic of the type of acquisitions we will do in the future," he said from the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, where Eldorado was unveiling its new listing. The shares already trade on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
"The Sino Gold acquisition is a departure from that but it's because of the strategic importance and our commitment to building a business in China," he added, saying the company was under no pressure to make additional acquisitions.
Vancouver, British Columbia-based Eldorado agreed to the all-stock takeover of Australia's Sino Gold in August.
The deal, which is expected to close in mid-December, will make Eldorado the top foreign gold miner in China, the world's top producer of gold.
Following the transaction, Eldorado's annual production will be 550,000 ounces, rising to over 1 million by 2013.
The company, like the rest of the sector, has basked in the glow of gold prices charging to record levels.
Spot prices were just below $1,060 an ounce on Thursday, promising wide margins for Eldorado, which expects 2009 cash costs around $300 an ounce, Wright said.
In addition to China, Eldorado also operates in Brazil Greece and Turkey.
Wright said the company's exploration this year is focused on Turkey and Brazil.
"We expect to spend approximately $15-$20 million in 2009, with the largest allocation in 2009 in Brazil," he said.
Eldorado's NYSE-listed shares were down 7 cents at $11.84, while its Toronto-listed stock was up 1 Canadian cent at C$12.41. The shares are up 29 percent so far this year, outperforming the 20 percent rise of the S&P/TSX global gold index.
(Reporting by Rhonda Schaffler, writing by Cameron French; editing by Rob Wilson)
