PREVIEW-Merck's liquid crystals seen on road to recovery
2009-10-22 06:36:00.0
(Reuters) - Recovery at Merck KGaA's (
) liquid crystals (LC) unit, the world's largest maker of chemicals for flat-panel displays, is in full swing, analysts said ahead of the German company's third-quarter results.
The LC business, traditionally Merck's biggest cash cow, is expected to post an operating margin of 33 percent, rising from one of the worst slumps the unit has seen, according to a Reuters survey of 14 analysts. [ID:nLL194777]
That compares with 27.4 percent in the second quarter and 10 percent in the first as measured by earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) to sales, but would still be below margins of around 50 percent it saw for much of 2008.
"The replacement of old cathode-ray TVs is still ongoing. There's good demand for flat-screen TVs from China, due to rising standards of living, but also, surprisingly, in Europe and the U.S., in part because display prices have slumped," said M.M. Warburg & Co analyst Ulrich Huwald.
"Margins of 50 percent are no longer realistic but somthing towards 40 percent should be possible next year," he said.
J.P. Morgan analyst Alexandra Hauber said she expected Merck to brighten its full-year revenue outlook for the business to a decline of about 10 percent, compared to current guidance of a 20-25 percent drop. She cited a strong rebound of LCD unit shipments in recent months.
In an interview with German magazine Wirtschaftswoche this month, Merck chief executive Karl-Ludwig Kley said that demand at its liquid crystals unit had recovered.
Makers of flat-screen TVs sold off inventories during the economic crisis and "orders are now coming in again; demand for LCD TVs remains strong," he was quoted as saying.
), LG Display (
), and Sharp Corp (
) are recovering from a massive decline in demand for big-ticket items such as TVs and computer screens in late 2008, which prompted TV makers to slash output.
Samsung, the world's largest LCD maker, this month forecast third-quarter operating profit above market estimates and up more than 60 percent from the second quarter. [ID:nT89846]
Research firm DisplaySearch last month edged up its global LCD TV shipment forecast for 2009 by 2.4 percent to 130 million units, citing strong demand in China and North America.
), a U.S. maker of specialty glass for flat-panel displays, said last month the decline in third-quarter glass output might be smaller than expected due to improving demand. [ID:nN10380868]
LG Display, the world's No.2 maker of LCD screens, this month also offered an upbeat outlook. [ID:nSEO366638]
As early as April, Merck raised the prospects of returning the LC unit to its old glory. "(The LC unit) should emerge from (the crisis) much in the way it was before: with growth, high returns and market leadership," finance chief Michael Becker said at the time. (Editing by Dan Lalor)
