Brazil stocks up on unemployment data, real dips
2009-10-22 11:14:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazilian stocks rose on Thursday as investors saw more evidence of an economic recovery here in a sharp drop in unemployment numbers, but found cause for wariness in rising U.S. jobless claims.
rose 0.86 percent to 66,046.33 points, on track to notch a second day of gains after a sharp drop on Tuesday on news of a new capital inflow tax.
"These gains are specific to Brazil," said Joao Pedro Ribeiro, an analyst with Tendencias consultancy in Sao Paulo, noting the jobless data, showing September unemployment in Brazil unexpectedly fell to a nine-month low. For more see [ID:nN22532930]
In the United States, however, the number of workers filing new jobless claims rose last week. The United States has struggled in the current global financial crisis, and the country has yet to show the kind of rebound that's brought investors flocking to Brazil. [ID:nN22534549].
Because the United States is the world's largest economy, investors in Brazil often look to U.S. markets to gauge international sentiment and risk appetite.
Investors had already shrugged off the impact of the government's attempts to brake the appreciation of the country's currency, the real, with a 2 percent inflows tax announced on Monday and implemented on Tuesday, said Ribeiro.
Leading gains in the Bovespa index were the two most heavily weighted stocks, Petrobras and Vale.
), the world's largest iron ore producer, put on 2.01 percent to 41.59 reais.
Vale should report strong third quarter results driven mainly by iron demand recovery outside China and higher iron ore spot price, noted a report from Merrill Lynch dated Wednesday.
) turned around morning losses to rise 0.71 percent to 52.58 percent. The company reported, after the close of markets on Wednesday, a 23 percent third quarter drop in net income, lower than analysts expected. [ID:nN21480983]
Changes in yields on Brazilian interest rate futures contracts <0#DIJ:> were mixed, with shorter-term contracts slipping but longer-term contracts ticking higher.
Brazil central bank policy-makers left the country's benchmark interest rate, the Selic, untouched at a record-low 8.75 percent at the conclusion of their two-day meeting on Wednesday evening.
The bank used the same statement to explain the move that it used at September's meeting, when policymakers kept the rate steady for the first time after an easing cycle of a cumulative 500 basis points begun in January.
The repetition of the statement reinforces beliefs that the Selic has reached its lowest point and that the central bank is not in a hurry to raise the rate back up, noted a report from Santander.
"We reiterate our forecast that the monetary authority will only hike the rate starting in July 2010," the report said. (Reporting by Luciana Lopez, editing by W Simon )
