UPDATE 1-Bank of Canada assumes C$ will stay strong
2009-10-22 10:51:00.0
(Reuters) - The Bank of Canada said on Thursday it assumed the Canadian dollar would remain substantially stronger than it was just three months ago, but it said the economy was growing again, and signaled no immediate action to counteract the currency's drag on growth.
will be worth 96 U.S. cents (or C$1.0417 per U.S. dollar), its value over the past 10 days. That is much higher than the 87 U.S. cents (C$1.1494 per U.S. dollar) it had assumed in July.
Despite the stronger currency, the Bank of Canada said risks had diminished, and growth was turning out to be higher in the second half of this year than it had projected in July.
It said the labor market may have stopped deteriorating, financial conditions continue to improve, consumer spending is expected to grow solidly through 2011, and business fixed investment should recover in early 2010.
"Following three consecutive quarters of sharp contraction, economic growth has resumed in Canada," it said. "Monetary policy in Canada has continued to be exceptionally stimulative."
It repeated its comments from Tuesday that the stronger Canadian dollar would more than fully offset positive developments since July, but made only the usual passing reference to the possibility of unconventional measures if things turned out worse than planned.
The bank signaled that the currency's rise was not simply due to strength in the commodity markets, which benefits the Canadian economy.
"While higher commodity prices have been supportive, movements in the Canadian dollar over the period appear to have been increasingly driven by a broader depreciation of the U.S. dollar against major currencies," it said.
One risk to its overall outlook, was an even stronger Canadian dollar driven by global portfolio movements out of U.S.-dollar assets.
In choosing the value of the Canadian dollar over the last 10 days, the central bank departed from recent past practice of taking the average over the last three months. It noted that the currency had been relatively stable between 90 and 94 U.S. cents until early July.
The bank also fired a shot across China's bow, saying disorderly adjustments could return over the medium term unless there were a sustained rotation of global demand from China to the United States. It said this required policies to bring about this rotation, an apparent reference to the need for flexibility in the Chinese yuan. (Reporting by Randall Palmer; editing by Janet Guttsman)
