BHP chairman tells China: game on
2009-10-22 04:55:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Thu, Oct 22 2009
Wed, Oct 21 2009
Wed, Oct 21 2009
Thu  EDT
In a parting shot at Chinese anger over high iron ore prices and over BHP's plans for a $116 billion iron ore joint venture with rival Rio Tinto (
), outgoing BHP Chairman Don Argus said China needed to get over any hostility.
"I don't know what creates the hostility. I can remember in 2005 people were hostile when we increased the iron ore prices 70 percent," he told reporters after speaking at a business lunch.
Argus then echoed comments by Australia's Trade Minister Simon Crean, saying China should play by international rules.
"If you're going to play in this game, then you've got to play with the big boys -- and they know that," Argus added.
Argus said BHP's China business continued normally, despite strained ties between Australia and China after the arrest of four Rio staff in Shanghai on commercial-espionage allegations.
Argus dismissed speculation that the production joint venture has only a 50-50 chance of going ahead and was sanguine about how Europe's competition regulators would view it.
"As far as I know we're still on track. We're all still working closely together," Argus told reporters after speaking at a business lunch.
European regulators had given BHP's proposed takeover of Rio Tinto a good hearing last year, but it was not clear how they would view the production joint venture, he added.
Last week, BHP and Rio scrapped a plan to jointly market up to 15 percent of their combined production in a move that was widely seen as an effort to allay concerns among Chinese customers and the European Union.
Argus is due to retire in early 2010 after more than 10 years as chairman presiding over the group's transformation into the world's biggest miner. He will be replaced by former Ford Motor Co (
(Reporting by Sonali Paul; Editing by Mark Bendeich)
