MONEY MARKETS-Flows into HK intensify, Korean swaps basis wider
2009-10-22 03:00:00.0
(Reuters) - Hong Kong interbank rates moved further below U.S. dollar rates on Thursday as speculative flows into the territory betting on a Chinese yuan intensified and led to another bout of heavy central bank intervention.
The Hong Kong Monetary Authority's estimates of aggregate local currency balances in the banking system was above HK$247 billion HKMAOOC on Thursday, heading towards all-time highs of HK$257 billion seen in May this year.
Foreign money has been flooding Hong Kong since May, going into Hong Kong stocks and property as investors bet on China's speedy economic recovery and speculate on the possibility of a yuan revaluation.
Those flows appeared to have intensified this month, spurred by data showing industrial production and other parts of China's economy were recovering rapidly and as more investors piled on bets that the yuan will be revalued or allowed to appreciate substantially.
Data showed on Thursday China's annual economic growth picked up to 8.9 percent last quarter as a combination of breakneck investment and buoyant bank lending more than made up for a slump in exports. [ID:nSP452724]
HKMA sold more than HK$5 billion on Thursday to defend the Hong Kong dollar peg, which has been at the top of its 7.75-7.85 per U.S. dollar band for months. [nHKG240188].
Hong Kong interbank rates, which track the Federal Reserve policy rate closely because of the peg, have been slipping although they are so close to zero that there is not much more room to fall.
Three-month HIBOR HIBOR=R was quoted at 0.19 percent, a 5-year low and 9 basis points below corresponding U.S. dollar LIBOR.
"It does seem that the inflows now have become more speculative, based on the revaluation view," said Woon Khien Chia, a strategist at the Royal Bank of Scotland.
"There's no room to receive rates when it is near zero and volatilities are also super low. So I would maybe do short-end flatteners up to 2 years and steepeners further up."
The spread between two-year and one-year Hong Kong dollar interest rate swaps HKDIRS has already flattened considerably, now at 64 bps. It was 4 bps higher earlier this week and 12 bps higher two months ago.
Korea's swaps basis, the difference between cross-currency swaps and won interest rate swaps, widened as the bond market turned more bearish on rates while the currency market persisted with pricing in won gains.
was weaker on Thursday, retreating further from its one-year highs struck last week as the dollar rallied against most currencies in what most analysts felt was a temporary correction to its downtrend.
But cross-currency swaps and forwards barely reacted to that decline in the won, with one-year dollar/won cross currency swaps KRWCRS still pricing in the won at a 0.75 percent premium.
"The bond market is bearish," said a trader in Seoul.
The won interest rate swap market which has been whip-sawed in recent weeks by a barrage of comments about rates from policy makers saw some paying interest on Thursday. The one-year swap KRWIRS was quoted at 3.57 percent, 2 bps higher than on Wednesday and near highs of 3.6 percent seen last week.
In latest comments from Korea, the finance ministry has voiced concern over the jobs sector and said house prices should be stabilising, while earlier this week the central bank chief was more hawkish in his warning about credit conditions and rising asset prices.
