China says concerned by Japan's move to boost military
2013-01-28 04:11:00.0
(Reuters) - China expressed concern on Monday after Japan unveiled plans to boost the number of its military personnel, as a bitter territorial dispute between the two countries drags on.
Japan's Defence Minister Itsunori Onodera said on Sunday the government would increase the number of personnel, now standing at about 225,000, by 287 in the next fiscal year starting in April, the biggest rise in two decades. The figure represents an expansion of about 0.1 percent.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Hong Lei said Japan should pay greater attention to regional concerns, alluding to Japan's at times brutal behavior during World War Two which China considers Japan has not done enough to atone for.
"Due to historical reasons, Japan's neighboring countries pay great attention to its military developments," Hong told a daily news briefing.
"We hope that Japan pursues a path of peaceful development, respects the concerns of countries in the region, take history as a mirror and does more to benefit regional peace and stability," he added.
Both sides sought to cool tension last week, with Chinese Communist Party chief Xi Jinping telling an envoy from Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe that he was committed to developing bilateral ties.
China's own military advances have rattled the region, including developing stealth fighters and launching the country's first aircraft carrier.
On Sunday, the government said it had again tested emerging military technology aimed at destroying missiles in mid-air.
(Reporting by Ben Blanchard; Editing by Robert Birsel)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
Japan deliberately worships Nazi war criminals in Shinto monastery, then whitewash it on NHK by showing deliberately misleading documentary of Buddhist monastery ceremonies ( a different religion) and mislead American viewers that its warmongering on China, is merely paying respect to ancestors, friends and foes. Japan knows how to plug into the pre-existing biases and prejudices that most westerners have Then Japan bribes, harass voices of conscience, defames, hacks computers, to subvert American democratic voice. Of course China has to be concerned. Those who differ are either too steep into the Japanese propaganda, and bribed by the fake superiority complexes with the false superiority complexes that Japan endows with its superb ※kiss-assing§ techniques since over 1000 years ago. The root, the history of the western adoration of Japanese culture is obscene racism that Japan and all its citizens, as well as the United States of America, we Americans, Clinton, Obama, should apologize to the Chinese people for每 not to the Chinese Government, but to its people. China, on the other hand, benefits nothing from worrying. The best strategy to deal with Japan is to speed up its respect for fundamental human rights of its citizens.
Japan deliberately worships Nazi war criminals in Shinto monastery, then whitewash it on NHK by showing deliberately misleading documentary of Buddhist monastery ceremonies ( a different religion) and mislead American viewers that its warmongering on China, is merely paying respect to ancestors, friends and foes. Japan knows how to plug into the pre-existing biases and prejudices that most westerners have Then Japan bribes, harass voices of conscience, defames, hacks computers, to subvert American democratic voice. Of course China has to be concerned. Those who differ are either too steep into the Japanese propaganda, and bribed by the fake superiority complexes with the false superiority complexes that Japan endows with its superb ※kiss-assing§ techniques since over 1000 years ago. The root, the history of the western adoration of Japanese culture is obscene racism that Japan and all its citizens, as well as the United States of America, we Americans, Clinton, Obama, should apologize to the Chinese people for每 not to the Chinese Government, but to its people. China, on the other hand, benefits nothing from worrying. The best strategy to deal with Japan is to speed up its respect for fundamental human rights of its citizens.
China has to decide: do you trust Japan or your own people more? The answer is: of course, your own people. The promise to fight corruption is not showing up in substance. The delay of Bo＊s trial indicates that there is no independence between the judiciary and the executive or the military/law enforcement branches. The whole trial is a charade, just like the Japanese careful manicure of its image to feign a peaceful, mature demeanor. Both are atrocious. And the Chinese people are the ones who suffer, from both China, and from the lingering manipulation of Japanese politicians, media, Reuters Japan, and western reporters.
Jan 29, 201310:31pm EST--
§ A stronger Japanese military helps Peace and stability from my perspective, plus the perspective of almost every country in the Asia-Pacific.§ Absolutely. Recent history 每 Tibet, Paracels, multiple current Chines land-grabs 每 show that China preys on the weak. If Japan and the rest of SEA don＊t build up their defence they could become the next victim. In SEA in its current state, any country that fails to look at their defensive capabilities would be very naive indeed.
Jan 30, 20131:47am EST--
China has a longer memory about history than others and is more alert to Nazism in the area which could potentially lead the area into another massive diaster as Japan did in the last centurry. In a sense, this is China＊s responsibility when China returns to the position that it has held for thousands of years, i.e., the center and commander of the east Asia order.
Jan 30, 20138:58am EST--
