South African Markets - Factors to watch on Oct 22
2009-10-22 01:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The following company announcements, scheduled economic indicators, debt and currency market moves and political events may affect South African markets on Thursday.
South Africa's central bank will likely keep interest rates steady at the end of a two-day meeting that started on Wednesday, the last chaired by central bank head Tito Mboweni. [ID:nLL56891]
Asian shares fell on Thursday, and the Australian dollar briefly retreated, amid disappointment that Chinese growth data, though robust, offered few surprises.
News that China's economy surged 8.9 percent in the third quarter, and retail sales and other indicators were robust in September, reinforced optimism that Asia is on a sustainable recovery path. [ID:nSP527740]. But the outcome was widely expected, giving investors little to trade on. [ID:nLM395113]
South Africa's rand fell sharply against the dollar early on Wednesday before later regaining its poise, mainly aided by gains on Wall Street and a firmer euro.
Domestic stocks rose for the third straight day, with financials adding the most points to the index as strong corporate results boosted global equities.
gained 0.52 percent to 23,925.79 points, a level last seen on Sept 22, 2008. The broader All-share index
added 0.46 percent to 26,564.65 points. [ID:nLL199289]
Zambia has eight suitors remaining in the hunt to buy Zamtel, Zambia's fixed-line telephone operator, source told Reuters on Thursday.
), Africa's biggest fixed-line operator which is seeking growth opportunities in Africa after selling its mobile unit Vodacom (
); ESKOM [ESCJ.UL]
Petrochemicals group Sasol SOLJ and electricity firm Eskom [ESCJ.UL] topped the list of South Africa's largest polluters, according to the country's 2009 Carbon Disclosure Project report. [ID:nLL171876]
Spot gold was steady around $1,060 an ounce on Thursday, not far from the record high marked last week as it drew investors hedging against a weaker dollar and concerned over inflation stemming from strong oil prices. [GOL/]
U.S. stocks fell on Wednesday, hurt by a late sell-off in financial shares after an influential bank analyst recommended selling Wells Fargo (
For most of the session, stocks had traded higher as the U.S. dollar's weakness underpinned shares of natural resources companies, while results from Morgan Stanley (
For the top emerging markets news, double click on [nTOPEMRG]
- State aid sought in new China trade row: S.Africa's ferrochrome producers call for limits on chromite ore exports
- Pick 'n' Pay's Ackerman retires as group lifts turnover
- Leading companies measure emissions; Nedbank (
- Residents cheers ANC's axing of top Standerton politicians
