China's elderly find life and joy in exercise
2009-10-22 02:53:00.0
China's elderly find life and joy in exercise | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
China's elderly find life and joy in exercise
Tue, Oct 20 2009
Mon, Sep 14 2009
Ma Junqiu, a 86-year-old folk artist, performs during a morning exercise session at the Temple of Heaven park in Beijing October 16, 2009. China has over 140 million people over the age of 60. Many lost out on an education, thanks to the Cultural Revolution, and have retired early as state-owned factories went bust or to help care for grandchildren. About 54 million engage in some sort of physical activity to enliven their golden years. Picture taken October 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Grace Liang
Thu  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - Gao Mingyuan has found joy at age 66.
Joy, in his case, consists of bending himself double and hooking his legs around a pole that runs behind his shoulders, in a Chinese meditative martial arts tradition.
Gao is one of many Chinese seniors, freed from the rigors of work and raising children, who are turning to martial arts such as tai chi, bopping to trendy beats or singing patriotic songs as they seek health and friends in parks across the country.
"We forget all our troubles when we practice," he said as he contorted himself at the Temple of Heaven, where seniors exercise beneath the gnarled trees at dawn.
China has over 140 million people over the age of 60. Many lost out on an education, thanks to the Cultural Revolution, and have retired early as state-owned factories went bust or to help care for grandchildren.
"Sportswear companies would well take heed of that figure, given how obsessed they are with the youth market," said Kunal Sinha, who studies the aging demographic for Ogilvy & Mather in Shanghai.
The elderly Chinese who swarm to the Temple of Heaven are a treasure-trove of traditional folk arts, martial arts and Chinese opera, sung in cracked voices that are still in tune.
Crowds of other seniors bop to a trendy beat, try their hand at Indian dance, waltz or join a chorus of patriotic Communist songs rarely heard any more.
"In India, seniors pass on traditions and social norms. In China, they're an untapped resource, because so many young people want to turn toward what's modern," said Sinha.
"On the other hand, because China is so in flux, we see a lot of old people picking up customs from young people. For instance, the phenomenon of the hip-hop granny -- you don't see that in India."
For 63-year old Wang Yongzhen, a grandmother who swing-dances in large gold-rimmed sunglasses and a traditional purple velvet cheong-sam, retirement is a time to indulge talents she never had time for when she was young.
"I liked singing and dancing when I was young but never had a chance, because work was busy and the kids were little. Now when I dance at the park, my heart opens up."
