INTERVIEW-UPDATE 1-Publicis CEO sees ad market rebounding
2009-10-21 10:57:00.0
(Reuters) - The advertising market will continue to improve slowly and progressively after hitting a trough at the end of June, the head of French advertising group Publicis (
"All numbers in hand give us the feeling the crisis is behind us, the recovery is coming, and we'll start seeing better numbers next year," chairman and chief executive Maurice Levy told Reuters on the sidelines of the Israel Presidential Conference on Wednesday.
Next year will likely be slightly positive overall, with a negative first half and positive second half, he said. "Coming after a year that is down in the region of 10 percent, to see flat-to-positive shows we are really getting out of the crisis."
Levy said Publicis was seeing a pipeline of new business with requests from clients, which happens when clients feel the crisis has ended.
Publicis, the world's third-largest advertising group by revenue, should perform better than the overall market, he said. "We should, thanks to our strategy, which proved to be the right one, have numbers better than the market, as we did until now."
), in which Publicis paid $269 million in cash and 6.5 million Publicis shares held in treasury. Microsoft now owns 3.3 percent of Publicis. [nL9724772]
"All the information in hand is very good. Clients are confirming their relationships with Razorfish," he said.
Levy said Publicis derived more than 25 percent of its business from digital advertising and he expected this number to continue to grow, though the company will not release a forecast on this until around February. "This is second to none and double the averge of our competitors," he said.
Publicis will continue to seek acquisitions in the digital market as well as in emerging markets, though not of the size of Razorfish. "What is in the market to be acquired is of a much smaller scale," he said.
In emerging markets, the company is particularly interested in Russia, China, Brazil and India, Levy said.
(Additional reporting by Steven Scheer; Editing by Dan Lalor)
((telaviv.newsroom@reuters.com; +972-9-899-0222; Reuters Messaging: tova.cohen.reuters.com@reuters.net)) Keywords: PUBLICIS/
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nLL195679
