UPDATE 5-Freeport-McMoRan's qtly profit up on metal prices
2009-10-21 16:35:00.0
(Reuters) - Freeport-McMoRan Copper & Gold Inc (
) said on Wednesday its third-quarter profit rose, exceeding Wall Street expectations as the company benefited from higher metal prices and cuts in mining costs.
The $2.07 earnings per share trumped Wall Street's average estimate of $1.34 and the company's stock rose more than 5 percent during the day, but pared gains later to close 1.4 percent higher at $79.72 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Freeport also increased its copper and gold production targets for full-year 2009 and said its board reinstated an annual cash dividend, with a quarterly payout of 15 cents per share expected next Feb. 1.
"If things stay strong in China we'll be in position to significantly increase our dividend," President and Chief Executive Officer Richard Adkerson told cable TV channel CNBC.
But despite rising copper prices, as well as gold at record highs of over $1,000 per ounce, Freeport is not yet ready to restart the production it had curtailed at several mines in the U.S. Southwest during last year's economic downturn.
"We are likely to make some changes in the near term," Adkerson told analysts on a conference call.
"But to have a full-scale return to maximum production is going to be contingent on our seeing clear evidence of recovery of copper demand in the U.S. and Europe. And we haven't see that yet."
"Strong demand in China and the developing world, plus the problems the industry has getting new projects going, gives us a tremendously positive outlook for the markets we are in."
Adkerson said an unexpected benefit of the recession had been that Freeport was able to reduce its costs dramatically, which contributed to the strong third-quarter earnings.
Copper mining costs were cut to 50 cents per pound, from $1.29 a year earlier, while the company sold the metal at an average price of $2.75 per pound compared to $3.14 in the 2008 quarter, he said.
Net earnings were $925 million, or $2.07 per share, compared with $523 million, or $1.31 per share, a year earlier. the Phoenix-based mining company said. Revenue slipped to $4.14 billion from $4.62 billion.
Analysts were expecting $1.34 per share and revenue of $4.053 billion, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
"It looks like a great quarter," said analyst Charles Bradford, of Affiliated Research Group. "It has to be the copper (higher) prices, plus they brought costs down."
Freeport operates the world's biggest gold mine, Grasberg, in Indonesia, which has been hit by violent protests in recent years.
It also recently began mining at a huge copper/cobalt deposit, Tenke Fungurume, in Democratic Congo, and produces metal at mines in South America and the southwestern United States.
Looking ahead, Freeport projected sales volumes for 2009 of about 4.0 billion pounds of copper and 2.5 million ounces of gold. That was higher than the forecast it gave in July for 3.9 billion pounds of copper and 2.4 million ounces of gold. (Reporting by Steve James; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick, Dave Zimmerman, Leslie Gevirtz, Gary Hill)
