Investors still struggling to put fear behind them
2009-10-21 08:09:00.0
(Reuters) - Many of the world's wealthiest investors remain traumatized by the losses they sustained during the financial crisis and are clutching on to safe, low-yielding assets rather than taking any risks.
Wealth managers say that even after a 75 percent rise in world stocks since March, a lot of clients' money has yet to move. Investors have, in the words of one strategist, become "structurally risk averse."
That is prompting investment managers to seek creative ways to unleash funds held in safe cash positions, and may be the key to sustaining this year's rally in stocks and riskier assets.
But going further back, it says U.S. money funds that report weekly took in a net $191 billion in 2007 as a whole. That suggests that the cash unwinding of the past two years is at most only two thirds through.
"There is a lot of juice," said Michael Dicks, head of research and investment strategy at Barclays Wealth. "Even if they went half way from where they are now to where they were pre-crisis, that would produce a significant amount of momentum."
Today's problem for investment managers -- who, of course, get their fees from clients making money and moving around assets -- is that the stock market crash was so harsh that many investors are almost terminally gun-shy.
World equities did, after all, fall some 60 percent from peak to trough.
"Clients are still nervous -- less so than they were a year ago but (they) are only getting back into markets very selectively," said Phil Cutts, director at RBC Wealth management.
To combat this and the ultra-low rates paid on cash accounts, investors are being offered products that provide some form of protection or at least a sweetener to get them to dip back into risk.
Cutts' RBC, for example, is touting a capital-guaranteed BRICs currency fund. Principal is returned in full if the Brazil, Russia, India and China basket -- divided equally between real, ruble, rupee and yuan -- underperforms the dollar.
But if it rises, investors get the principal plus the return on the basket. RBC then adds an additional 20 percent of the return.
RBC also offers what it calls a "best entry point" note, designed to assuage fears of a coming market correction. It is not capital protected, but lets investors buy equities now at the lowest closing price over the coming six months.
Barclays Wealth, meanwhile, is also guaranteeing at least some principal in an emerging markets foreign exchange fund, this time based on the Indonesian, Brazilian, Indian, South African and Polish currencies.
The product offers 95 percent capital protection and has what is known as a participation rate of 220 percent, meaning that if the basket rises by, say, 10 percent at the end of 3 years, the client receives 95 percent plus 22 percent, or 117 percent of the initial capital invested.
One of the ironies of using these kinds of products to wean clients from low-yielding cash, however, is that the yields themselves make it difficult to create such funds, which are generally guaranteed by the use of options.
"Typically what you would do is sell an option on (an) index so that you could buy it back again at 100 percent," said Guy McGlashan, head of private wealth management services at Kleinwort Benson.
McGlashan said that many of his firm's clients were also tentative about moving back out of cash and that many of those who had, had moved into what are now expensive government bonds.
The former protects funds from an investment losing too much if it falls in price. The latter, meanwhile, also protects gains that are made by having the stop rise when the underlying asset does.
(Additional reporting by Mike Dolan; editing by Patrick Graham)
