Japan, China need rules of game to avoid clash: Abe adviser
2013-01-18 04:59:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan and China need "rules of the game" to keep a feud over tiny islands from escalating into a military clash, an adviser to Japan's prime minister said on Friday, as a ruling coalition partner prepared to visit Beijing in search of better ties.
China scrambled two J-10 fighters last week in the area after two Japanese F-15s followed a Chinese military aircraft, which China said was on a "routine patrol".
Japan has sent up fighter jets several times recently to intercept Chinese planes near the islands, called the Senkaku by Japan and the Diaoyu by China.
"We need some rules of the game. We have to discuss preventative measures," Shotaro Yachi, a former senior diplomat now advising Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on foreign policy told Reuters in an interview.
"During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union had such 'rules of the game' to avoid a possible conflict. We can learn a lesson from their experience," he said.
Abe, who returned to the premiership after a five-year gap following his Liberal Democratic Party's (LDP) election win last month, has taken a tough stance in the row over the islands, vowing not to negotiate.
The dispute, which has coincided with a U.S. "pivot" in diplomatic and security focus to Asia, is hurting business ties between Asia's two biggest economies, creating pressure for some resolution.
In a sign of a possible bid to reach out to China, Abe's coalition partner, Natsuo Yamaguchi, leader of the smaller, more dovish New Komeito party, is scheduled to visit China next week - perhaps carrying a message from the prime minister.
"There must be a tacit understanding between Mr. Yamaguchi and the prime minister for seeking improved bilateral ties," Yachi said. LDP Vice President Masahiko Komura is also planning a China trip, though no dates have been set.
Still, a formula for resolving the dispute remains elusive, despite suggestions that the matter could somehow be "shelved" as historians say the two countries agreed to do decades ago.
"The situation now is that their government ships come to the adjacent zone and Japan's territorial waters and government airplanes invade Japan's airspace," Yachi said.
"We don't want to 'shelve' this situation."
On Friday, Abe wound up a trip to Vietnam, Thailand and Indonesia, part of a push for stronger ties with Southeast Asia to help counterbalance China's growing influence.
Yachi said some on the Chinese side were thinking in a "realistic and rational" way, so there was hope the two countries could engage. At the same time, a lack of transparency had left Tokyo guessing just what Beijing intends.
"We need to hedge. Maybe China will not go along with that (realistic and rational) policy, so we have to prepare.
"We have no intention to 'encircle' them, but if they come, we will respond. If they want to occupy the Senkaku islands, we have to respond. If they use military force, we have to respond effectively."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
China signed the 2002 Conduct of Parties Treaty with ASEAN to resolve all disputes in the South China Sea peacefully. China signed bilateral treaties in 2011 with all claimants in that area to resolve disputes peacefully. The problems have been rising since the US ¡°Asian Pivot¡± was announced, and virtually all of them involve nationalist civilians who appear to be auditioning for the ¡°Jackass¡± series of movies. The best response is to use surveillance vessels and aircraft to observe and report any violations by civilians to the appropriate law enforcement authorities in the countries in which the civilians live. When the civilians return to port, they can explain their actions to the police and judges in their home countries.
Jan 19, 20132:10pm EST--
