INTERVIEW-UK's Darling fears climate talks will drag like Doha
2009-10-21 09:54:00.0
(Reuters) - Climate change talks risk dragging on in the same way as world trade negotiations, British finance minister Alistair Darling said on Wednesday, urging the G20 to agree next month on funds to help tackle global warming.
"We really do have to make a go of it in St. Andrews," Darling told Reuters in an interview.
"The thing I'm really worried about is that we must avoid getting into a situation like we did with the Doha trade round. We can't get into that situation with climate change."
Environment ministers meet in Copenhagen in December hoping to agree action that would reduce the impact of global warming, but talks have stalled over who should curb emissions by what amount and climate finance aimed at helping poorer countries.
The Doha round of world trade talks, launched in 2001 with the aim of helping poor countries improve their economic prosperity through reducing trade barriers, has turned into the longest set of multilateral trade talks in history.
G20 leaders have said they want Doha to conclude by the end of 2010, but analysts are sceptical because several similar pledges have come to nothing.
"There's a long way to go yet (on climate change) and a lot of reasons to be cautious but all the more reason to show determination," Darling said, adding it was "essential" that G20 finance ministers should agree an approach to climate finance.
He has urged the European Union and the U.S. to give 10 billion euros each to the fund, with 1 billion euros coming from Brtiain, as part of 30 billion euro direct aid package from richer nations.
Fifty billion euros could be sourced from carbon markets, he says, and the rest of the funds should come from big emerging nations such as China.
An impasse among finance ministers from the 27-nation EU means the issue of EU aid to developing countries -- a sticking point in talks on a U.N. pact to fight global warming due in December -- will be passed on to an EU summit on Oct. 29 and 30, just before the G20 finance ministers meet.
Evidence of growth in some larger, recession-hit economies earlier this year has fuelled fears of that complacency among some policymakers could result in stimulus measures being withdrawn too soon, endangering the recovery.
