FACTBOX-Australia plan aims to set standard for post-Kyoto pact
2009-10-21 05:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Just weeks before a U.N. deadline to try to agree on a tougher global deal to fight climate change, nations can't agree on the design or legal nature of a new pact.
The United Nations says the existing Kyoto Protocol needs to be expanded or replaced from 2013 to try to draw in the United States, which never ratified Kyoto, and big developing countries, which are now among the world's top greenhouse gas emitters.
Following are some details on Australia's "National Schedules" scheme that aims to bridge the divide.
The existing Kyoto Protocol, whose first phase ends in 2012, and the broader U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change divide the world into industrialised and developing countries.
Kyoto commits 37 industrialised countries, except the United States, to economy-wide emissions targets between 2008-12, while developing nations are supposed to implement voluntary steps according to their abilities.
Kyoto, though, hasn't worked. The European Union says the pact has been a failure, global greenhouse gas emissions have soared over the past decade and that few of the rich nations bound by Kyoto cuts will meet their targets by 2012.
And the distinction between rich and poor nations has long since become blurred. China, India and Indonesia are now among the world's top emitters.
A POSSIBLE SOLUTION?
Australia, Japan, Europe and the United States say it's time for a new agreement, though differ on a mechanism to ensure nations stick to their emission reduction programmes from 2013.
Australia proposes a scheme that would bind all major emitting nations. Under the plan, nations would agree on their own schedule of actions or commitments. For rich countries, this would mean economy-wide targets to cut emissions, as well as national emissions trading and perhaps renewable energy targets.
For developing countries, they could instead choose other steps, such as setting energy intensity targets for industries, energy efficiency programmes, or a target to curb deforestation.
But while these steps for developing countries were flexible, they would have to be legally binding and become part of a broader post-2012 climate pact.
Combined, such undertakings would give clarity on what each nation was prepared to do, help rich countries settle on binding emissions targets post-2012 and guide finance and technology to developing nations to achieve their emissions reduction goals.
LINGERING MISTRUST In theory, the Australian idea sounds fine. But developing countries see it as an effort to break away from Kyoto and treat rich and poor countries the same way in terms of emissions reduction steps.
India and Indonesia in particular say any voluntary steps to curb emissions should not be subjected to independent verification, or auditing, nor should they be legally binding. Only steps wholly or partly funded by rich nations should be open to scrutiny. [ID:nDEL173572]
The Australian plan also blurs Kyoto's penalty, or compliance, system for rich nations that don't meet their 2008-12 emissions targets. It says reduction commitments, which will be taken mainly by rich nations, would be subject to compliance. Actions, mainly taken by developing countries, would not. (Writing by David Fogarty)
