China economy to underpin global demand in 2013: CIC
2013-01-26 01:23:00.0
(Reuters) - China's economy could grow at more than 8 percent in 2013, giving some underpinning to global economic activity that is set for a mild, tortuous recovery this year, the head of China's sovereign wealth fund said on Saturday.
"China's economic growth could be over 8 percent this year. China's economy supports a very large part of global demand," Lou Jiwei, chairman of the China Investment Corp. (CIC) CIC.UL, told a forum.
China's economy expanded an annual rate of 7.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2012, snapping seven consecutive quarters of weaker growth, as a raft of pro-growth policies kicked in.
The Q4 bounce helped lift full year growth in the world's second biggest economy to 7.8 percent which, though China's slowest pace for 13 years, generated roughly a third of global economic growth of 3.2 percent - itself the worst since the 2009 financial crisis and just barely above the 3 percent mark economists say signals a worldwide recession.
Lou said that even if China's growth did accelerate further in 2013, increased financial market volatility caused by Europe's debt crisis and concerns about the U.S. fiscal position, left the world economy set for a "mild, tortuous and slow recovery" at best.
Problems in debt-constrained countries, though, meant opportunities for cash-rich China, Lou said, adding that the government should encourage local firms to step up their efforts to expand and invest abroad.
"There are big opportunities for countries with cash on their hands, especially for China. We should grasp the opportunities and give firms more freedom in investing overseas," he said.
China has accumulated the world's biggest store for foreign reserves, some $3.31 trillion as at the end of 2012, generated largely as a function of capital controls that have forced Chinese exporters to sell foreign currency to the central bank.
Despite the difficulties, Chinese non-financial outbound foreign direct investment hit a record $14.7 billion in December, taking the 2012 total to $77.2 billion from 2011's $60.1 billion, Commerce Ministry data shows.
Zeng Peiyan, a former vice-premier, told the same forum that China's leaders must have "political courage" to quicken economic reforms to help sustain long-term growth.
Zeng, now chairman of top Beijing think-tank the China Centre for International Economic Exchanges (CCIEE), said the Chinese economy was "shifting gear" and clearly decelerating from the double-digit average growth rates of the past three decades to 7-8 percent in the foreseeable future.
Chen Xiwen, deputy director of the office of the Central Financial Work Leading Group, a powerful body that charts key government economic policies, said China's growth strategy should focus on improving urbanization in its next stage of development.
Chen, who also heads the ruling Communist Party's office on rural policy, said China's actual urbanization rate is around 35 percent - lower than the official rate of 51 percent.
"In other words there are some 200 million (rural) people who have entered cities, but have not yet become urban residents. This is a big problem that we need to deal with in the future urbanization process," he said.
China's rigid household registration, or hukou, rules are seen by many analysts as China's most pressing reform item as a change there would address inequality and boost domestic demand, rebalancing the core growth drivers of the economy.
The millions of migrant workers who have entered cities from the 250 million-strong rural workforce are denied access to services like health and education, forcing them to save hard and constraining spending that would boost domestic consumption.
Spreading the benefit of China's ascent to its position as a global economic powerhouse is widely seen as the best way of quelling the risk of popular revolt and officials have pledged to gradually loosen hukou controls.
A newly recalibrated official index this month indicated China's gap between rich and poor was so wide that serious social dissatisfaction may be brewing.
(Reporting by Kevin Yao; Editing by Nick Edwards and Ron Popeski)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This article points out a significant fact in the shift of the global economy: China¡¯s economic growth in 2012 amounted to one third of the entire world¡¯s economic growth for 2012. Arvind Subramanian, in his book ¡°Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China¡¯s Economic Dominance,¡± argued that China had passed the US in 2010 in terms of wealth, trade, and finance. He works in the Indian Finance Minister¡¯s Expert Group on the G20, so he is unlikely to support China¡¯s economic dominance. In 2011, I found evidence to support his claim when China passed the US to become the EU¡¯s biggest trade partner. This should have been impossible because the US and NATO were conducting a military campaign to remove Qaddafi in Libya. The US needed EU fuel, food, and other supplies to conduct naval and aerial surveillance and command and control operations to support the mission, and NATO needed US smart munitions and US naval and aerial support operations. In military logistics, these are recorded as computerized ledger entries at supply depots, but they affect US and EU trade numbers as US purchases from the EU and US sales to the EU and as EU purchases from the US and EU sales to the US. The Libyan intervention caused a substantial increase in US/EU trade that should have made it impossible for China to pass the US and become the EU¡¯s biggest trade partner. The only way for China to beat the US in trade with the EU during the 2011 Libyan intervention would be for China to have a bigger economy than the US, making the Chinese economy the world¡¯s biggest economy. Now, we have a report that gives more evidence of this shift. I woke up today, ate breakfast, went to work, returned home for supper with the family, came to the computer, read the article, and wrote these comments. The world did not end, and it will likely keep rotating on its axis creating new days for many centuries into the future. Enjoy them. If anyone wants to improve America¡¯s economic position in the world, invent new products, make them, and sell them to the world.
Jan 26, 20131:39pm EST--
