WRAPUP 2-France, China, Canada fret about weak U.S. dollar
2009-10-20 00:44:00.0
(Reuters) - France said on Tuesday the euro at $1.50 was a disaster for Europe and joined China in worrying that a weak U.S. dollar would stoke inflation.
The Bank of Canada also chimed in, saying its currency's strength against the greenback would "more than offset" good news on the Canadian economy. The remarks came after the Canadian central bank held interest rates steady at 0.25 percent and said it would keep rates on hold until mid-2010.
, which on Tuesday traded just shy of $1.50, a level not seen since August 2008.
"A euro at $1.50 is a disaster for European industry and the economy," Henri Guaino, President Nicolas Sarkozy's speech writer, told reporters on the sidelines of a conference of Sarkozy's ruling UMP party.
Guaino, who is one of Sarkozy's inner circle of advisers, said that at some point the euro's strength against the dollar would become unbearable and Europe would have to react, most likely by printing euros that would also lead to inflation.
France was disappointed that leaders of the G20 developed and developing nations, who met in Pittsburgh in September, discussed global imbalances without touching on currencies.
In the case of Canada, its central bank has long expressed worries about the surging Canadian dollar
, which has gained 16 percent this year versus the greenback. The bulk of Canadian exports go to the United States and a strong currency makes its products less competitive.
On Tuesday, the BoC reiterated its concern, saying strength in the Canadian dollar is working to "slow growth". For more see [ID:nN19231469].
"In the circumstances of a falling U.S. dollar exchange rate, net capital inflows may intensify, adding to excessive liquidity pressure at home and increasing inflation risks," Ma Delun, a vice-governor with the People's Bank of China, said on Tuesday.
Earlier this month, the G7 group of industrialized nations, which excludes China, singled out the yuan, urging authorities to let it strengthen.
INFLATING PUBLIC DEBT?
U.S. officials have said they want a strong dollar but France's Guaino accused the United States of having a policy aimed at inflating away the public debt. Guaino said the United States was "flooding the world with liquidity" and said eventually Europe would be forced to react.
"When the Americans create dollars and the dollar falls, there is a point at which you cannot take it any more," he said. "What do you do? Either you create liquidity to bring the euro down, or you let the euro rise, rise, rise and then you are completely suffocated."
Earlier this month, the chief operating officer of European planemaker Airbus (
), Fabrice Bregier, said the euro's strength is becoming "very difficult for all industrial companies which have their costs in euros." [ID:nL8168437]
), which generates nearly half its sales in the United States, said its third-quarter profit was flat at 108 million francs, hurt in part by the weak dollar.
Within the euro zone, the impact of the dollar's weakness is a subject for debate although there is no general agreement over how big a problem it might be.
Spanish Treasury Secretary Carlos Ocana said the euro was trading at normal levels while the German exporters' association, BGA, said trade prospects would brighten in the coming months despite expecting a further rise in the euro.
Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund's First Deputy Managing Director John Lipsky said on Tuesday that a weaker U.S. dollar has so far not hindered a global recovery. But over time, he expects currencies will play a role in the necessary rebalancing of the global economy. [ID:nN20435383] (Additional reporting by Jamie McGeever in London, Randall Palmer in Ottawa and Alister Bull in Washington; Editing by James Dalgleish) (gertrude.chavez@thomsonreuters.com; Tel: +1 646 223 6322; Reuters Messaging: gertrude.chavez.reuters.com@reuters.net))
