UPDATE 3-Safilo shrs jump on new plan, key shareholder
2009-10-20 14:02:00.0
(Reuters) - Italian eyewear maker Safilo (
) said Dutch shareholder Hal Investments would end up its biggest investor, owning up to half the debt-laden company under a new recapitalisation plan, sending its shares higher.
The world's second-biggest maker of eyewear, which also unveiled falling preliminary third-quarter results, said the 283 million euro ($423 million) funds inflow would boost its capital structure and partly repay about 185 million euros in debt.
"We expect substantial value to be created for stakeholders ... We've had an extremely positive response from all major licensors including Armani, Dior, and Gucci," Chief Executive Roberto Vedovotto told a conference call with analysts.
Shares in the maker of Gucci and Dior sunglasses, which has been trying to shore up its balance sheet, closed up 13 percent at 0.700 euros.
Hal Investments, which holds 2 percent of the company, will have a stake of 37.23 to 49.99 percent, Safilo said in a statement late on Monday. It is the European investment subsidiary of Netherlands-based Hal Holding NV. Its investments include optical retail chain operators like Pearle Europe and GrandVision.
Safilo Chairman Vittorio Tabacchi's family will reduce its 40 percent stake to 10 percent, a source close to the matter said.
Safilo, hit by falling sales in the global economic downturn, said in July that talks with private equity funds had collapsed.
The new plan foresees Hal buying outstanding high-yield notes of 195 million euros ($292 million) for a price equal to 60 percent of their nominal value as well as the restructuring of Safilo's senior debt facilities with its main financing banks.
Safilo's bond traded between 63.5 and 69.5 euros on Tuesday. The plan depends on the successful completion of the cash tender offer launched by Hal on the notes and Hal needs to reach an acceptance threshold equal to or higher than 60 percent.
Hal will buy Safilo stock for 13 million euros. This will be followed by a 250 million euro capital increase guaranteed by Hal, Banca IMI (
). Safilo will also sell non-core and loss-making retail chains in Spain, Australia and China to Hal for about 20 million euros. This would allow Safilo to concentrate on production and its licences while Hal would focus on distribution.
In a research note, Centrobanca estimated that at the end of the plan, seen at the end of the first quarter 2010, Safilo would have net debt of 307 million euros.
"Before having a long position in the restructuring story, we would wait for a business plan in order to understand, from a fundamental point of view, how the new major shareholder will intend to transform a company with a sound brand portfolio, in a cash cow machine with a decent profitability level."
Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a note the plan was an "acceptable solution to guarantee Safilo's survival in some form". Should the solution be finalised, it expects more Safilo eyewear to be sold via Hal's retail network, mainly in Europe.
Orders for the first two weeks of October were 12.5 percent below that of the same period last year, it said.
In the conference call, Vedovotto said he was worried by the operating performance of the group, which he said was very weak in October, due to the high level of debt. (Additional reporting by Massimo Gaia and Cristina Carlevaro; editing by Rupert Winchester and Jon Loades-Carter) ($1=.6678 Euro)
