UPDATE 2-Analyst pushes Apple target to $280; shares jump
2009-10-20 09:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Brokerages lifted their price targets on Apple Inc (
) on Tuesday to as much as $280, implying a gain of about 40 percent from current levels for the iPhone and Mac maker, whose quarterly results trounced Wall Street forecasts.
"We continue to see a big December-quarter driven by iPhone supply now catching up to demand and a MacBook/iMac refresh we think is imminent including lower entry prices," analyst Rob Cihra of Caris wrote in a note titled 'Guess somebody forgot to tell Apple about the recession.'
Apple on Monday said sales of Mac computers -- the largest single contributor to Apple's revenue -- jumped a better-than-foreseen 17 percent in the quarter ended Sept. 26, even as shipments of the closely watched iPhone were held back by problems in producing enough to meet demand, particularly abroad. [nN19395089]
"We view the combination of new product launches, broader distribution and more attractive pricing as demand drivers over the next two years," Huberty said.
Apple's iPhone sales in the quarter had been expected to steal the limelight. Yet unit sales rose 7 percent to 7.4 million, just shy of Wall Street expectations of 7.5 million units.
Still analysts at UBS believe the iPhone will continue to see greater "recurring" iPhone hardware revenue, which should drive more visibility into iPhone sales, as well as iPhone expansion driven by new partnerships.
Separately, J.P.Morgan Securities' analyst Mark Moskowitz said he expects increasing revenue growth out of Apple in the first quarter of 2010, driven by sustained momentum in Mac and iPhone.
In contrast, "we expect most other IT hardware peers to have upside potential more on the bottom line versus the top line," Moskowitz said.
Mac sales hit 3.05 million in the September quarter, growing 17 percent year-over-year. [nN19395089]
Growth in sales of Mac computers, which dwarfed the PC industry's anemic 2 percent expansion, was particularly remarkable given the persistent reports of a calendar fourth-quarter MacBook and iMac refresh that likely delayed some sales, Oppenheimer's Yair Reiner said.
Apple has shown resilience to the slump in consumer spending that pummeled rivals, such as BlackBerry maker Research in Motion's RIM.TO RIMM.O and Nokia (
"In fact, Apple has not had a negative year-over-year growth quarter since March 2003," Deutsche Bank's Chris Whitmore said.
This momentum, coupled with a greater geographic expansion -- iPhone into China, South Korea and multiple carriers in the UK and Canada in the December quarter -- and a strong pipeline, should help Apple continue to outperform, Whitmore said.
(Reporting by Mansi Dutta and Tenzin Pema in Bangalore; Editing by Ratul Ray Chaudhuri)
((mansi.dutta@thomsonreuters.com; within U.S. +1 646 223 8780;outside U.S. +91 80 4135 5800; Reuters Messaging: mansi.dutta.thomsonreuters.com@reuters.net)) Keywords: APPLE/RESEARCH
(C) Reuters 2009. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution ofReuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expresslyprohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuterssphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group ofcompanies around the world.nBNG533786
