Supreme Court to hear Guantanamo Uighurs appeal
2009-10-20 11:33:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Thu, Oct 15 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Fri, May 22 2009
Tue  EDT
The nation's highest court agreed to decide whether federal judges in Washington have the power to order the government to release Guantanamo prisoners into the United States when no other country will take them.
A U.S. appeals court ruled only the executive branch can make immigration decisions about bringing members of the Uighur ethnic group into the United States. The case set a precedent for other detainees at Guantanamo, a prison at the U.S. Navy base on Cuba.
The Supreme Court's decision to hear the case was a setback for the Obama administration, which had opposed the appeal and had urged the justices to reject it.
In June, the U.S. government sent four of the Uighurs to Bermuda. U.S. Solicitor General Elena Kagan told the Supreme Court in late September that the Pacific island nation of Palau had agreed to take 12 of the 13 remaining Uighurs.
She said six Uighurs have agreed to be resettled in Palau, and two more may soon agree to go. She said the U.S. government was trying to find an appropriate place to send the others.
President Barack Obama has ordered that Guantanamo prison be closed by January 22, but administration officials said the deadline probably will not be met. Guantanamo now holds about 220 detainees who were picked up as foreign terrorism suspects after the September 11 attacks.
Early this year, the Obama administration said it was considering freeing the Uighurs in the United States, but a political firestorm erupted, with many members of Congress opposing such a transfer.
Attorneys for the Uighurs, supported by civil liberties groups, appealed to the Supreme Court.
They said the case presented important questions that required the intervention by the justices, and that the indefinite imprisonment of the Uighurs violated the Geneva Conventions, the internationally accepted humanitarian principles to be observed during armed conflict.
The attorneys said the Supreme Court's ruling last year that Guantanamo prisoners can challenge their confinement would be rendered meaningless if judges could not order their release into the United States when no other country will take them.
Obama administration attorneys said the appeals court correctly ruled the Uighurs have no constitutional right to be released in the United States, and that they are not entitled to come to this country because they have refused to return to China.
The nine-member court has been closely divided between conservative and liberal factions in Guantanamo cases, with Justice Anthony Kennedy in the last ruling casting the decisive vote that the prisoners have certain legal rights, including the ability to challenge their confinement.
