WRAPUP 1-France, China worry about U.S. dollar weakness
2009-10-20 09:31:00.0
(Reuters) - France said the euro at $1.50 was a disaster for Europe on Tuesday and joined China in worrying that the weak U.S. currency would stoke inflation.
France has been pushing for an international exchange rate discussion and has led European complaints about the euro, which on Tuesday traded just shy of $1.50, a level not seen since August 2008.
"A euro at $1.50 is a disaster for European industry and the economy," Henri Guaino, President Nicolas Sarkozy's speech writer and one of his inner circle of advisers, told reporters on the sidelines of a conference of Sarkozy's ruling UMP party.
He said at some point the euro's strength against the U.S. currency would become unbearable and Europe would have to react, most likely by printing euros that would also lead to inflation.
France was disappointed that leaders of the G20 leading developed and developing nations, who met in Pittsburgh in September, discussed world economic imbalances without touching on currencies.
"In the circumstances of a falling U.S. dollar exchange rate, net capital inflows may intensify, adding to excessive liquidity pressure at home and increasing inflation risks," Ma Delun, a vice-governor with the People's Bank of China said on Tuesday.
Earlier this month, the G7, which excludes China, singled out the yuan, urging authorities to let it strengthen.
"When the Americans create dollars and the dollar falls, there is a point at which you cannot take it any more," he said.
"What do you do? Either you create liquidity to bring the euro down, or you let the euro rise, rise, rise and then you are completely suffocated."
Earlier this month, the chief operating officer of European planemaker Airbus (
), Fabrice Bregier, said the euro's strength is becoming "very difficult for all industrial companies which have their costs in euros". [ID:nL8168437]
), which generates nearly half its sales in the United States, said its third-quarter profit was flat at 108 million francs, hurt in part by the weak dollar.
Within the euro zone, the impact of the dollar's weakness is a subject for debate although there is no general agreement over how big a problem it might be.
Spanish Treasury Secretary Carlos Ocana said the euro was trading at normal levels while the German exporters' association, BGA, said that trade prospects would brighten in the coming months despite expecting a further rise in the euro.
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet on Monday stuck to his line that excessive volatility in currency markets was bad for the economy and repeated his attachment to comments from U.S. officials supporting a strong dollar. (Additional reporting by Jamie McGeever) (Writing by Anna Willard; Editing by Andy Bruce)
