A123 in talks on some $250 million loans
2009-10-20 13:33:00.0
(Reuters) - Battery maker A123 Systems Inc AONE.O is in "late-stage" talks with the U.S. Department of Energy aimed at winning about $250 million in loans to support battery manufacturing in the United States, its chief executive said on Tuesday.
A123, which made its debut on the Nasdaq stock market in September, will start production at its first U.S. battery plant in mid-2010 and is looking at additional manufacturing sites in Michigan, Chief Executive David Vieau told Reuters in an interview.
Its first U.S. lithium-ion battery plant, to be located in Livonia, Michigan, will employ "hundreds" of workers when it becomes fully operational and have enough capacity to supply batteries for 20,000 plug-in electric vehicles, Vieau said.
"We're in late-stage negotiations on loans from the Department of Energy to support our overall U.S. manufacturing programs," Vieau said on the sidelines of an industry forum in Detroit.
President Barack Obama has expressed strong support for advancing battery technology to reduce gasoline consumption, to cut tailpipe emissions and to lift U.S. automakers and their suppliers out of their financial troubles. Production of lithium-ion battery cells is now dominated by Japan, South Korea and China.
"Combined grant and loan numbers are under half a billion (dollars)," Vieau said.
A123, which currently has manufacturing facilities in South Korea and China, intends to invest $600 million in the proposed Livonia plant.
"There is additional expansion within Michigan that's planned," Vieau said. "It's not been announced yet, but there is commitment and cooperation with state, federal governments to expand beyond Livonia. We're looking at several sites."
A123, founded by scientists linked to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), develops batteries for electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids and works with carmakers such as Bayerische Motoren Werke AG (
) or BMW, Chrysler Group LLC and General Motors Co GM.UL.
The automotive market for lithium-ion batteries, mostly found in mobile phones and computer laptops, is projected to be $32 million in 2009 but is expected to skyrocket to $22 billion in 2015, according to A123's prospectus.
(Reporting by Soyoung Kim; editing by Gunna Dickson and Gerald E. McCormick)
