Q+A: Japan and U.S. differ over defense issues
2009-10-20 02:54:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Oct 20 2009
Sun, Oct 18 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Wed, Sep 16 2009
Tue  EDT
Japanese Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama, who won a landslide election victory in August, has vowed to steer a more independent diplomatic course from Washington. That has sparked concern among investors about possible friction in the relationship.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO U.S. FORCES IN JAPAN?
Japan, whose own forces are restricted by its pacifist constitution, hosts about 47,000 U.S. military personnel, a source of irritation for communities near military bases, with many complaints about crime, noise, pollution and accidents.
The ruling Democratic Party's election manifesto promised to rethink a planned redeployment of U.S. troops and propose amendments to the agreement under which U.S. troops operate in Japan.
Washington and Tokyo have agreed to ease the burden of U.S. bases on the southern island of Okinawa by moving a 4,000-strong U.S. Marine Corps air base from the center of a town to a less populated area in the north of the island.
The deal means 8,000 Marines will be moved from Okinawa, partly at Japan's expense, to the U.S. territory of Guam.
Washington is keen to press ahead with the project, which is supposed to be completed by 2014, partly because the issue has dragged on since an initial agreement in 1996.
But many residents of Okinawa, which suffered one of the bloodiest battles of World War Two and remained under U.S. control until 1972, are dissatisfied with the plan for environmental and other reasons.
The party's proposed changes to the Status of Forces Agreement would include a requirement that U.S. forces make good any damage to the environment caused by their activities, a Japanese newspaper has said.
HOW FAR WILL JAPAN BACK U.S. MILITARY ACTIVITIES?
Hatoyama said he will not renew the mandate for Japanese ships on a refueling mission in the Indian Ocean in support of U.S.-led operations in Afghanistan, which expires in January.
U.S. officials say the decision is up to Japan, but that they would welcome an alternative contribution to Afghan security.
Officials including Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada have hinted that Japan's future contributions would be civilian rather than military. But Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa said last week he was concerned that civilian activities alone might not be a suitable alternative.
WHAT LINE WILL THE NEW GOVT TAKE ON NUCLEAR WEAPONS?
Hatoyama backs U.S. President Barack Obama's calls for a world free of nuclear arms and has promised to uphold Japan's three "non-nuclear principles" banning the making, possession or introduction into the country of nuclear arms.
But Japan benefits from a nuclear "umbrella" provided by Washington, something many see as important given China's growing military might and North Korea's nuclear program.
HOW WILL JAPAN'S ASIA STRATEGY CHANGE?
Hatoyama advocates a new East Asian Community modeled after the European Union, although he concedes it would take more than 10 years to set up a unified regional currency.
He wants to deepen ties with China and has said he will stay away from Yasukuni, a war shrine in Tokyo seen by many in Asia as a symbol of Japan's military aggression in the early 20th century.
