Nikkei gains 1.1 pct, techs rise on Apple results
2009-10-19 22:34:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Nikkei stock average rose 1.1 percent on Tuesday, buoyed by tech shares such as Kyocera Corp (
Shares in companies with a large exposure to the Chinese market, such as Hitachi Construction (
), a maker of earth-moving equipment, gained on expectations of strong economic growth ahead of GDP data later this week.
A raft of U.S. earnings included Apple Inc's (
) beating estimates as iPhone and Mac sales hit quarterly records, while Texas Instruments TXN.N also did better than expected. [ID:nN19395089]
"These results are inevitably providing a bit of a boost, particularly for parts suppliers and chip makers, while a whole range of China-linked shares are also doing well," said Koichi Ogawa, chief portfolio manager at Daiwa SB Investments.
"But the Nikkei still isn't rising as much as you might expect given this lineup of good incentives and the improving economic climate -- and that's due to a lot of selling by domestic institutional investors."
rose 111.07 points to 10,347.58 and appeared to be on track for its highest close in a month. The broader Topix
While foreign investors, long a key driver of the Nikkei, were buying, market players said this was still relatively limited compared to other major share markets and was not providing as much of a boost as might be hoped.
"Foreign investors remain lukewarm towards Japanese shares in comparison to other Asian markets, so this will make it hard for the Nikkei to renew its high for the year," said Kenichi Hirano at Tachibana Securities.
"Most of those who are buying Japan appear to be doing it to get country balance in their portfolios, rather than being motivated by a strong interest in the shares themselves."
Apple's profits and sales streaked past Wall Street forecasts, with sales of Mac computers jumping 17 percent and its shares jumped 7 percent in extended trading. [ID:n19395039]
Tech shares took heart, with Kyocera gaining 1.6 percent to 8,120 yen, memory maker Tokyo Electron (
) rising 1.4 percent to 5,770 yen and Nikon (
), a top maker of steppers, climbing 2 percent to 1,782 yen.
While analysts said Apple's earnings were indeed encouraging, they also warned against reading too much into the figures. "I'm not sure you can really say that Apple's sales indicate improving U.S. consumer sentiment, it's just Apple that's doing well," said Masayoshi Okamoto, head of dealing at Jujiya Securities. China-linked shares did well after senior Chinese official said on Monday that China's gross domestic product grew more than 7 percent in the first nine months and that China would have no difficulty reaching the government's full-year GDP growth target of 8 percent. [ID:nBJC002361].
GDP figures for the third quarter are due on Thursday, with economists polled by Reuters expecting year-on-year growth of 8.9 percent. Komatsu (
), the world's second-biggest maker of earth-moving equipment, rose 2 percent to 1,833 yen and Hitachi Construction rose 2 percent to 2,270 yen. The Nikkei business daily also said Komatsu likely secured about 10 billion yen ($110 million) in operating profit for the July-September quarter on strong demand for construction machinery in China and other emerging countries.
) fell 2.1 percent to 138 yen after the company cut its operating profit forecast for the year to March by 35 percent to 13 billion yen ($143 million), citing dwindling consumer spending and falling prices for fish including bluefin tuna.
Trade was light on the Tokyo exchange's first section, with 863 million shares changing hands, compared with last week's morning average of 956 million.
Advancing stocks outnumbered declining ones by nearly 3 to 1. (Reporting by Elaine Lies; Editing by Edwina Gibbs)
