Bird, planes and trains no challenge for Chinese mimic
2009-10-20 03:16:00.0
Bird, planes and trains no challenge for Chinese mimic | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Bird, planes and trains no challenge for Chinese mimic
Tue  EDT
(Reuters Life!) - Is it a bird? Is it a plane? Or is it a train? No, it's Chinese mimic Cheng Jiaqiang who can imitate about 100 sounds from birds singing and horses galloping to planes taking off and trains trundling along the tracks.
No sound is a challenge for the professional mimic who has been performing for more than 30 years and is now deputy head of the Beijing Art Ensemble of Golden Larks, a group of acrobats, singers and dancers that gives ensemble performances.
"I have very good qualities. My lips, teeth, throat, tongue and nose are all good," said Cheng.
Cheng comes from a long line of professional performers who were famous in China's acrobatic world and performed for Chinese leaders and even Hollywood star Charlie Chaplin and his wife.
But he has no sons and says his daughters do not have the strength required to learn mimicry. Instead, he is passing on his family's guarded skills to an art school graduate who wants to become a mimic.
Today, along with other traditional Chinese artists, Cheng gives regular performances at Beijing's famous Laoshe Teahouse and his performances are almost always packed.
However, his profession has its drawbacks: he avoids alcohol, cigarettes and only drinks very weak tea. Also, there are times when his tongue cramps, which causes his whole body to contract with pain.
His performances may be packed, but Cheng says nowadays people have more career choices so they are less interested in the traditional arts.
"Now there are more types of jobs and people can go to university. So, less people are interested in training as a professional vocal mimic."
(Reporting by Reuters Television, Editing by Sugita Katyal)
