UPDATE 3-Japan steel output recovery stalls in September
2009-10-19 08:35:00.0
(Reuters) - A rapid recovery in Japan's crude steel output stalled in September after a blast furnace at Japan's top maker Nippon Steel Corp (
) was halted, but output will resume rising in October, an industry body said.
Japan's crude steel output slipped 0.4 percent from August for a first month-to-month decline in five months, the Japan Iron and Steel Federation said on Monday.
Japan's output had been on a fast recovery track since April on a strong revival in exports to Asia and a rebound in car production at home on government's tax incentives.
A spokesman at the industry body said trouble at Nippon Steel's No.3 blast furnace at its Kimitsu plant near Tokyo on Aug. 28 affected nationwide steel output in September, but the restart of its idled furnace in early October should help increase output for the month. [ID:nT103733]
"There is no change in the trend for a steady recovery in output," he said.
Demand for hot coils and sheet steel, mainly from Japanese firms operating in China, South Korea and other Asian countries, stayed at a high level in September helped by China's economic stimulus package, although demand in the key domestic construction sector remained in the doldrums.
On a year-to-year basis, Japan's crude steel output fell 18 percent in September to 8.27 million tonnes, down for the 12th month running. That follows a 18.3 percent year-to-year fall in August.
For a graphic in Japan's crude steel output, click
While Japan's top steelmakers were still cautious of restarting idled blast furnaces due to an uncertain market outlook in China, some market watchers saw a rebound in the Chinese market, citing the government's possible further boost in infrastructure spending.
"We expect steel prices in China to bottom out soon and the market to gradually improve," said Junichi Misawa, senior fund manager at STB Asset Management. "I'm positive about demand outlook as well as Japanese steel shares."
Japan's top two steelmakers, world No.2 Nippon Steel and No.6 JFE Holdings Inc (
), have kept some of their blast furnaces shut as uncertainty remains about demand in the January-March quarter.
), Japan's biggest construction steel maker, to cut its November prices on Monday, in its first across-the-board price reduction since April. (Reporting by Yuko Inoue; Editing by Joseph Radford)
