UPDATE 2-Brazil's Petrobras may sell dollar bonds-sources
2009-10-19 15:52:00.0
(Reuters) - Brazil's state oil company Petrobras (
) plans to sell U.S. dollar-denominated global bonds in different tranches, seeking to test investors' appetite for the company's debt, a source with direct knowledge of the transaction told Reuters on Monday.
), which tapped international capital markets twice earlier this year, is seeking to structure the deal so that investors can choose from a variety of maturities and amounts, said the person, who asked not to be named because terms of the transaction remain private.
"The novelty here is that this issue will be a multi-tranched issue, that is, it should have more than one maturity," the person said.
"Therefore, with this structure they should be able to grab a bigger volume," the person added.
Petrobras is expected to offer bonds with 10- and 30-year maturities, according to International Financing Review, a Thomson Reuters publication.
IFR said the company will start a roadshow for investors on Tuesday in San Francisco. Other stops include London and Los Angeles on Wednesday, and Boston and New York on Thursday.
By tapping debt markets abroad, the company may decrease its reliance on state funds to finance its $174.4 billion five-year investment plan. Less than a third of the more than $30 billion that Petrobras has raised this year has come from private investors.
This year, in addition to a $6.5 billion bridge loan led by Banco Santander and Societe Generale, among other private commercial banks, Petrobras secured a $12.5 billion credit line from state development bank BNDES, $2 billion in loans from the EximBank of the United States and $10 billion from the China Development Bank.
The sources did not elaborate on terms of the deal, such as the size, maturities and coupon interest rates for the notes.
), HSBC (
), JPMorgan Chase (
) to handle the transaction, sources told Reuters on condition of anonymity because the deal has yet to be completed. (Additional reporting by Denise Luna in Rio de Janeiro; Editing by Kenneth Barry)
