UPDATE 1-Bangkok Bank Q3 net beats forecast, prospect improves
2009-10-19 07:43:00.0
(Reuters) - Bangkok Bank BBL.BK, Thailand's largest lender, posted a surprisingly strong 17 percent rise in third-quarter net profit on Monday despite a decline in lending, due mainly to the absence of an investment loss.
Together with improving net interest income and lower operating expenses, the bank's fourth-quarter net profit should be better, analysts said, with the bank expected to book a 1.3-1.4 billion baht gain from the sale of its 19.3 percent stake in ACL Bank ACL.BK to China's ICBC (
Bangkok Bank, a barometer for domestic industry with $51.6 billion in assets at end-August, reported a net profit of 5.07 billion baht ($152 million) in July-September -- above the 4.84 billion baht forecast by eight analysts polled by Reuters.
Before the announcement, full-year net profit was expected to have dropped 2.5 percent to 19.73 billion baht, according to 18 analysts polled by Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Bangkok Bank's shares dropped 0.41 percent to 121 baht before the results were announced. The stock has risen 75 percent this year, outperforming a 63 percent gain in the Thai market.
Quarterly profit was helped by rising non-interest income. Last year, the bank booked a 2.5 billion baht loss from its investments in Lehman Brothers, which collapsed last September.
Bangkok Bank's loans contracted 6.9 percent in the nine months to the end of September, versus its full-year target of zero to 3 percent, while net interest margins were about 2.87 percent in the quarter, down from 3.37 percent a year earlier as a result of softening loan yields.
Income from fees and services rose about 16 percent from a year earlier. "Its fee income was higher than expectations," said Sirinattha Techasiriwan, a banking analyst at Kasikorn Securities who had expected fee income to rise only by single digits.
"But other key items were in line with the consensus," she said, adding the broker would maintain its "outperform" rating on the bank.
Earnings by second-ranked Krung Thai Bank KTB.BK and number three Siam Commercial Bank's SCB.BK were due on Tuesday. Other smaller rivals reported weaker results last week.
Number four Kasikornank KBAN.BK posted a 3 percent drop in quarterly net profit, in line with market expectations and dragged down by rising operating costs and a contraction in loan growth. [ID:nBAK002898]
Sixth-ranked TMB Bank TMB.BK reported a 68 percent drop in quarterly net profit to 526 million baht, below analysts forecast, due mainly to a decline in net interest income. ($1=33.40 Baht) (Editing by Jason Szep)
