UPDATE 1-Iraq lures bid for for W.Qurna from Total, CNPC
2009-10-19 10:27:00.0
(Reuters) - France's Total (
) and a consortium led by China's CNPC have revised bids to develop Iraq's giant West Qurna oilfield and would soon meet Iraqi officials for talks, a senior Iraqi oil official said on Monday.
) and Russia's LUKOIL (
) in competing for the field, which Iraq failed to award at its first bidding round in June. All four of the consortiums baulked then at what they saw as stiff contract terms for the field.
The winner of the service contract for phase one of the West Qurna field, which has reserves of 8.7 billion barrels, would be announced within two weeks, Abdul-Mahdy al-Ameedi, deputy director of Iraq's Petroleum Contracts and Licensing Directorate, told a news conference in Istanbul.
"Some of the international oil companies revised their offers and submitted their offers to the Ministry of oil -- Exxon Mobil, LUKOIL, Total -- and CPNC's is coming," Ameedi said. "So we are dealing with these revised offers."
The deal is one of three that the Iraqi government is close to sealing which would almost triple Iraq's output to 7 million barrels per day (bpd), making it one of the world's top oil producers.
Iraqi officials would meet with CNPC and Total in the coming days to discuss whether they will accept the Iraqi Oil Ministry's remuneration fee of $1.90 per barrel for West Qurna phase one, he said.
Exxon and Lukoil have already accepted that fee. Total has yet to submit a "clear offer" on the remuneration fee, Ameedi said.
Last week, another official from the state oil contracts office said Exxon Mobil's bid to boost West Qurna phase one's long-term production to 2.1 million barrels per day (bpd) put it ahead of LUKOIL.
LUKOIL has since revised up its bid from the 1.5 million bpd output target it initially gave, but neither LUKOIL or Iraqi officials have yet to make public the revised target.
(Reporting by Ayla Jean Yackley and Simon Webb) (ayla.yackley@reuters.com; +90 212 350 7053; Reuters Messaging: ayla.yackley.reuters.com@reuters.net))
