Tweddle steals the show as China stifle opposition
2009-10-18 14:11:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's Beth Tweddle raised the domed roof at the O2 Arena on Sunday after she tumbled to glory on the floor exercise, while Olympic champion Zou Kai and his team mates showed China had lost none of the sparkle that helped them dominate the 2008 Beijing Games.
However, it was Tweddle who handed promoters of the 2012 London Olympics with their dream marketing tool when she outshone her rivals to win her first world floor title with a rousing routine which earned her 14.650.
"The crowd gave me such a buzz and they just cheered me on to the medal," Tweddle, who is considered an asymmetric bars specialist, told the fans.
While Tweddle is guaranteed to become one of the faces of the next Olympics, when the gymnastics will be staged at the same venue, fans visiting this week will have already worked out there will be one anthem that will be played over and over again.
Over the weekend, Chinese anthem "March of the Volunteers" was aired six times, with Zou (16.150 on horizontal bars), Wang Guanyin (15.975 on parallel bars) and Deng Linlin (15.000 on balance beam) striking gold on Sunday to ensure the world's most populous nation won half of the 12 titles up for grabs.
Despite the precision, excellence and artistry of the Chinese trio, it was Tweddle who stole the show.
At 24, the Briton was between five to nine years older than all of her rivals on Sunday but Tweddle proved she still had the ability to land the big titles in a sport usually dominated by teenagers.
The crowd waving a sea of red, white and blue Union Jacks came alive when Tweddle was introduced over the PA system and the fans screamed themselves hoarse while the gymnast composed herself and took her place at the corner of the mat.
She had everyone clapping along to her foot-tapping display and once she nailed her final tumbling sequence before ending her routine on bended knees with arms outstretched skywards, the fans leapt to their feet to give her a standing ovation.
Unfortunately for Tweddle she had to wait for 40 agonizing minutes before seeing if her score of 14.650 was good enough to beat the remaining seven gymnasts and allow her to make amends for her flop on the bars, where she failed to make the final.
"The most nerve-wracking was waiting for the scores," said Tweddle, who added the floor title to her 2006 bars success.
With her job done for the day, she looked forward to returning to the same venue in three years' time provided "the youngsters aren't kicking me out the team."
Marian Dragulescu, 28, also soared past his young challengers by winning his fourth vault gold -- and eighth world title overall -- with an average of 16.575 from his two attempts.
But the risks faced by young gymnasts in the pursuit of gold medals was again highlighted when Jessica Gil Ortiz's bid to win the floor title ended with a trip to the hospital.
The 19-year-old Colombian was attempting to finish off a high-flying tumbling sequence with a double front somersault when she banged her head at an uncomfortable angle, hushing almost 12,000 fans into silence.
After being fitted with a neck brace, Ortiz was carried off on a stretcher while her rivals looked on in shock.
"She is in a stable condition in hospital. She had to go for an x-ray and a scan but her condition is neurologically intact," head of the medical team John Aldridge said in a statement.
