UPDATE 2-Saudi SABIC silent on dividend as Q3 net halves
2009-10-18 11:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Saudi Basic Industries Corp 2010.SE (SABIC), the world's biggest chemicals company by market value, kept investors guessing if it would pay a dividend for 2009 after third-quarter profit halved.
Chief Executive Mohamed al-Mady said that with uncertainty over recovery in its key U.S. market, the direction of petrochemical prices was unpredictable despite a recent firming in oil prices and a pickup in demand from Asia.
) and Germany's BASF BASF.DE -- said net profit fell to 3.6 billion riyals ($960 million) in the quarter from 7.24 billion riyals a year earlier, when global demand and petrochemical prices were booming.
The drop came on the back of an annual 39.2 percent fall in SABIC's turnover, though volume sales rose 4 percent to 11.6 million tonnes, according to Reuters calculations based on previous financial statements.
The repercussions of the global crisis continued to be felt through depressed demand and lower petrochemical prices than in 2008, a year which Mady said was "exceptional".
"It's unfair to compare to 2008 ... It will be difficult to realise the same profits as in 2008. We should rather compare to the previous quarters of this year," he told reporters.
SABIC has in fact doubled its net profit relative to the second quarter of this year, and increased sales by about 14 percent to 27 billion riyals.
The bulk of this growth came from Asian markets, especially China and the Middle East, Mady said. Demand from the U.S. market was also showing some signs of recovery.
"It remains to be seen if this (recovery in U.S. demand) is fundamental and not only due to the temporary effects of stimulus packages," he said.
Higher oil prices should help prices firm up, but new production capacities would work against that trend, Mady added.
SABIC usually does better in terms of profitability than rivals because it purchases feedstock at lower prices, analysts say.
In addition to petrochemicals, SABIC owns Hadeed, Saudi Arabia's largest steel maker.
SABIC has faced one of its toughest years in 2009 and Mady said he hoped the start of new production capacities by the firm's affiliates as well as a cost-cutting plan would boost margins in 2010.
Before the earnings announcement, SABIC shares had inched down 0.3 percent, bringing the stock's year-to-date performance to 53.4 percent, outperforming the all-share .TASI index but below the 66 percent rise in the petrochemical index .TPISI.
"I think the (SABIC) stock will fly," said Laurent-Patrick Gally, of Dubai-based Shuaa Capital. (Additional reporting by Ulf Laessing and Asma Alsharif, writing by Souhail Karam, editing by Will Waterman)
