China's gymnasts finally strike gold in London
2009-10-17 13:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Zhang Hongtao, Olympic champion He Kexin and Yan Mingyong began China's gold rush at the world gymnastics championships by producing a series of eye-catching routines on Saturday.
The nation which dominated the 2008 Beijing Games by winning nine out of the 14 titles up for grabs, had to wait until the penultimate day of this year's competition to strike gold.
Zou Kai, who climbed to the top of the rostrum three times last year, had been expected to be the first of the Chinese winners in the floor final but he was squeezed out.
Romanian Marian Dragulescu tumbled to glory with a score of 15.700 after performing a series of complex twists and soaring somersaults, beating Zou by 0.025.
"Every time it's harder so every time you win another one it's more difficult, the work is twice or three times more so I'm very satisfied," Dragulescu told reporters.
Apart from Dragulescu, no one else on the day had the talent or the belief to stop the Chinese.
"After the performance I celebrated to myself. I performed very well, almost perfect. I didn't realize I had won the title," said Zhang.
Hungary's Krisztian Berki and Australian Prashanth Sellathurai made up the top three, leaving Smith to look up to the heavens to wonder what went wrong.
It was not the kind of spectacle the fans were expecting from Smith, who had hoped Saturday's final would set him on his way to claiming the Olympic title at the same venue in 2012.
"Devastated really but rather it happen now than in two or three years' time," Smith told reporters.
Instead of celebrating a British victory, the crowd soon realized that China's world-beating champions are likely to gatecrash the 2012 party.
The Chinese gymnast edged out Bulgaria's Jordan Jovtchev, a five-time Olympian, in the strongman's event by 0.1 of a point with a score of 15.675.
Twice former champion Jovtchev, who at the age of 36 and with his silver-specked hair could be mistaken for one of the judges, proved he could still compete at the highest level when he picked up his eighth world medal in the discipline.
Apart from He's success, it was a bad day for Beijing winners as North Korea's Hong Un-jong botched both her vaults.
American Kayla Williams made the most of Hong's misfortune and nailed her high-flying handspring straight front somersault with 1-1/2 twist. She scored a winning average of 15.087 from her two vaults.
(Additional reporting by Alison Wildey and Marie-Claire Calvert, editing by Justin Palmer)
