Nadal through in Shanghai after Ljubicic quits
2009-10-16 00:51:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Thu, Oct 15 2009
Thu, Oct 15 2009
Wed, Oct 14 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Sun, Oct 11 2009
Refael Nadal of Spain plays a shot to Ivan Ljubicic of Croatia during their quarter final match at the Shanghai Masters tennis tournament in Shanghai October 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Nir Elias
Fri  EDT
"It was tough, it was a difficult match," said world number two Nadal. "I'm sorry for him, it's not very nice to win like this. I just wish him a fast recovery."
Despite seeing an eighth player depart injured from a tournament already without Roger Federer and Andy Murray, who withdrew before the start, organizers will be pleased that Nadal is staying for another day at least.
That had not looked likely when Ljubicic went a set up in a start to the match that recalled Nadal's defeat to another big-serving Croatian, Marin Cilic, at the China Open last week.
Nadal rallied in the second, however, and will face compatriot Feliciano Lopez Saturday hoping to reach his first final since knee and abdominal injuries disrupted his season.
The 22-year-old, chasing a third successive title in China after last year's Masters Cup triumph and last week's victory in Beijing, needed to show real mental strength in a frenetic third set against the French hustler.
The pair traded two breaks each in a dramatic first four games, Djokovic at one stage going from chest-pounding delight to racket-smashing fury in a matter of three points.
"Most of the time when I smash the racket things go better from then on," said Djokovic. "The positive thing is that I managed to find a good solution after so many ups and downs from both sides. A very emotional, very intense match."
The Serbian, who will be world number three again next week, broke Simon again for 3-2, and was the first to hold serve before rattling through the remainder of the set.
"I had no chance," Davydenko recalled. "He played very good baseline. Really, I could not do anything. If I still have good control, maybe I have a chance."
"I just tried to play my best tennis and to play my best weapons as best as I can," he said. "It's my first semis, and I'm so happy."
