Germany says EU concerns don't endanger Opel deal
2009-10-17 04:27:00.0
(Reuters) - Economy Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg expressed confidence on Saturday that Germany could address EU concerns about a sale of carmaker Opel to Canada's Magna MGa.TO, saying they did not put the deal at risk.
The European Commission announced late on Friday that Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes had written to Guttenberg voicing doubts about Germany's offer to provide 4.5 billion euros ($6.7 billion) in aid for Opel as part of the deal with Magna.
In the letter, Kroes said there were "significant indications" that Germany had made the aid for Opel contingent on Magna being chosen as the winning bidder -- a stance that would run counter to EU competition rules.
Speaking to reporters in Berlin on Saturday morning, Guttenberg said the deal was "on track" and voiced confidence that Germany could resolve the questions raised by Kroes.
Asked whether her concerns could doom the sale to Magna, he replied: "No, I don't believe that."
Magna, a car parts group whose bid for Opel is backed by Russian investors, had been in competition with private equity investor RHJ International (
) and China's BAIC, for control of the General Motors unit.
It linked its offer of 4.5 billion euros in aid for Opel to a Magna takeover, with Chancellor Angela Merkel promising back in August to intervene personally, if necessary, to ensure Magna won the bid battle.
Under pressure from Germany, GM chose Magna as its preferred bidder last month. Under a deal that had been expected to be signed this week but was pushed back amid the EU doubts, GM plans to sell a 55 percent stake in Opel to Magna and Russian state-owned bank Sberbank SBER03.MM.
Kroes said GM and the trust established to keep Opel separate from its U.S. parent's recent bankruptcy in the United States should be given the chance to reconsider the decision to sell to Magna.
If GM is forced to reopen the bidding for Opel, or the closing of the deal faces significant delays, Opel could face a cash crunch based on previous projections by the automaker.
"We can't close a deal if we don't have the financing," GM spokesman Chris Preuss said in Detroit.
Opel employs about 50,000 workers in Europe, with half of those in Germany and major plants in Britain, Belgium, Poland and Spain.
Guttenberg said on Friday that Austria and Poland had made written commitments to contribute to the aid package and cited positive signals from Britain and Spain. (Writing by Noah Barkin; Editing by Ron Popeski)
