Gymnastics-Smith not yet in perfect harmony with pommel routine
2009-10-17 13:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Britain's Olympic bronze medallist Louis Smith has no plans to concentrate on his singing career after a disappointing last place in the pommel horse final at the world championships on Saturday.
Smith, who auditioned for popular British talent show -- The X Factor, suffered misfortune early on in his routine at the O2 Arena but the 20-year-old is focusing on the London 2012 Games.
"Gymnastics is my thing. If you get me a microphone I'll get up there and give it a go but you probably won't enjoy it as much as my pommel routine," Smith told reporters.
The home favourite was greeted like a rock star as he entered the arena, better known for holding pop concerts, to huge cheers and waving flags.
First up of the eight finalists, Smith who was debuting the routine he hopes to do at the next Olympics, slipped off the pommel attempting a handstand, prompting loud gasps from the crowd.
"It was a great crowd, the atmosphere was great and I did a perfect routine in training before I came out, so unfortunately it's just one of those things that happen," he said.
"I wouldn't say it was nerves. I was at the Olympic Games final and I performed a great routine there.
"I was trying to do a new routine, I've never competed with before. It'll most probably be the routine I'm going to do in the 2012 Olympics and I'm doing it three years out, trying to do it on the world stage, so there are positives.
"I'm already doing one of the hardest routines in the world at top level," Smith added.
China's Zhang Hongtao won the world title but Smith had no regrets about trying out his technically challenging routine even though his mistake cost him any chance of a medal.
"I could have played safe and got a bronze... but the whole idea is for me getting ready for 2012 and if I'm going to have any chance of getting a gold there, then I have to be doing these hard routines.
"To come out here in front of a home crowd in the arena that's going to be used for 2012 was the perfect chance to do it. Obviously I'm upset that I fell off but I'm looking forward to 2012," he said.
