Sloan grabs dramatic all-around victory
2009-10-16 19:44:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Oct 16 2009
Fri, Oct 16 2009
Bridget Sloan (R) of the U.S. and teammate Rebecca Bross listen to their national anthem after the women's individual all-round final of the Gymnastics World Championships at the O2 Arena in London October 16, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Dylan Martinez
Fri  EDT
Sloan sealed the title with a score of 57.825, eclipsing Bross by 0.050 of a point. Koko Tsurumi claimed Japan's first women's all-around medal at the worlds since 1966 when she secured a surprise bronze.
Shimmering in a crystal encrusted pink leotard, Bross had led the competition going into her last apparatus and needed to surpass a score of 12.925 to secure the top prize.
However, she landed on her head at the end of her final tumble while attempting a punch-front 1/2 twist somersault.
Unable to hide her disappointment, Bross ran off the mat and began to pace the sidelines as she waited to see if the judges verdict would hand her a reprieve.
Sloan, who had resigned herself to the silver, suddenly realized she had been given a golden chance and stood hand on hips with her eyes fixed on the scoreboard.
When Bross's mark of 12.875 flashed up, Sloan did not have the heart to celebrate and instead went up to her younger rival to offer a consolation hug.
"I had a little mishap at the end of my routine. It happens and there's nothing I can do about it now," said Bross.
Sloan said: "I knew I had a strong floor but just not as good as hers. When she fell it was like 'oh no'. (When the scores came up) it was like 'oh my gosh did that just happen?'"
Sloan's victory kept up the domination of the Americans in the discipline as she followed 2007 world champion Shawn Johnson and Olympic title holder Nastia Liukin by climbing to the top of the podium.
Sloan and China's Yang Yilin were the pre-event favorites but the Olympic bronze medalist was never in the running for the title after she landed on her head while trying to execute a full-twisting double back dismount from the asymmetric bars, her first event.
After Kohei Uchimura's success on Thursday, Tsurumi looked well placed to give Japan a double celebration at the packed O2 Arena as she deftly showed off her acrobatic skills on the bars and the balance beam to sit on top of the standings at halfway.
Bross, though, leapfrogged from third place to the summit after an exquisite performance on the beam.
Looking as if she was performing on a four-inch piece of metal -- rather than wood -- with magnets stuck to her feet, the 16-year-old did not waver once.
In contrast, Sloan wobbled her way through her beam display and was lucky not to fall when she swayed dangerously from side to side four times during her 90-second demonstration.
(Additional reporting by Marie-Claire Calvert, editing by Tony Jimenez)
