Travel Postcard: 48 Hours in Phitsanulok, Thailand
2009-10-16 07:54:00.0
Travel Postcard: 48 Hours in Phitsanulok, Thailand | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Travel Postcard: 48 Hours in Phitsanulok, Thailand
Fri, Oct 2 2009
Fri, Dec 5 2008
A general view of a Buddha statue is seen at the Sukhothai historical park in Sukhothai September 17, 2009. Picture taken September 17, 2009. To match Travel Postcard-48 Hours in Phitsanulok, Thailand. Credit: Reuters/Ajay Kamalakaran
PHITSANULOK, Thailand
Fri  EDT
PHITSANULOK, Thailand
Oct 16 (Reuters Life) - Got 48 hours in Phitsanulok, a riverside town in central Thailand? Reuters correspondents help you make the most of a stay in this pilgrimage and party town, known locally as Phi-Lok.
10:00 a.m. - Visit the Wang Chan, a former Chan palace, where King Naresuan was born in 1555. The palace compound has a shrine which depicts the king proclaiming the Ayuthaya kingdom's independence from Burma.
12:00 p.m. - Head to the Wat Ratcha Burana, a 14th century Buddhist temple built in Sukhothai style and go for a tarot reading by a parrot.
Just across the river is the Wat Phra Si Rathana Mahathat, a pilgrimage site that houses the bronze Phra Phutta Chinarat, the most famous Buddha image in the country after Bangkok's Emerald Buddha.
1:30 p.m. - To enjoy a traditional Phitsanulok lunch, follow the pilgrims to Pa Lai, a noodle shop famous for its "hanging-legs" rice noodles.
3:00 p.m. - In the mood for a late-afternoon adventure? Head around 20 km (12 miles) out of town and go rafting on the Mae Nam Nan River.
5:30 p.m. - Still feeling energetic? When the sun goes down, Phitsanulok gets into fitness mode. Go for a jog on the riverside promenade or join a mass aerobics class.
In case you need a more relaxed workout, how about tai-chi with the town's older generation?
7:30 p.m. - Go bargain hunting at the night market with its collection of clothes, souvenirs, antiques and bronze Buddha statues. The market also has massage parlors and outdoor food courts.
9:00 a.m. - Drive through the lush green countryside to the UNESCO World Heritage historic old town of Sukhothai, the site of the oldest Thai civilization. Begin with a visit to the Sukhothai museum to learn about the town's architectural gems and the history of the Thai language.
11:00 a.m. - Walk up to the Wat Saphaan Hin which has a Buddha statue 300 meters above sea level. Enjoy a picnic brunch on the hill, with its views of the fertile Sukhothai plains, followed by a stroll in the nearby forest.
1:30 p.m. - The highlight of Sukhothai is the Wat Mahathat, famous for its lotus-bud stupa. The temple complex, surrounded by lotus ponds, has various sanctuaries and chapels with Buddha images.
4:00 p.m. - Back in Phitsanulok, go for a relaxing foot massage near the riverfront or if you prefer a more holistic treatment go to the Grand Riverside's spa for an aromatherapy body massage.
