Five world market themes next week
2009-10-16 11:07:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Oct 16 2009
Fri  EDT
1/ MY CURRENCY, YOUR PROBLEM
A depreciating dollar helps U.S. exporters -- as third quarter U.S. earnings might highlight next week -- and is part of the long-term global rebalancing process, but it risks becoming more and more of a headache for countries on the other side of that currency equation, such as members of the euro zone, Canada, Japan, or Australia. Expressions of concern about volatility are more prevalent than complaints about actual levels and any official comments next week (e.g. from Eurogroup finance officials or the Bank of Canada) are unlikely to depart from this principle. Financial markets are ever more alert, however, for G7 watchwords such as "excessive volatility" being deployed.
2/ PARITY PARTY PREPARATION?
Parity is drawing nearer in the U.S. dollar/Canadian dollar, dollar/Swiss franc, and euro/sterling and even those unversed in technical analysis will feel the magnetic pull of these levels. The psychological impact of such rates will magnify the official reaction, exporters' and investors' scramble to hedge, and the complaints about loss of competitive advantage from countries saddled with appreciating currencies. Sterling's sharp swings this week show the risk of too many short positions being accumulated. Still, official rhetoric alone won't turn the tide, and traders could be gearing up to test policymakers' appetite to resist the moves in the coming weeks and months.
As if major central bankers don't have enough to occupy themselves as they contemplate the eventual timing, size and pace of accommodative policy withdrawal, exchange rates may have to figure more heavily in their thinking and policy-making. Central banks with appreciating currencies know that implementing exit strategies (or rate hikes for some) would likely strengthen their currencies further. How FX moves feed through to central bank rhetoric could start to shape interest rate market moves.
Retailers will wrest the spotlight from banks when the second full week of U.S. earnings and the first full week of the European reporting deluge gets under way. Results from Apple, Nestle, Danone, Coca-Cola, Cadbury, Hershey, LVMH, PPR, Ahold and Home Retail are set to shape investors' views on how strongly economies are recovering and the regions in which domestic demand is strongest. If corporate results and/or macro data (retail sales from Britain, Italy, China; flash PMI; UK Q3 GDP, China GDP and industrial output) show consumption and the broader economy is picking up, it could help to buoy world stocks and keep them in positive territory in the quarter to date.
More and more companies are taking advantage of the market rally to raise capital -- either to repair their balance sheet or to fund acquisitions. So far so good, given that liquidity in the system is helping absorb the supply, but Credit Suisse points out that it would start to worry if net corporate issuance (IPO plus secondaries less cash-financed bid activity and buyback) breaches certain levels -- e.g. 1 percent of U.S. market capitalization from current levels of 0.5 percent.
(Compiled by Swaha Pattanaik; Editing by Ruth Pitchford)
