CLSA says China fund to help overcome govt hurdles
2009-10-16 05:40:00.0
Track China's Leaders
Fri, Oct 16 2009
Fri, Oct 16 2009
Fri  EDT
"It's extremely hard for a foreign-currency fund to buy out companies in China, where the sentiment is against foreign acquisitions," CLSA Chairman Wu Changgen told a financial conference in Shanghai. "That's why foreign investors like us have been seeking a Chinese passport."
Wu's remarks underscore the regulatory hurdles faced by foreign buyout firms such as Carlyle Group [CYL.UL] and Blackstone Group (
) when they buy Chinese companies, and partly explains their recent rush to launch yuan-based funds.
In August, CLSA said it would form an asset management venture with a unit of the Shanghai government, aiming to raise 10 billion yuan, as Shanghai relaxed rules to allow private equity firms to register locally.
Blackstone, Prax Capital and First Eastern Investment Group have also announced plans to launch funds in China, while Carlyle and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co [KKR.UL] may also follow suit, sources with the situation told Reuters in August.
"Foreign-currency funds face restrictions in many industries in China, whether due to retaliation or national protectionism," Xu Ping, partner of Power Capital Co, told the same conference.
"Resource sectors such as energy and mining are mostly off-limits to foreign investment, but are open to local currency funds."
U.S. buyout giant Carlyle failed to acquire Xugong, China's top construction equipment maker, after the Chinese government blocked the deal last year, citing concerns over foreign monopoly.
CLSA's Wu said that by partnering with the Shanghai government and launching funds locally, CLSA expects to buy control of Chinese firms in highly fragmented industries to help drive consolidations.
"In the 1970's, there were 500 property developers in Hong Kong, and now, only five major ones left," Wu said. "Industry consolidations will happen in China as well, creating good opportunities for private equity firms." He added that CLSA would leverage its strength in brokerage research to help make long-term investments in China and help create value. (US$1=6.832 Yuan)
