Hebei Steel warns China mills may make loss in 2010
2009-10-16 06:41:00.0
(Reuters) - China's steel industry, the world's largest, may end up losing money next year as excess supplies weigh on prices, a senior official at the country's second-biggest mill warned on Friday.
Chinese mills have been cutting prices since early August due to massive supplies of steel in the physical market, putting them back under pressure despite having just moved into the black in May after a half-year of overall industry losses due to a slowing economy.
Prices in the physical Chinese steel market have fallen more than 20 percent since early August as a steady rebound in demand lags the more rapid rise in supply. Steelmakers eager to take advantage of China's economic recovery have boosted domestic production to record monthly levels.
"Stockpiles of construction steel products at steel mills have returned to a level last seen at the end of last year -- a substantial amount," said Han Weidong, deputy chief of Hebei Iron and Steel Group's market section.
"There is a risk that China's steel sector will return to an overall loss in 2010," Han told an industry conference.
Han said China's domestic steel demand was unlikely to reach 600 million tonnes next year, while an expected reduction in bank lending in 2010 could hurt both end-user demand for steel and expansion at steel mills, restraining growth in iron ore consumption.
A senior executive of the China Iron and Steel Association said on Friday that China's apparent steel consumption was expected to rise about 26 percent or about 120 million tonnes this year, although this was partly due to rising inventories. [ID:nSHA78254]
), the listed unit of China's third-largest steel mill, cut the November price for its major steel products by up to 400 yuan per tonne from October tags, only days after Baosteel (
) cut prices for its major steel products by up to 700 yuan a tonne, or 13 percent, for November. [ID:nSHA369620]
Hebei, formed by a merger of the state-owned parents of Tangshan Iron and Steel Co (
), Handan Iron and Steel Co 600001.SS and ferroalloy producer Chengde Xinxin Vanadium and Titanium Co 600357.SS, cut the price of reinforcing bar used in building construction by 10 percent late last month. (Reporting by Alfred Cang and Edmund Klamann)
