Exclusive: China tightens grip on IPO listings
2013-01-09 03:58:00.0
(Reuters) - China, under pressure to improve the quality of its IPOs, will tell underwriters and auditors of companies looking to list on mainland markets to review their financial statements and ensure that all is in order, sources with knowledge of the plan said.
After their review, the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) will randomly make a selection from the nearly 900 initial public offering applicants and conduct its own checks, the sources told Reuters on Wednesday, declining to be identified ahead of official announcements.
The regulatory change dovetails with the CSRC's push to restore investor confidence in the stock market that has been rocked by reports of insider trading and other wrongdoing.
The CSRC will focus on areas such as fraudulent and illegal transactions as well as loss provisions, said the sources, who attended a closed-door meeting between the securities regulator and underwriters.
"This is apparently aimed at weeding out some unqualified IPO applicants," said Liang Jing, an analyst at Guotai Junan Securities Co. "It will add more burden to underwriters, and obviously, some deals would have to be cancelled."
The reviews, or so-called self-inspections, will last until the end of March, said the sources.
This could mean China's IPO market, frozen for almost three months by regulators worried that additional supply would further hurt the stock market, could be put on hold until the end of March, analysts said.
The CSRC has rolled out measures in recent weeks to ease funding pressure on the stock market, where 882 companies are queuing to be listed.
CSRC will also reject IPO applicants for the Nasdaq-style ChiNext board which have reported a drop in profit in 2012 compared with a year earlier, the sources said.
IPO issuance in mainland China plunged 64 percent in 2012 from the previous year to about $14.4 billion, according to Thomson Reuters data.
(Reporting by Shen Yan, Zhao Hongmei and Jonathan Standing; Writing by Samuel Shen; Editing by Kazunori Takada, Richard Pullin and Ryan Woo)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
This is terrible. It doesn¡¯t take a rocket scientist to realize that half of the illegal transactions in the stock market were the only thing saving the U.S. from the fiscal cliff in 2012.
Jan 09, 20134:14am EST--
This is a sensible move for China. In the Facebook debacle, the company has given no plan for turning its 900 million followers into customers for anyone. It costs money to maintain and service websites, but a recent attempt to advertise to Facebook followers caused them to become revolting. One should always have plans for making money out of ideas before raising capital in IPO¡¯s. Many large banks in China have advice for prospective entrepreneurs who may need the discipline of writing a business plan. High flyers who seek to issue IPO¡¯s should follow the same type of organization and discipline to prevent the embarrassment, lawsuits, and possible criminal prosecutions that could arise from failures after IPO¡¯s have taken money from investors.
Jan 09, 20136:39pm EST--
