INTERVIEW-Poor nations fear empty climate deal at Copenhagen
2009-10-15 00:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Poor nations are not blocking global climate talks but are simply demanding that rich nations meet existing commitments of financial help, a leading negotiator for the 77 poorest countries said.
About 180 nations will meet in Copenhagen in December to try to find a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol, the U.N.'s main tool against climate change, which expires in 2012.
A dispute over how much money rich nations pay to help the poor adapt to climate change threatens to undermine chances of a deal there, said Muller, who negotiates for the Group of 77 (G77) nations.
"What we fear most is that this will just turn into a short political declaration that says principally that nothing will be done unless developing countries do it themselves," Muller, who is from the Philippines, told Reuters.
"But it will be done in beautiful language -- We are making a commitment to address the defining challenge of our times... blah, blah, blah."
"There must be a complete shift in mindset," Muller said on the sidelines of an Oxfam meeting. "They want to deny historical responsibilities. They want to get rid of their legally binding commitments. They want a new one in which developed countries will continue their wasteful lifestyles."
Europe says that it wants to widen Kyoto, which does not bind the United States nor rapidly emerging economies such as the world's biggest carbon emitter China, and so would rather craft a new pact than extend and add an attachment to Kyoto.
Developing nations must first prove the money will not be wasted by showing how they will use it to cut emissions in a transparent and verifiable way, they say.
But poor nations are under no such obligation to report emissions cuts, Muller said. The only obligation that exists in the U.N. convention on climate change is for rich countries to provide financial help.
"The reason we're suffering so much is we don't have the resources to cope. Right now, the Philippines has undergone a series of typhoons, we are still having floods and we think they'll stay until the end of the year."
"The areas that are underwater right now are areas of vegetable and rice production. What are we going to do? We've lost settlements and people. And then they come to us and say we must take mitigation action, and then report it and verify it... how can they say that?"
"Negotiating is the art of the possible, so we sit there, we talk, we wait..." she said. (Reporting by Pete Harrison, editing by Anthony Barker)
