GSK examines Botox sales tactics used in China
2013-07-08 03:07:00.0
(Reuters) - GlaxoSmithKline said on Monday it was investigating new allegations that its staff had used improper tactics to market Botox in China, but had so far found no evidence of bribery or corruption.
The move follows a claim that GSK staff allegedly handed doctors cash and other rewards for prescribing Botox treatment, which the British group sells in China under an agreement with patent-holder Allergan.
The latest allegations against GSK, which is already under investigation by Chinese police for unspecified "economic crimes", were first reported by the Wall Street Journal.
The newspaper said internal documents and email showed GSK's China sales staff were also apparently instructed to use their personal email addresses to discuss marketing strategies related to Botox.
"Nevertheless, we are investigating these new claims. However, our inquiries to date have found no evidence of bribery or corruption in relation to our sales and marketing of therapeutic Botox in China," the spokesman said.
The Wall Street Journal said emails and documents it had seen also discussed a marketing strategy for Botox that targeted 48 doctors and planned to reward them with either a percentage of the cash value of the prescription, or educational credits, based on the number of prescriptions the doctors made.
The strategy was called "Vasily", after the Russian World War II sniper Vasily Zaytsev.
"We have investigated the specific claim on the so-called Vasily program. Our investigation has found that while the proposal didn't contain anything untoward, the program was never implemented," the company spokesman said.
GSK is responsible for therapeutic sales of Botox in China - for example, to treat facial spasms - rather than its use as a cosmetic treatment to remove wrinkles.
GSK, Merck and other foreign and domestic drugmakers are also being investigated by China's top economic planning agency on cost and pricing issues, as foreign firms come under pressure from Beijing over possible price-fixing.
China is an increasingly important market for international pharmaceutical companies, which are relying on growth in emerging markets to offset slower sales in Western markets where many former blockbuster drugs have lost patent protection.
IMS Health, which tracks pharmaceutical industry trends, expects China to overtake Japan as the world's second-biggest drugs market behind the United States by 2016.
(Reporting by Kazunori Takada and Ben Hirschler; Editing by Stephen Coates and Louise Heavens)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
As the spokesman for GSK said, ¡°GSK has some of the toughest compliance procedures in the sector. We are proud of our high standards and operate in accordance with them.¡± But a foreign firm should do more than that. It should also comply with the laws of the country and rules of the local community where it operates.
Jul 08, 20139:07pm EDT--
Big Pharma thinks that it is a law only to itself and most probably it is. When it paid off the US authorities last year by forfeiting $3 billion-plus (the largest hand over of money in pharmaceutical history to stop it going to Court ¨C the nearest thing to admittance), for fraudulently selling drugs and where in some cases they were life-threatening and to our young, they simply paid up more-or-less immediately. Why did they do this. Well, having sold $28 billion of the stuff and it is a known fact that big Pharma make at least a 50% profit, they had pocketed at least $14 billion in profits. Take ¡ê3 billion from $14 billion and you have a nice little earner of $11 billion. So $3 billion was just an expense really and where the US authorities taught GSK nothing other than they can get away with whatever they wish and still come up smelling of roses. But everyone should read where the roots of big pharma come from for enlightenment. Many came out of the Nazi era and where western governments after WW2 actually hardly ever imposed any significant reprisals. Even though many were involved with the extermination of the Jews throughout Europe supplying the Nazi killing machine with the means to do it. But this may have been just a precursor to the modern day where big pharma still get away with literally ¡®murder¡¯. So nothing has really changed¡­really. I again wonder why but where it appears clearly that the government-big business interface is well alive and kicking behind closed doors. For more insights into big pharma visit http://foolscrow.wordpress.com/2010/07/27/return-to-nuremberg-big-pharma-must-answer-for-crimes-against-humanity/ Dr David Hill
Big Pharma thinks that it is a law only to itself and most probably it is. When it paid off the US authorities last year by forfeiting $3 billion-plus (the largest hand over of money in pharmaceutical history to stop it going to Court ¨C the nearest thing to admittance), for fraudulently selling drugs and where in some cases they were life-threatening and to our young, they simply paid up more-or-less immediately. Why did they do this. Well, having sold $28 billion of the stuff and it is a known fact that big Pharma make at least a 50% profit, they had pocketed at least $14 billion in profits. Take ¡ê3 billion from $14 billion and you have a nice little earner of $11 billion. So $3 billion was just an expense really and where the US authorities taught GSK nothing other than they can get away with whatever they wish and still come up smelling of roses. But everyone should read where the roots of big pharma come from for enlightenment. Many came out of the Nazi era and where western governments after WW2 actually hardly ever imposed any significant reprisals. Even though many were involved with the extermination of the Jews throughout Europe supplying the Nazi killing machine with the means to do it. But this may have been just a precursor to the modern day where big pharma still get away with literally ¡®murder¡¯. So nothing has really changed¡­really. I again wonder why but where it appears clearly that the government-big business interface is well alive and kicking behind closed doors. For more insights into big pharma visit http://foolscrow.wordpress.com/2010/07/27/return-to-nuremberg-big-pharma-must-answer-for-crimes-against-humanity/ Dr David Hill
Jul 14, 20135:12pm EDT--
