Nadal goes through, more retirements in Shanghai
2009-10-15 10:45:00.0
Nadal goes through, more retirements in Shanghai | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Nadal goes through, more retirements in Shanghai
Thu, Oct 15 2009
Rafael Nadal of Spain reacts during a match against Tommy Robredo of Spain during the Shanghai Masters tennis tournament in Shanghai October 15, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Nir Elias
Thu  EDT
As the debate about the draining effects of the long men's season continued with Stanislas Wawrinka and Gael Monfils becoming the sixth and seventh players to retire injured from the $3.24 million tournament.
World number two Nadal, still not back at his best after an injury-disrupted second half of the season, cantered through the first set but lost his serve at the start of the second.
The 23-year-old Australian Open champion is nothing if not a fighter, however, and he battled back into the set in a 15-minute third game before breaking again for a 5-4 lead and serving out for victory.
"I am playing well," Nadal, who next faces Ivan Ljubicic, told reporters. "But I played two terrible games at the start of the second set so I have to improve in situations like this if I want to beat the top players."
Djokovic, who will move up to number three in the world next week, proved in winning the season-ending Masters Cup here last year that he has the legs to outlast his rivals.
The Serbian won the China Open title last weekend and his victory over Schuettler, which set up a clash with Gilles Simon, was his ninth in a row on Chinese soil.
"It was comfortable," the 22-year-old said. "I didn't play the last couple of games of the first set that well, but the important thing is that I played as much as I needed to win."
Sixth seed Nikolay Davydenko defused Fernando Gonzalez's serve with his mobility along the baseline to grab a sixth win in six meetings against the Chilean, 6-3 7-5.
"If he has a second serve, I know I have a 90 percent chance to win the point," said the seemingly indefatigable 28-year-old.
Simon, seeded eighth, was the only one of three Frenchmen to get through the third round after he notched up a 6-3 6-4 win over Czech Tomas Berdych.
"I know that if I play well, I have a chance, but this tournament won't decide who's going to play in London," said the ninth seeded Swede, who will face Feliciano Lopez on Friday. "There's still a lot of tennis to be played."
Swiss Wawrinka was losing 3-6 7-6 4-2 to Czech Radek Stepanek when abdominal pains caused him to withdraw, while Frenchman Monfils was down 6-2 3-0 to Ljubicic when he quit because of a back injury.
