MOVES-UPDATE 2-Regions Financial, Cushman & Wakefield
2009-10-15 18:01:00.0
(Reuters) - The following financial services industry appointments were announced on Thursday. To inform us of other job changes, e-mail moves@thomsonreuters.com.
The regional bank named Grayson Hall, who manages its General Banking Group, as president and chief operating officer of the bank. Hall, 52, succeeds Dowd Ritter, who remains chairman and chief executive officer, in the post of president.
The real estate services firm said Bruce Mosler, 51, its president and chief executive officer since 2005, will be replaced by a yet-to-be determined executive. Mosler will become co-chairman of the firm's board alongside John Cushman III, focusing on the firm's global brokerage business.
) has hired Stephen Swett, formerly a senior vice president at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, as a senior equity analyst and managing director. Swett, who will be based in the firm's New York office, will head up its equity research efforts in Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs).
The regional banknamed Willem-Jan Hattink as executive vice president and head of private wealth management and institutional investment solutions. Hattink, who has been with SunTrust for more than 26 years, will report to SunTrust President William Rogers. He succeeds E. Jenner Wood, who had been serving in the role on an interim basis.
) has hired Sonal Desai, most recently a member of the global credit team at Thames River Capital in London, as director of research at the Franklin Templeton Fixed Income Group's international bond department. Desai, who will report to Michael Hasenstab, portfolio manager and co-director for the international bond department, will be based in San Mateo California and started work on Oct. 1.
The company said it appointed Alexander van Aken as director of client service for the Netherlands. Prior to joining SEI, Mr. Van Aken spent over nine years at Fortis Investments, most recently as head of investment specialist solutions.
Europe's largest bank said it appointed Liu Che Ning as head of global banking Hong Kong and China with immediate effect. Prior to this appointment, Ning worked as managing director and head of Hong Kong Investment Banking at Morgan Stanley (
The real estate investment subsidiary of MBH Enterprises LLC said it appointed Gregory McManus as a principal in the firm's Philadelphia office. (Compiled by Amit Kumar in Bangalore)
