UPDATE 2-Gap to open in China in 2010, will restart TV ads
2009-10-15 11:42:00.0
(Reuters) - U.S. clothing chain Gap Inc (
The Gap brand will also begin television advertising next month after an absence of two years, the company said on Thursday ahead of a presentation to investors.
) and Japan's Uniqlo (
), but no significant presence by a U.S. apparel brand.
The company, one of the world's largest apparel retailers and owner of the Gap, Old Navy and Banana Republic chains, as well as the Piper Lime and Athleta online businesses, has cut costs and streamlined its stores over the past two years.
The U.S. recession exacerbated a multiyear sales decline at the company's two largest brands, Old Navy and Gap, and sent sales falling at its more upscale Banana Republic chain.
But recent signs of a turnaround at Old Navy -- September same-store sales there rose 13 percent compared with a 24 percent decline a year earlier -- have calmed investors, who are nevertheless waiting for a similar turn at Gap stores.
Signs of that turn may come in November, Murphy said, when Gap launches television commercials. The company's only recent television ads have been at Old Navy, which is focusing on fun but practical styles that offer value to families.
Chief Financial Officer Sabrina Simmons said the company's marketing budget for the third quarter will be $25 million higher than a year earlier, while spending for the fourth quarter will be about $45 million higher.
A main focus for Gap for 2009 and beyond is to increase investments to regain market share and expand internationally, Murphy said. The company's investor day is taking place in New York City.
Gap operates more than 3,100 stores in the United States, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, Japan and France and has recently signed franchise agreements in international markets such as Asia, the Middle East and Latin America.
Murphy noted that the company has no stores in some large European markets, such as Italy, Germany and Spain.
At the Old Navy chain, a new smaller but easier-to-shop store format will be in 50 different stores by year's end. Still, Murphy said it would not make sense to expand the Old Navy brand beyond North America right now.
Remodeling of stores at the chain will continue, the company said.
Gap, which began in San Francisco in 1969, has seen its market share erode as rivals from big-box retailers to specialty apparel chains have crowded the casual apparel arena.
Gap shares fell 9 cents to $22.88. (Additional reporting by Martinne Geller in New York; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick and Dave Zimmerman)
