China announces more death sentences for Xinjiang riot
2009-10-15 09:42:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Mon, Oct 12 2009
Wed, Oct 7 2009
Sat, Sep 26 2009
Mon, Sep 21 2009
Thu, Sep 17 2009
Thu, Oct 15 2009
A frame grab taken from footage shot on October 14, 2009, shows defendants, involved in ethnic riots in far western Xinjiang region in July, during their trial in Urumqi, Xinjiang Autonomous Region. Credit: Reuters/CCTV via Reuters TV
Thu  EDT
The official Xinhua news agency reported that a court in Urumqi, Xinjiang's regional capital, also sentenced three defendants to suspended death sentences, which could be commuted to life sentences in two years.
At least two of those sentenced were Han Chinese. The others all appeared to be Uighurs, a Turkic ethnic group that calls Xinjiang its homeland, judging from their names.
Dilxat Raxit, a spokesman for the exiled World Uyghur Congress, said all the Uighurs who had stood trial so far had been denied a fair hearing, including the right to freely choose their defense lawyers.
"The Chinese judgments are only making the situation more tense," he said in an emailed statement.
Last month, China announced the first charges to be laid in connection with the unrest, with 21 people charged with murder, arson, robbery and damaging property during ethnic riots that erupted in Urumqi on July 5.
In Xinjiang's worst ethnic violence in decades, Uighurs attacked majority Han Chinese in Urumqi, after taking to the streets to protest against attacks on Uighur workers at a factory in southern China in June that left two Uighurs dead.
The violence left 197 people, mostly Han Chinese, dead and wounded more than 1,600, according to official figures.
Energy-rich Xinjiang, strategically located in central Asia, has been struck in recent years by bombings, attacks and riots blamed by Beijing on Uighur separatists demanding an independent "East Turkistan."
(Reporting by Chris Buckley and Ben Blanchard, Editing by Ron Popeski)
