Wealth Manager-Playing global growth by buying Canada
2009-10-15 09:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Commodity prices are up and are likely to stay there, helped by an anemic U.S. dollar and strong demand for raw materials from emerging markets.
So how might a Canadian investor cash in on this trend? Try looking close to home.
"You can play global growth from Canada," said John Stephenson, a portfolio manager and senior vice president at First Asset Investment Management Inc in Toronto.
He recommends buying large-cap Canadian companies that supply products and raw materials to emerging economies, a move he said he expects to pay off well into the future.
That's because he doesn't think the U.S. dollar is going to mount a comeback from its precipitous fall any time soon, due to the mountain of debt the United States is struggling under.
The greenback fell to its lowest level in more than a year against a basket of major currencies on Wednesday, making commodities, which are priced in U.S. dollars, more affordable to non-U.S. dollar holders.
That helped push the Reuters-Jefferies CRB index .CRB, which tracks a basket of 19 commodity futures, up to an 11-month high. [ID:nWEN4664]
Camilla Sutton, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto, said the greenback is likely to stay weak long term.
"When we look years out in our forecast, we still have a weaker U.S. dollar," she said.
"A weakening U.S. dollar ... probably also implies strong commodities, which creates some opportunities."
Stephenson, who recently released the book "Shell Shocked: How Canadians Can Invest After the Collapse," points to China, and to a lesser extent India, as rapidly growing markets that will keep demand strong for the raw materials Canada produces.
"They have a voracious appetite for commodities," he said. "Almost all of the growth in copper demand is coming from China. Same thing in oil."
And that will benefit many Canadian companies, he said.
) was another good bet, and fertilizer producers Agrium (
Looking to Canadian industrials with a global scope, Stephenson likes plane and train maker Bombardier (
), which he recommends buying on dips, as well as flight simulator maker CAE(
"I think you're going to see good growth from Canadian equities because of what we do," he said.
Jaime E. Carrasco, an investment advisor at Blackmont Capital, is also buying Canadian to position himself for a future with higher commodity prices.
He recommends investing in exchange traded funds with a focus on sectors like precious metals, food, and energy.
Individual investments in companies that produce raw materials and energy, traditional or alternative, as well as pipelines and utilities are also a good bet, he said.
"I love Canada," he said. "Canada has what the world needs." (Reporting by John McCrank; editing by Janet Guttsman)
