UPDATE 4-SABMiller H1 beer sales dip, but China strong
2009-10-15 05:53:00.0
(Reuters) - World No. 2 brewer SABMiller (
) saw beer sales dip slightly as forecast in the six months to September as the global slowdown hit demand, with declines in Europe offset by double-digit growth in China.
) of Miller Lite, Peroni and Grolsch said in a statement on Thursday that half-year underlying sales volumes fell 1 percent, with a 12 percent rise in the world's biggest beer market China cushioning dips in Europe, Latin America and South Africa.
Most forecasts in a poll of analysts by Reuters ranged from flat to a 1 percent decline as the brewer's volumes continued to suffer from price rises pushed through to offset sharp rises in commodity costs such as barley, glass and aluminium.
SABMiller shares fell 1.4 percent early to a low of 16.07 pounds before trading unchanged at 16.30 pounds by 0920 GMT as analysts looked forward to a second-half volume recovery as the previous year's comparison figures become easier to match.
"Weak Q2 volumes, but confident of H2 pickup," concluded analyst Melissa Earlam at brokers UBS.
) said its financial performance was in line with its own expectations, and that revenue was supported by the price rises taken in its previous financial year.
"A slightly disappointing volume performance in H1 with volumes off 1 percent. This implies down 2 percent in Q2, a deterioration on the flat performance in Q1," said analyst Matthew Webb at broker Cazenove.
But he left his earnings forecasts unchanged for the year to March 2010, noting that the potential to acquire FEMSA Cerveza at an attractive price was a positive for the shares.
The brewer, which earns nearly 90 percent of its profits from emerging markets like South Africa, Colombia, Poland and China, is seen by analysts as the front-runner to buy Mexico's second biggest brewer FEMSA Cerveza (
), maker of Sol and Tecate beers, for around $7.5 billion.
Elsewhere in the sector, AB Inbev said on Thursday it had agreed to sell breweries in nine eastern European countries to CVC Capital Partners for an initial $2.23 billion, passing its target for divestments since its merger a year ago. [nLF123750]
SABMiller, which also brews Castle, Snow, and Pilsner Urquell beers, said beer volumes dipped 1 percent in Latin America, fell 6 percent in Europe and slipped 3 percent in South Africa, while Asian volumes rose 9 percent boosted by strong growth in China and its Africa region was up 3 percent.
In the United States, where it formed the MillerCoors (
) joint venture in July 2008, sales to retailers were off 1 percent in the half-year with both key brands Miller Lite and Coors Light seeing volumes down.
(Reporting by David Jones; editing by John Stonestreet)
