UPDATE 1-China's Goodbaby eyes loans after buyout talks stall
2009-10-15 03:32:00.0
(Reuters) - The private equity owner of Goodbaby Group has called off the sale of China's largest baby stroller maker after prices came in too low, forcing the company to seek new loans to refinance its debt, sources said.
The planned sale of Pacific Alliance Group's (PAG) 67 percent stake in Goodbaby, which makes pushchairs and other products for infants for brands including Quinny, Nike Kids and Tommee Tippee, could be worth around $300 million, Reuters reported in June.
Hong Kong-based PAG's investment in Goodbaby was China's first and rarely seen Western-style leveraged buyout (LBO) deal, completed in 2006 when PAG bought a 67 percent stake in Goodbaby for $122.5 million.
The sale, a rare opportunity for foreign investors to take a controlling stake in a Chinese consumer product leader, attracted interest from more than 20 companies, including Permira, TPG Capital [TPG.UL], Morgan Stanley Private Equity Asia, Sweden's EQT Partners and Affinity Equity Partners, but all talks stalled over price, said the sources familiar with the situation.
"There's a huge gap, at least 50 percent, between the seller's expectation and the offers it can get from some buyers," said one source.
"Meanwhile, it is a good company, a very well known Chinese brand, not something like a distressed asset, so the seller is definitely keen to get a good price tag for it," he said.
Early this year, PAG hired Morgan Stanley (
Goodbaby now controls nearly 70 percent of China's stroller market and it makes two out of every five strollers sold in the United States, a recent Forbes magazine article said.
Goodbaby is now seeking $33 million in three-year syndicated loans to refinance part of its debt, via special purpose vehicle G-Baby Holdings Ltd, according to loan market sources.
Loan market sources believe Goodbaby's plan to re-enter the banking market for more loans came after it had difficulties finding a new owner to refinance its debt any time soon.
The new three-year syndicated loans required by Goodbaby include two parts -- $23 million Term Loan A to partly refinance its outstanding debt of $57 million borrowed from banks in 2007 and $10 million Revolving Credit B for its general corporate purposes, according to loan market sources.
Tranche A's maturity date is June 30, 2012 while tranche B's maturity date is Sept. 30, 2012, said the loan sources.
Goodbaby is now undergoing the syndication process and expected to complete by early November, they said.
Despite a lack of high-price bids from private equity investors, Goodbaby may draw interest from strategic buyers at home or abroad, said the sources, but added no deal for a strategic buyer to take over the company was likely to happen quickly.
For related Asian private equity news, Reuters 3000 Xtra users can double click on: [LEN-RTRS-ASIA-PVE] (Editing by Jacqueline Wong)
