UPDATE 1-Malaysia ruling party votes for reform, ally fights
2009-10-15 03:41:00.0
(Reuters) - Malaysia's main ruling party agreed to internal voting reforms on Thursday in a bid to end the corruption that helped inflict the biggest ever losses on the government in last year's national and state elections.
Prime Minister Najib Razak called on his own party, the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), at its annual meeting to accept the proposed democratic and economic changes or risk losing at the next elections, which must be held by 2013.
"UMNO needs to open up and improve," he told delegates.
His hour and twenty minute speech was greeted with polite applause rather than the rapture that met his appointment as UMNO president in March, even though it came on the heels of a rare by-election win for the government last weekend. [ID:nKLR424194]
The reforms will increase to 146,000 from 2,500 the number of members allowed to vote in UMNO elections and were coupled with the end of strict rules governing who could contest top posts.
The changes will reduce the influence of party warlords who have benefited from UMNO's culture of patronage, analysts say.
"This move is historic because no other leader, especially one in power, has been willing to change the system that placed them in power in the first place," UMNO Vice-President Hishamuddin Hussein, Najib's cousin, told party members.
Najib has to tread a careful path between pushing ahead with economic reforms to boost Malaysia's falling share of foreign investment while looking after the majority Malay population that UMNO represents.
His biggest ally, the Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), looked bogged down by an internal power battle. No decision was tkan at a meeting of its central committee on Thursday on whether its President Ong Tee Keat would remain in power.
Ong lost a confidence vote last weekend and is locked in a battle for control with his deputy in a party that seeks to represent the 25 percent of the Malaysian population that is ethnic Chinese. Until last year, they voted reliably for the National Front.
Najib has enacted some economic reforms, such as dismantling rules that gave 30 percent of stock listings to ethnic Malays and opening up the services sector.
But few foreign investors have repaid him by putting their money here, preferring instead fast-growing and fast-reforming Indonesia whose stock market
is up 85 percent this year, double Malaysia's performance .KLSE.
Najib needs foreign investments that have increasingly flowed to China, Indonesia and Thailand to come to Malaysia if he is to lift economic growth to six percent a year from the expected contraction of up to five percent this year. [ID:nKLR343775]
In addition to the global financial crisis, foreign funds exited Malaysia after the 2008 vote due to political uncertainty and have not come back.
The country has registered outflows of money every quarter since the second quarter of last year MYFLO=ECI and foreign ownership of the stock market stands at just 20.7 percent, off a peak last year of 27 percent, prompting investment bank JPMorgan to dub Malaysia the "forgotten market" in a report. (Additional reporting by Niluksi Koswanage; Writing by David Chance; Editing by Ron Popeski)
