Eurogroup to discuss exchange rates on Monday
2009-10-14 00:32:00.0
(Reuters) - Euro zone finance ministers will discuss exchange rates on Monday, sources close to the meeting said, with concern more likely about the possibility of the euro's further rise in the future than about current levels.
The euro has become almost 20 percent more expensive in dollar terms since the start of the year, rising to 14 month highs
The common currency, shared by 16 European countries, made similar gains against the Chinese yuan, which remained virtually pegged to the dollar in that period.
"The question will be not so much about the strength of the euro, but more about the weakness of the dollar and the yuan, which is linked to the dollar," one source close to the preparation of the ministers' meeting said.
"I would say that at present levels exchange rates do not give a cause for concern, not great concern, but if the euro keeps on rising, it may become a concern," the source said.
This is in line with remarks made by the euro zone finance ministers' chairman Jean-Claude Juncker in a Reuters TV interview at the meeting of Group of Seven finance ministers and central bankers on exchange rates in Istanbul earlier this month.
"We are a little bit concerned without being worried about the prospective level of the euro, we do think that others have to contribute to bringing down the existing global imbalances," Juncker told Reuters Television on Oct 3.
The G7 kept their message on exchange rates unchanged from their meeting six months earlier, even though the Chinese currency did not appreciate as urged by the April G7 statement.
"There will again be a discussion on the exchange rate -- what precisely was discussed in Istanbul, why we had the outcome that we had in the end, if there is anything the Europeans should add in terms of communications," a second source involved with the ministerial meeting said.
"This is not to say that everybody is perfectly happy with the G7 communique, but it takes two to tango," the source said.
Last year, before the euro hit record highs against the dollar at just above $1.6 in July, European companies had said that for European exporters the pain threshold for euro strength was any level above $1.4.
But euro zone ministers are unlikely to send any such message on Monday, even though some believe the euro is overvalued.
"I can categorically exclude that anyone on Monday will say that our pain threshold is $1.4 and that we will not accept this. There will not be any reference to a pain threshold," the second source said.
"We firmly believe that exchange rates should reflect fundamentals and if I look at the European fundamentals now I have a problem squaring them with what is on the markets," the second source said.
Euro zone officials have urged the United States to talk up the dollar, by saying a strong currency was in the U.S. interest. But despite a repeated statement from U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner before the G7, the dollar fell more.
"Geithner seems to have a credibility problem, but you should take him seriously," the second source said.
As for the yuan, discussions on its exchange rate were best held behind closed doors rather than through public statements, the first source said.
"The G7 has the major imperfection that one of the absolute key players, even more important than the Japanese, is not there," the second source said in reference to China.
"So besides the current level and evolution of exchange rates, there will be a more general discussion on where should these issues be actually discussed, with whom, in what format and what for," the source said.
"There is a little bit of a worry on the side of the Europeans, specifically the euro area, that if the G7 loses its control over the exchange rate issue, then where will the discussion go? There is broad agreement that it should definitely not go to the G20 because that is not the right forum to discuss some of these issues," the source said.
The G7 is made up of the United States, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, Italy and Britain.
One of the options was to enlarge the G7 to encompass China, the source said, but there was also the possibility, although more politically difficult, of scaling down the group by removing Canada from it and pulling the G7 euro zone members into a single seat.
(Reporting by Jan Strupczewski; Editing by Ruth Pitchford)
