FOREX-Dollar hits 14-mth low as recovery optimism builds
2009-10-14 00:11:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar slid to a 14-month low against a basket of currencies and the euro on Wednesday, as solid earnings by JPMorgan Chase and rising stock and commodity prices stoked optimism for an improving global economy.
The dollar, which has been a safe-haven investment, was hit by the sharp rise in profit reported by JPMorgan Chase & Co (
), as well as forecast-beating earnings from Intel Corp (
"On the back of a solid start to the earnings season and strong trade and loan growth releases from China, investors are widely seeking risk today," said Camilla Sutton, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto, in a note to clients. "This has helped push equities and commodities higher and the USD and bond prices lower."
The greenback also remained under broad selling pressure on expectations that U.S. interest rates will stay at very low levels for some time, following comments by Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald Kohn on Tuesday. Low rates reduce the attractiveness of U.S. assets and ease demand for the dollars to buy them.
Low U.S. rates also promote the use of the dollar as a funding currency in the carry trade, where investors borrow in one currency, which they then sell to buy higher-yielding assets in another currency.
Midway through the New York session, the euro was last up 0.2 percent at $1.4891
after rising to its highest level since August 2008. Many in the market see the euro climbing further, and some analysts see a break above $1.50 in coming weeks.
, the dollar fell 0.3 percent to 89.43 yen.
"The data was pretty solid across the board. It helps support the story that the recovery is building steam and that some of the optimism is justified, although I still don't buy it," said Brian Dolan, chief currency strategist at Forex.com in Bedminster, New Jersey.
For a graphic on the correlation between euro/dollar and world stocks, click
The dollar index .DXY, which tracks the dollar's value against a basket of currencies, slid to 75.436, a trough last seen in August 2008. The Swiss franc
rose to around 1.0166 francs versus the dollar, its highest since July 2008.
also hit their strongest levels since August 2008, while the Norwegian crown
"The correlation between the equity market and euro/dollar has declined slightly in the past month, but it is still high by historical standards," said Kasper Kirkegaard, currency strategist at Danske Markets in Copenhagen.
Also pressuring the dollar were comments from Fed Vice Chairman Kohn on Tuesday that the economy would not snap back quickly from its deep recession, bolstering the view for low U.S. rates. [ID:nN13198041] (Additional reporting by Wanfeng Zhou in New York and Jessica Mortimer in London; Editing by Leslie Adler)
