FOREX-Dollar falls to 14-month low vs euro
2009-10-14 09:24:00.0
(Reuters) - The dollar dropped to a 14-month low against a basket of currencies and the euro on Wednesday, dented by expectations that solid JPMorgan Chase results and rising stock and commodity prices bode well for an improving global economy.
) late on Tuesday and upbeat Chinese trade data on Wednesday, all of which helped brighten the economic outlook and encouraged investors to move into perceived riskier and higher-yielding currencies.
"On the back of a solid start to earnings season and strong trade and loan growth releases from China, investors are widely seeking risk today," said Camilla Sutton, currency strategist at Scotia Capital in Toronto in a note to clients. "This has helped push equities and commodities higher and the USD and bond prices lower."
In early New York trade, the euro was last up 0.3 percent $1.4900
, the dollar fell 0.2 percent to 89.55.
"The data was pretty solid across the board. It helps support the story that the recovery is building steam and that some of the optimism is justified, although I still don't buy it," said Brian Dolan, chief currency strategist at Forex.com in Bedminster, New Jersey.
For a graphic on the correlation between euro/dollar and world stocks, click
The dollar index .DXY, which tracks the dollar's value against a basket of currencies, slid to 75.436, a trough last seen in August 2008. The Swiss franc
rose to around 1.0167 francs versus the dollar, its highest since July 2008.
also hit their strongest since August 2008, while the Norwegian crown
"We have seen the correlation between the equity market and euro/dollar has declined slightly in the past month, but it is still high by historical standards," said Kasper Kirkegaard, currency strategist at Danske Markets in Copenhagen.
Also pressuring the dollar were comments from Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald Kohn, who on Tuesday said the economy would not snap back quickly from its deep recession, bolstering the view for low U.S. rates. [ID:nN13198041]
(Additional reporting by Wanfeng Zhou in New York and Jessica Mortimer in London) (Editing by Theodore d'Afflisio)
