Johnson Controls CEO: We're not a consolidator
2009-10-14 10:05:00.0
Johnson Controls CEO: We're not a consolidator | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Johnson Controls CEO: We're not a consolidator
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Wed, Sep 23 2009
Wed  EDT
) has the money to invest in acquisitions when some rivals find themselves in distress, but the car interiors company will not act as a consolidator of failing U.S. auto suppliers, its two top executives said on Tuesday.
The company, which also makes batteries and building efficiency systems, is interested in deals to expand into geographic markets where it has no role, or to add technology that can open doors to new markets.
"We're not a value player. We're not a consolidator," Chief Executive Stephen Roell told Reuters in an interview.
Roell spoke on the sidelines of an analyst meeting in New York, in which Johnson Controls laid out a forecast of improving sales and profits for fiscal 2010.
The financial crisis -- which saw the bankruptcies of General Motors GM.UL and Chrysler, as well as parts suppliers Lear LEARQ.PK and Visteon VSTN.PK -- could mean $700 million to $800 million in sales as a direct result of distress at Johnson Controls' peers, Chief Financial Officer Bruce McDonald said.
"We picked up $200 million in the auto business as a result of the distress in those two companies in particular," McDonald said of Lear and Visteon. "Some of our customers are nervous about the long-term viability of those competitors."
McDonald said the company has the capacity to make acquisitions, but added, "Consolidation in the sector is not a strategic interest to us."
Asked whether Johnson Controls would be interested in bidding for Delphi's electronics business, Roell said: "There's good and bad there. My broader answer is, I don't think that's available. That's core to them."
Overall, the auto industry was moving toward smaller vehicles, but there is no correlation between the size of a vehicle and profitability. It has also meant a faster embrace of hybrid or electric vehicles than was expected.
Eventually, the North American auto industry is likely to see more Chinese players, McDonald said.
"I think you'll see the Chinese become an increasingly significant part of the global sector, not just their own market but exporting and local manufacturing in Europe and, before long, North America," McDonald said.
"Even if they're not able to buy assets here, you'll see them expand into these other markets because they have global aspirations."
The auto segment, historically the company's largest, is expected to account for about $12 billion of the company's 2009 sales of about $28 billion to $29 billion, when Johnson Controls reports its fiscal fourth-quarter results on October 27.
"As we get to recovery, you'll see automotive becoming a bigger part of the pie," Roell said, adding that he expected the segment to have higher growth rates for at least the next several years, compared to its building efficiency unit.
That unit, meanwhile, was expecting to rely less in coming years on new construction, which has been hurt by the deep slowdown in the commercial real estate market, tight credit and rising unemployment.
The company's building efficiency segment relies on new construction for about a quarter of its sales, with the rest coming from retrofits, service and facilities management.
"The inherent growth rate potential... should be more and more toward existing buildings, retrofits, service and away from new construction," Roell said.
Separately, the CEO said the company would continue to invest in lead-acid battery technology for automobiles, with the aim of being the No. 1 player in the U.S. and European markets.
It is talking with potential partners for a battery venture in China. He said he considered a current joint venture with France's Saft (
"We're not going to rush to the A123 IPO values. We want to control that business," Roell said, referring to the successful initial public offering of A123 Systems Inc AONE.O, a lithium-ion battery maker. (Reporting by Nick Zieminski; editing by Patrick Fitzgibbons and Tim Dobbyn)
