Nadal through in Shanghai, Del Potro retires
2009-10-14 10:56:00.0
Nadal through in Shanghai, Del Potro retires | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Nadal through in Shanghai, Del Potro retires
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Mon, Oct 12 2009
Mon, Oct 12 2009
Sat, Oct 10 2009
Fri, Oct 9 2009
Rafael Nadal of Spain plays a shot to James Blake of the U.S. during the Shanghai Masters tennis tournament in Shanghai October 14, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Nir Elias
Wed  EDT
U.S. Open champion Juan Martin Del Potro, however, joined the growing casualty list at the $3.24-million tournament, retiring because of a wrist injury while 7-5 2-1 down to Austrian Jurgen Melzer.
After Nadal raced away with the first set, the pair contested two absorbing sets filled with high-quality winners before Nadal, with Blake serving to take the match into a decisive tiebreak, unleashed a sizzling forehand to clinch victory.
"It's been a difficult year for me, so every victory is really important for me," said the Spaniard. "I thought I deserved to win the match because most of the time I think I played better than James."
"If I continue like this, with this motivation...I'm going to come back to playing my best tennis," he added.
"I had this injury in Miami this year and I don't want to risk for the end of the season," said the 21-year-old Argentine.
"I'm a little sorry. It's a big tournament here in Shanghai, very important for me, but if I want to have a good finish this season, I have to recover."
SEASON'S LENGTH
With world number one Roger Federer and number three Andy Murray skipping the tournament because of fatigue and a wrist injury respectively, Del Potro's departure is certain to intensify the debate over the length of the men's season.
"It's difficult to play 11 months at a high level but we know they are working on that, so we hope that there will be a good change for the future," said the world number five.
In-form second seed Novak Djokovic picked up where he left off in the final of the China Open on Sunday, notching up his 15th win in his last 17 matches with a straightforward 6-3 6-1 victory over Italian qualifier Fabio Fognini.
The Serbian, who won the final Masters Cup title here last year, has lost only to Federer in his last three tournaments, in the Cincinnati Masters final and the U.S. Open semi-finals.
Croatian Ivan Ljubicic proved it was possible to play at the top level after 30, despite the grueling schedule, by upsetting Spanish seventh seed Fernando Verdasco 6-4 7-6.
Eighth seed Gilles Simon and Gael Monfils, the 11th seed, ensured France would have three players in the third round when they beat Viktor Troicki and Lleyton Hewitt respectively.
