UPDATE 1-Lower taxes lure big oil to Iraq oilfield deals
2009-10-14 13:17:00.0
(Reuters) - Iraq has lured big oil firms into new service contracts on some of its giant oilfields by cutting taxes and sweetening terms to make the deals more profitable, industry sources said on Wednesday.
International oil companies are close to striking deals that would almost triple Iraq's output and catapult it up the table of global producers. The firms walked away from those deals at an auction just over three months ago.
Lower taxes were the main factor that convinced firms they could turn a profit where they previously saw too much risk on punishing terms, executives at international oil firms said.
"The contract has been massaged so the oil firms can work at the fees Iraq wants to pay," said one executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "The most important change was in taxes."
"Previously it was tax on everything, on all revenue," said another executive. "Now the tax will be limited to profit. It makes a big difference."
) and China's CNPC as they hammered out the small print for the contract they won for the Rumaila oilfield at the auction in June, executives said.
"All contracts are now mirroring that contract," said one executive.
BP and CNPC were the only firms to win a contract in the bid round, the first chance for foreign oil firms to compete for Iraqi oil since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003. Seven other oil and gas fields failed to attract bidders on the terms Iraq offered.
But a consortium headed by Italy's ENI (
) said on Tuesday it signed a deal to develop the giant Zubair field for a remuneration fee of $2 a barrel. At Iraq's oilfield auction in June, the consortium refused to go below $4.40 a barrel.
Two consortiums were still competing for a deal to develop the even larger West Quran oilfield, Iraq's Oil Minister Hussain al-Shahristani said on Tuesday. They were Russia's LUKOIL (
) was still working with Exxon on the bid for West Qurna, as it had in June, industry sources said. Shahristani had not mentioned Shell on Tuesday, and the company had not clarified whether it was still involved with Exxon. The two fierce competitors rarely work together.
Both the Exxon and LUKOIL consortiums had accepted a fee of $1.90 a barrel, Shahristani said. That was less than half Exxon's best bid in June and less than a third of the LUKOIL consortium bid.
The other fields offered in the first bid round, including the giant Kirkuk field in the north, were not being renegotiated, executives said.
Baghdad had decided to leave any further talks on Kirkuk until after Iraq's upcoming election in January. The semi-autonomous Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) in Iraq's north has demanded a say on Kirkuk, complicating efforts by the federal government to boost output from the field.
Kirkuk would also likely require a higher remuneration fee than the maximum $2 a barrel offered by Iraq, even with the improved terms of the contract, executives said. That made it harder to renegotiate, they said.
"It has been producing for longer, it needs more work than some of the other fields," one executive said.
FISCAL STABILITY, SECURITY
Security was seen as a huge risk by foreign oil firms after years of conflict and sectarian violence in Iraq. Initially, Iraq had said foreign oil firms would have to rely on Iraqi forces for security.
New terms make that arrangement more flexible, and if firms feel security measures are insufficient, they can bring in their own teams.
Iraqi officials are also looking to guarantee contracts would remain unchanged, so local governments would be unable to slap more taxes on the deals.
Uncertainties and risk remain, especially over the legality of contracts, executives said. Oil firms remain concerned that future administrations or parliaments may deem old contracts as illegal. (Reporting by Simon Webb; editing by Sue Thomas)
