Green economy needs targets, free trade: GE
2009-10-14 08:48:00.0
(Reuters) - The world needs tougher targets to boost low-carbon energy, both nationally and in global climate change talks, the head of General Electric Co's energy business John Krenicki said on Wednesday.
"If you really want it to take off, governments have got to set the framework," he told Reuters.
"What we can't have is a one-year policy and expect companies to invest billions and billions of dollars when we're not convinced there's going to be a market," he said, using the example of U.S. renewable energy tax breaks that expire in two years.
The most important outcome from a global meeting in December in Copenhagen, meant to agree a new climate pact, would be placing an economic value on carbon cuts, through tough emissions targets, and lower trade barriers to clean technology investment, he said.
"Targets, we don't have much right now, and free trade," said Krenicki, head of energy at the world's biggest maker of power turbines and jet engines, on green business needs from the U.N.-led meeting.
On national policies, some analysts and industry leaders forecast China will for the first time install more wind turbines this year than any other country, overtaking Europe and the United States.
"China's made a very aggressive commitment to renewable energy, with firm targets to 2020, they're going to do it. That's why there's a lot of action in China right now versus the United States. The current incentives in the United States expire in two years. That's the difference."
Beijing favors domestic wind turbine suppliers, through minimum standards for local manufactured content, making foreign investment difficult. Krenicki called for free trade in green technologies.
"It's a real challenge, for a company like GE, even though we're fully localized in China .... there are tariffs (barriers) in that market, other markets around the world," he said.
"A significant portion of the (Chinese) market is not available to us. China is not the only place, you can look at South America, the United States, Canada."
Following the financial crisis the global economy was now in better shape than expected at this point, but Europe and the United States were still not robust, Krenicki added.
"I think from things that we look at internally, most signals are better than we expected at this point in time, on the general economy externally," he said, describing the view of the biggest U.S. conglomerate.
"I don't sense a robust economy in Europe or the United States yet, not at the moment. There's still a lot of unemployment," he added, saying GE was focusing on investments in high growth economies.
(Reporting by Gerard Wynn, Editing by Anthony Barker)
