Q+A: Why should we care about a new climate agreement?
2009-10-13 23:05:00.0
Q+A: Why should we care about a new climate agreement? | Reuters
Track China's Leaders
Q+A: Why should we care about a new climate agreement?
Tue  EDT
Oct 14 - The global economy is still is bad shape, people are worried about their jobs and just paying the bills is a major challenge, hardly the right environment to get people focusing on climate change.
With so much to worry about, it can be hard to understand all the fuss about reaching a tougher U.N. climate deal in December in the Danish capital Copenhagen.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO ME?
A new deal will change the way energy is used, priced and created. In short, it will change the global economy.
For you and me, this will most likely mean higher fuel and electricity bills, while catching a plane will also become more expensive, as will buying imported food and drink. Insurance premiums covering storm damage or other natural disasters are also likely to rise.
In short, we'll be forced to make tougher lifestyle choices.
The flip side is that governments will help make renewable energy and greener transport more attractive, allowing people to make the switch to cleaner alternatives. Wind farms, solar, plus geothermal, wave and tidal power along with hybrid and fuel cell cars should become more commonplace as costs come down.
Financing from rich nations could also drive a green revolution in developing countries, boosting investment, creating jobs and cutting emissions.
HOW WILL THIS WORK?
It all hinges on putting a price on every tonne of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, produced by industry, transport or through deforestation, or saved from being emitted, such as building wind farms or saving tropical forests that soak up CO2.
Emissions trading through cap-and-trade schemes that give industries incentives to clean up will also be essential. Europe already has such a scheme, while Australia and the United States are working on their own versions.
Key to these schemes are tougher 2020 emissions reduction targets under a new climate treaty. The tougher the targets, the greater the financial incentive for industries to act.
WHAT'S THE URGENCY? CAN'T WE WAIT?
The world has already warmed on average 0.7 degrees Celsius over the past century through the burning of fossil fuels, such as oil, coal and gas. Prior to the latest financial crisis, emissions growth was increasing annually at a rate beyond past projections, driven largely by soaring coal and oil consumption in big developing nations, such as China and India.
Scientists say that the world is on course to pump enough carbon dioxide into the air to raise global temperatures by at least 2 deg C in the next few decades, a level they say will lead to more chaotic weather, rising seas, melting glaciers, water shortages and falling crop yields.
Such disruption poses major security threats because the world's population is expected to keep rising. Pollution and health problems are also growing risks.
Even if you don't believe in climate change, the world has only about 41 years of oil left based on proven reserves and 2008 consumption levels of nearly 31 billion barrels a year. As reserves fall and oil becomes harder to extract, prices of crude will continue to rise, making greener energy more attractive.
WHAT CAN JUST ONE PERSON DO?
A lot. Switch to compact fluorescent lighting in the home and office, use public transport, buy locally produced food and recycle your rubbish. Take re-usesable bags when shopping and switch off unused appliances at home.
Every little bit helps because it entrenches behaviour and gets people talking. (Writing by David Fogarty; Editing by Nick Macfie)
