Japan's Uchimura shines in qualifying
2009-10-13 22:58:00.0
(Reuters) - Japan's Kohei Uchimura put in a commanding all-around performance at the world gymnastics championships on Tuesday to show he was ready to step into the shoes left vacant by Olympic champion Yang Wei.
Uchimura had snapped at Yang's heels during the final at last year's Beijing Games but in the end was powerless to stop a man who was determined to succeed in front of his home fans.
Fourteen months on and with Yang now retired, a huge smile lit up Uchimura's face as he topped men's qualifying at the O2 Arena that is set to host the gymnastics competition at the 2012 Olympics.
The day, however, ended on a sour note for China's Chen Yibing after a botched landing from the rings -- on which he is the Olympic and world title holder -- cost him a place in the eight-man apparatus final.
Things could not have been better for 20-year-old Uchimura as he broke the 15-point barrier in five of the six apparatus to finish with a total of 90.925, a 1.575 point lead over former European champion Maxim Deviatovski of Russia.
"I feel great except the vault landing. I can win the gold medal if I hit everything in the final on Thursday," he said.
American Tim McNeill, Briton Daniel Keatings and Jonathan Horton of the U.S. completed the top five with one sub-division remaining.
The athletes would have been further boosted by withdrawal of charismatic European champion Fabian Hambuechen, who took an early flight out of London after hobbling out of training on crutches at the weekend.
Once German Hambuechen pulled out, Horton had been expected to be Uchimura's closest rival but now has two days to iron out the flaws in his pommel horse program after he slipped off the wood mid-routine.
"(It's the) prelims, (so I'm) not real worried. It's almost good for this to happen. It has nothing to do with confidence," the American told reporters.
With no team medal up for grabs in East London, Asian powerhouse China, who won seven of the eight men's titles at the 2008 Olympics, have opted to concentrate on the apparatus finals.
Instead of vying to succeed twice world champion Yang as all-round winner, the likes of Zou Kai -- a triple Olympic gold medalist -- Yan Mingyong, Feng Zhe and Zhang Hongtao set the benchmark in their specialty apparatus.
After an anxious seven-hour wait on Tuesday, his worst nightmare came true as Chen finished 11th to miss the cut.
