DEALTALK-Big Australian miners eye small iron ore firm
2009-10-14 01:52:00.0
(Reuters) - The battle to claim every acre of Australia's Pilbara iron ore belt is heating up, with the sectors' dominant miners, including BHP Billiton Ltd (
), turning their gaze on explorer United Minerals Corp UMC.AX.
Shares in Australia's mineral-rich but capital-poor United Minerals, which holds an estimated 158 million tonnes of iron ore reserves, were suspended last week pending the outcome of takeover talks, sparking speculation about its suitor.
United Minerals, last valued at nearly $130 million, entered the talks less than a month after it agreed to sell A$27.2 million ($24.68 million) worth of shares to China Railway Material Commercial Corp Group for an 11.4 percent stake. [ID:nSYU007199]
What makes UMC attractive is the location of its deposit near BHP, Rio Tinto Ltd (
"We can see the logic there, both BHP and Rio Tinto have infrastructure very close to UMC," Brett Lambert, managing director of Thundelarra Exploration (
), United's top shareholder with a stake of 13 percent, told Reuters.
"We are a seller on the right terms," Lambert said, adding that expressions of interest had come from a "variety" of parties in and out of Australia, though not from BHP, Rio or Fortescue.
"We've had no contact with them," Lambert said.
UBS, which is advising United Minerals, declined to comment.
"There are issues around pricing and the China Rail that needs to be resolved before a deal can be struck. The company is keen to make an announcement by Friday," one person with direct knowledge of the negotiations told Reuters.
BHP, Rio and Fortescue declined to comment on the speculation they may want to buy UMC and two sources discounted the likelihood of Rio Tinto and Fortescue lodging bids.
WORLD'S BIGGEST IRON ORE DEPOSIT
The Pilbara is the world's single biggest deposit of iron ore, sprawling over a half-million square kilometres, supplying more than 300 million tonnes of ore to steel mills worldwide this year.
Iron ore prices are expected to soar up to 15 percent this year as China's steel mills boost production, stoking a hunger for iron ore that drove up the country's imports of the resource by 30 percent last month. [ID:nBJD003121]
But over the past five years, much of the Pilbara has been pegged, restricting the acreage of available new ground and making what can be acquired more precious.
Add to that UMC's proximity to train lines controlled by BHP and Rio Tinto, which would make it easy to transport the ore to the west coast for export.
BHP, which held more than $10 billion in cash by June 30, has faced criticism for not spending some of that on acquisitions. Last month, BHP's Chief Commercial Officer Albert Calderon was quoted as saying the miner had identified "four or five" opportunities. [ID:nSP451345].
BHP is believed to have made A$1.40 a share offer for United Minerals, a 50 percent premium to the last price, the Australian newspaper said in an unsourced report.
They also questioned UMC's fit with BHP's focus on larger and longer-life assets. UMC's deposits would yield around 10 million tonnes a year, less than one-tenth of BHP's annual production.
Still, BHP may simply be looking to tie up as much of the Pilbara as it can, particularly given the legion of recent arrivals mining the region, led by Fortescue and Atlas (
"They were caught napping a little bit, it's fair to say," said Ken West, a partner at Perennial Growth. (Additional reporting by Sonali Paul) (Editing by Clarence Fernandez) ($1=$1.101 Australian dollar)
