UPDATE 5-Johnson Controls sees higher FY sales, earnings
2009-10-13 14:39:00.0
(Reuters) - Johnson Controls Inc (
) said on Tuesday it expects higher sales next year as global auto production recovers, U.S. stimulus efforts pay off and emerging markets improve, but the company's forecast disappointed some on Wall Street and its shares fell nearly 3 percent.
The maker of car interiors, batteries and building-efficiency systems said it is gaining market share in many of its businesses and is benefiting from recent cost cuts, while higher auto production levels should support volumes.
The company said it expects to earn 40 to 42 cents per share for its fourth quarter, ended Sept. 30, on sales of about $7.9 billion, with all of its geographic automotive businesses posting a profit. The result would be above the 39 cents per share analysts have been expecting, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
For the new fiscal year now under way, it said sales should rise 9 percent to about $31 billion, above the $30.2 billion analysts have been expecting, and it should earn $1.35 per share to $1.45 per share. Analysts, on average, have forecast $1.44.
"Profitable growth is back. We see improvements across our businesses," Chief Executive Stephen Roell said in an interview, on the sidelines of an analyst meeting in New York.
"Even though we have a late cycle in building efficiency, we feel good about the potential there to grow. We're really well positioned to take (market) share."
JPMorgan analyst Himanshu Patel said in a research note the company's 2010 earnings outlook was a touch below its expectations.
But Patel added the stock has the potential to rise up to $44 in the long term, driven by robust growth in batteries and building-efficiency systems.
Roell said he saw reasons for caution, citing the uncertain strength of U.S. consumer spending, since improving retail sales have yet to translate to strong sales of durable goods like cars.
"We were accused today of conservatism in our outlooks. It's probably that (consumer) element that we're waiting to get more evidence on."
The world's largest maker of auto interiors estimated North American auto production of 9.8 million vehicles in 2010, up from about 8.6 million in 2009.
European production should be flat, at 15.8 million vehicles, while China's output of passenger vehicles is expected to jump to 8.3 million vehicles from 7 million.
"We're seeing a very strong recovery in China," Roell said.
Higher auto production should boost sales in its power solutions segment 17 percent next year, or 6 percent excluding the impact of higher lead prices. And it predicted a 3 percent sales increase in its building-efficiency business, helped by demand in emerging markets.
The company, which is retrofitting New York's landmark Empire State Building to reduce energy use, forecast U.S. commercial construction would begin to recover in the second half of 2010.
Johnson Controls said longer-term profit margins should be stronger than previously expected in its auto interiors and battery units, but kept forecasts unchanged for its buildings segment.
The company said it expects government stimulus-funded projects to begin to have a meaningful impact on revenue this year, and weakness in North America should be offset by less economically sensitive institutional markets and several emerging markets.
New construction, which has been hit by rising unemployment and tight credit, accounts for about a quarter of the building-efficiency revenue, with services, retrofits and other income sources making up the bulk.
Roell stressed the company's primary focus is on institutional buildings -- including healthcare, government and school facilities -- and these sectors are expected to hold up better than commercial buildings.
The company estimated 2010 capital expenditures of $625 million to $675 million to boost capacity in emerging markets, launch new auto businesses and fund improvements in the battery business. It said it has minimal debt coming due this fiscal year and about $1 billion maturing in fiscal 2011.
Johnson Controls' shares were down 75 cents, or 2.8 percent, at $26.38 in late New York Stock Exchange. (Additional reporting by Christopher Kaufman and Soyoung Kim; Editing by Gerald E, McCormick, Maureen Bavdek and Steve Orlofsky)
