Clinton fails to win Russia pledge on Iran sanctions
2009-10-13 00:38:00.0
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Our day's top images, in-depth photo essays and offbeat slices of life. See the best of Reuters photography.
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Russia's President Dmitry Medvedev (L) shakes hands with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton as they meet at the presidential residence in Barvikha outside Moscow, October 13, 2009. Credit: Reuters/Natalia Kolesnikova/Pool
Tue  EDT
But Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov restated at a news conference with Clinton Russia's long-standing position that any talk of sanctions against Iran at this stage was counter-productive.
"All forces should be aimed at supporting talks," he said.
A U.S. official later told reporters of the Russian side: "They said there weren't ready in this context to talk specifically about what steps they would be willing to take."
The Russian side preferred to discuss any possible moves against Iran in the context of the United Nations, the official added, speaking on condition he was not identified.
Clinton praised "very comprehensive and productive" discussions with Lavrov, saying they were further evidence of the "reset" in formerly rocky U.S.-Russia relations.
"I feel very good about the so-called reset," she said.
"We did not ask for anything today," she told the news conference. "We reviewed the situation and where it stood, which I think was the appropriate timing for what this process entails."
Clinton did not address sensitive issues such as human rights and democracy at the news conference but later met a group of rights activists and opposition journalists privately at the U.S. ambassador's residence.
The meeting was not televised but the State Department released an audio recording of the event in which Clinton told the participants, in a reference to killings of Russian journalists and rights activists:
Clinton also met Dmitry Medvedev at his Barvikha residence outside Moscow, where the Russian president praised joint U.S.-Russian efforts to broker a peace deal between historic foes Turkey and Armenia as "a good example of our cooperation."
But Clinton did not see the man most diplomats, analysts and ordinary Russians consider the true ruler of Russia -- Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. Putin is away on a visit to China.
U.S. President Barack Obama's decision to scrap plans for an anti-missile system located in eastern Europe has helped improve ties with Moscow after stormy relations under his predecessor George W. Bush.
Diplomats say that in return the United States now wants better Russian cooperation on an array of foreign policy issues such as the U.S.-led war in Afghanistan, the Iranian nuclear program, missile defense and a nuclear arms reduction treaty.
On missile defense, Lavrov said Russia had listened to U.S. plans for a new anti-missile system to replace the Bush-era plan for fixed radars and anti-missile batteries in central Europe which had upset the Kremlin.
"We want to know what are these plans, what they provide for, how the concept will function," he said. "The more we know about this concept, the sooner we will come to an understanding of whether we can work jointly on a project."
Some Russian officials, including Moscow's ambassador to NATO Dmitry Rogozin, have suggested Obama's new missile defense plan, involving sea-based and mobile missiles, could pose an even graver security threat to Moscow.
Russian officials say Moscow's concerns would only be addressed if it became an equal partner in any European anti-missile system.
