UPDATE 3-Iraq says close to deals on first round oilfields
2009-10-13 13:15:00.0
(Reuters) - Iraq is in the final stages of striking deals for oilfields left over from a June energy auction after oil majors accepted deep cuts to development fees without major changes to output targets, a top official said.
If agreed, the deals would catapult Iraq to the world's No. 3 oil producer after Russia and Saudi Arabia, up from 11th.
The deals would boost output from fields offered in the auction by up to 4.5 million barrels per day, almost tripling Iraq's total output to 7 million bpd, according to Reuters calculations.
Italy's ENI (
), U.S. firm Occidental (
) and South Korea's KOGAS (
The consortium has accepted a $2 a barrel fee and is in the final stage of talks with Iraq for the deal, Iraq's Oil Minister Hussain al-Shahristani told a news conference on Tuesday.
"We cut our fee (but) the whole structure of the contract has been changed," ENI's Chief Executive Paulo Scaroni told reporters at a conference. "There has been a sweetening of other elements to the point that this contract is meeting our requirements in terms of return on investment." [ID:nWLA5559]
In the June auction, a milestone in Iraq's efforts to resurrect its oil sector, the ENI-led group initially proposed a fee $4.80, which it reduced later that day to $4.40.
But the group has maintained in renewed talks with Iraq its proposed production plateau of 1.125 million barrels per day (bpd) for Zubair, which has reserves of 4 billion barrels.
) for Iraq's West Qurna, Phase 1 field, Shahristani said. West Qurna was also offered in the June 30 auction and has reserves of 8.7 billion barrels.
The LUKOIL group has put forward an output target of 1.5 million bpd, the same as its June bid, while Exxon has proposed a target of 2.1 million bpd, slightly lower than its June offer of 2.325 million bpd, the minister said.
Another top oil ministry official said this week that Iraq was expecting another offer from France's Total (
It was not immediately clear why oil majors were willing to slash fees for working in a nation only just emerging from a long, bloody conflict and saddled with huge legal risks.
"The companies have revised their calculations after a long period of talks," Shahristani said, but did not elaborate.
The Oil Ministry had vowed that oil fields would be offered to developers through transparent auctions, raising questions about the bilateral negotiations now employed in revisiting the fields skipped by oil majors in the June auction.
Jabir Khalifa Jabir, a member of the Iraqi parliament's oil and gas committee, said Shahristani would be summoned to parliament for questioning on Oct. 27.
Shahristani has been asked to appear before lawmakers -- critical of the Oil Ministry's policies -- before, but unlike previous grillings, he could face a vote of no confidence after questioning over accusations of mishandling Iraqi oil wealth.
The June auction was a centrepiece of Iraq's efforts to boost production above pre-invasion levels more than six years after Saddam Hussein was ousted.
But of eight fields offered, only one deal was clinched after firms balked at the oil ministry's stiff payment terms.
In that deal, BP (
) and China's CNPC agreed to a fee of $2 per barrel to develop super-giant Rumaila field.
Oil officials were expected to discuss revised first round deals with companies this week in Istanbul, where they will hold a workshop on a second oil auction expected in December.
For a factbox on the oil and gas fields offered in the June auction, click [ID:nLM718284]
For further details of the Rumaila contract, click [ID:nL6265378] (Additional reporting by Simon Webb and Luke Pachymuthu in Dubai and Tom Bergin in London and Waleed Ibrahim in Baghdad; Writing by Missy Ryan and Mohammed Abbas; Editing by David Gregorio)
