Nearly 1,000 Chinese kids poisoned by metal plants
2009-10-13 08:05:00.0
(Reuters) - Nearly 1,000 children living in a major Chinese lead smelting base have excessive levels of the heavy metal in their blood, state media said on Tuesday, as environmentalists called on firms to detail their pollution.
The country's biggest smelter has acknowledged some responsibility in the poisoning in central Henan province, and all children whose homes were within a kilometre of metal plants have been moved, the official Xinhua agency said.
"We do bear responsibility for the pollution," Xinhua quoted Yang Anguo, board chairman of Yuguang Gold and Lead (
Of 2,743 who were checked, more than one-third had excessive lead in their blood. The city government has suspended production at 32 of the 35 lead plants, and on the most polluting production lines at the three major plants, Xinhua said.
Environmental campaign group Greenpeace on Tuesday slammed 18 major Chinese and international companies for failing to publish their pollution levels, in violation of environmental laws.
Firms fingered by Chinese officials for violating pollution standards are required to disclose the details of all their emissions within a month, but none of those Greenpeace found cited around China had done so.
"Our results demonstrate corporate ... disregard for Chinese environmental regulations. This is especially disheartening given that all 18 companies are leaders in their respective fields," Greenpeace said in a report after combing local media and contacting officials and the companies to ask for data.
They said the lack of information undermined grassroots efforts to keep China's land, air and water clean.
"A comprehensive environmental information system that is free and easy to access for the public ... is essential to safeguard citizens and the environment from industry-induced risks," Greenpeace said in its report.
Environmental problems are an increasing source of unrest in China, worrying the stability conscious government.
"Mass incidents" -- or riots and protests -- sparked by environmental problems have been rising at a rate of 30 percent per year, according to China's environment minister.
At the same time, the boom in metals prices has made investment in mines and smelters very profitable, and dangerously polluting plants have sprung up across the Chinese countryside.
A child who ingests large amounts of lead may develop anaemia, muscle weakness and brain damage. Where poisoning occurs, it is usually gradual. The average level of lead in the blood of Chinese children is five times the acceptable level in the United States, according to statistics from the China Daily.
