DBS drops out of race for ING private bank: source
2009-10-13 04:02:00.0
Track China's Leaders
MUNICH - Siemens Chief Executive Peter Loescher is to leave the company, four years before the end of his contract, after the German engineering group this week issued its second profit warning this year.
NEW YORK - Small business owners plan for growth this year but are closely tracking recent interest rate rises and any impact they might have on their business and customers, according to a spot survey of firms in the New York region.
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Tue, Oct 13 2009
Mon, Oct 12 2009
Tue  EDT
), Southeast Asia's biggest lender, has pulled out of the race to buy ING's (
) private banking unit in Asia, as it did not want to pay a premium for the business, a source with knowledge of the deal told Reuters.
) as the strongest player for the Asian assets, which bankers said ING may try to sell for about $1 billion after it agreed last week to sell its Swiss assets to Julius Baer BAER1.VX for 520 million Swiss francs ($507 million).
"DBS found it inappropriate to pay a premium given that it has its own private-banking franchise which is already bigger and more well-established compared to the assets for sale," the source said on Tuesday. The source did not want to be identified because the talks on the deal are not public.
DBS's bid lapsed "a few weeks ago," the source said.
DBS, which was ranked as Asia's sixth-biggest private bank in terms of assets by consultancy Calamander, is bigger than ING's private bank in Asia. DBS manages about S$30 billion ($22 billion) in client assets.
The Singapore bank said last week that it plans to set up a domestic private banking presence in China, as its sees onshore wealth management growing in importance and new funds flowing in from Asian investors.
) was advising DBS on the bid, sources have said.
"DBS' priority is to pursue organic growth opportunities which extend our Asia banking franchise," DBS said.
"In any inorganic initiative we pursue, we always adopt a disciplined approach and will only do the deal if it fits our strategic initiatives and return on investment requirements."
Singapore's third-biggest bank, OCBC (
), is also considered a potential bidder for Asian assets of ING, sources have said. The bank's private banking arm is run by Frenchman Olivier Denis.
OCBC said in a statement on Tuesday it is in talks to buy ING assets, but did not specify the assets. It added there was no certainty that an agreement will result from the talks.
