UPDATE 2-Tangguh to ship 50 LNG cargoes in 2010-BPMIGAS
2009-10-13 05:44:00.0
(Reuters) - Indonesia said on Tuesday it plans to export 50 liquefied natural gas (LNG) cargoes from its Tangguh plant in Papua in 2010, a volume deemed modest in face of a demand crunch for the chilled gas.
Still, the forecast by the head of BPMIGAS is well up on the 16 cargoes for 2009 that the energy watchdog had estimated last month.
Slow demand and technical problems that halted the first train have slowed production from plant, sharply cutting initial estimates for 56 cargoes this year.
The Tangguh LNG plant, led by BP's (
) Indonesia unit, has the capacity to produce 7.6 million tonnes per year via two trains.
"The next lifting from the first train of Tangguh will take place at the end of October, and the cargo will go to Fujian," BPMIGAS chairman Priyono said on the sidelines of an oil and gas symposium in Singapore, adding that the current global economic crisis had put a lid on LNG exports.
Demand for LNG in the traditionally thirsty Pacific Basin market has fallen this year as the global economic recession took hold, leading many buyers to use flexibility in their long-term contracts to cut back on shipments.
"For 2009, we had to sell LNG in the spot market, mainly to India," Priyono said.
Even as the Tangguh shipments will increase next year, the volume was "modest," energy consultant Tony Regan suggested.
"Indonesia is following the policy of running slowly this year. They are constraining volumes next year," said Regan from Tri-Zen International, referring to LNG exports.
According to industry estimates, Indonesia shipped two LNG cargoes from Tangguh to South Korea and China in July, a cargo to Mexico in August and a cargo to South Korea in September.
Tangguh LNG shipments could reach 110 cargoes a year at full production, given a typical cargo of 60,000 tonnes.
Although China and India are seeing signs of economic recovery, their ability to absorb LNG imports is limited by a shortage of LNG plants in the short term.
"Elsewhere, we are not seeing evidence of a real recovery. The year 2010 is expected to be a very weak (LNG) market," Regan added.
The United States and Europe, two of the key LNG buyers, are facing a supply glut due to declining demand, while Japanese imports have yet to recover to pre-crisis levels.
Japan imported 5.367 million tonnes of LNG in August versus 5.384 million tonnes in July, and below the 5.706 million tonnes achieved in August 2008, official data showed.
Global LNG prices will remain pressured next year as new supply comes online and demand remains weak, the head of Qatargas Operating Co told Reuters in the World Gas conference last week. [ID:nN07349922]
Spot prices of the super-cooled gas have tumbled from highs above $22 per million British thermal units in Asia last summer to about $5 per mmBtu as the recession dented demand. Indonesia, the world's third largest LNG exporter after Qatar and Malaysia, plans to use more natural gas at home to avoid costly oil imports as its own oil reserves dwindle. (Editing by Lincoln Feast)
